--------------------------The Bihar Value Added Tax Act, 2005--------------------------
1 
 THE BIHAR VALUE ADDED TAX ACT, 2005  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
INCIDENCE OF TAX  
 
3. Charge of tax.  
4. Levy of purchase tax.  
5. Liability to pay purchase tax on certain purchases.  
6. Non -levy of tax in certain cases.  
7. Exemptions.  
8. Burden of proof.  
 
CHAPTER III  
TRIBUNAL AND  TAXING AUTHORITIES  
 
9. Tribunal.  
10. Taxing Authorities and Inspectors.  
11. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
12. Power to issue summons and examine on oath.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
RATE OF TAX AND POINT OF LEVY  
 
13. Point or points in series of sales at which sales tax shall be levied.  
14. Rate of tax.  
15. Compounding of tax liability in certain cases.  
16. Input tax credit.  
17. Exports to be zero -rated.  
18. Rate of tax on packing materials and containers.  
 2 
 CHAPTER V  
REGISTRATION  
 
SECTIONS  
19. Registration.  
20. Amendment and cancellation of certificate of registration.  
21. Security.   
22. Declared manager.  
23. Furnishing of information by dealers.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
RETURNS, ASSESSMENT, RE -ASSESSMENT AND PAYMENT OF TAX  
 
24. Returns, payment of tax, interest and penalty.  
25. Scrutiny of returns.  
26. Self -Assessment of tax.  
27. Assessment of dealer not filing returns.  
28. Assessment of tax of dealers evading registration.  
29. Assessment of tax on disputed question.  
30. Assessment of tax of non -resident dealer doing business temporarily by way of fair, mela , etc.  
31. Assessment or re -assessment of tax of escaped turnover . 
32. Escaped turnover detected before or at the time of assessment of tax.  
33. Assessment of tax based on audit objections.  
34. Assessment of tax proceedings, etc., not to be invalid on certain grounds.  
35. Taxable turnover.  
36. Tax payable by a dealer.  
37. Time limit for completion of proceeding of assessment of tax.  
38. Exclusion of time in assessment tax proceedings.  
39. Payment and recovery of tax.  
40. Advance recovery of tax on sales and supplies to Governments and other persons.  
41. Advance recovery of tax from works contractors.  
42. Production of tax clearance certificate.  
43. Restriction on collection of tax by dealers.  
44. Forfeiture of tax collected in violation of this Act.  
45. Rounding off of tax liability.  
46. Recovery of tax as arrears  of land  revenue.  
47. Special mode of recovery of tax and other liabilities under this Act.  
48. Liability of surety.  
49. Transfers to defraud revenue void.  3 
 SECTIONS  
50. Period of limitation for recovery of tax.  
51. Tax to be first charge on property.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
BOOKS OF ACCOUNT AND FURNISHING OF INFORMATION  
 
52. Maintenance of accounts.  
53. Issue of tax invoice and debit and credit notes.  
54. Accounts to be audited in certain cases.  
55. Furnishing of information by Government departments, banks, financial institu tions clearing and 
forwarding agents and owners of warehouses, godowns and others.  
 
 CHAPTER VIII  
INSPECTIONS, SEARCH AND SEIZURE   
 
56. Production of books of account, inspection, search and seizure.  
57. Cross checking or verification of transactions.  
58. Survey.  
59. Control on clearing, forwarding or booking agent and any person transporting goods.  
 
CHAPTER IX  
CHECK -POSTS AND RESTRICTIONS ON MOVEMENT  
 
60. Establishment of check -posts.  
61. Restriction on movement of goods.  
62. Transportation of goods through State of Bihar.  
 
CHAPTER X  
LIABILITIES OF REPRESENTATIVE CHARACTER  
 
63. Liability to pay tax in case of transfer of business.  
64. Tax payable by deceased dealer shall be paid by his representative.  
65. Tax -liability of guardian and trustee, etc.  
66. Tax -liability of court of wards.  
67. Liability in case of dissolution of firm, etc.  
 
 
 4 
  
CHAPTER XI  
REFUNDS AND ADJUSTMENTS  
SECTIONS  
68. Refunds.  
69. Provisional refunds.  
70. Interest on delayed refund.  
71. Power to withhold refund in certain cases.  
 
CHAPTER XII  
APPEAL, REVISION AND REVIEW  
 
72. Appeal to Deputy Commissioner and Joint Commissioner.  
73. Appeal to Tribunal.  
74. Revisionary powers of Commissioner.  
75. Additional evidence in appeal or revision.  
76. Review.  
77. Determination of disputed questions.  
78. Power to transfer proceedings.  
79. Appeal before High Court.  
80. Case before High Court to be heard by not less than two Judges.  
 
CHAPTER XIII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
 
81. Offences and penalties.  
82. Cognizance of offences.  
83. Investigation of offences.  
84. Offences by companies and others.  
85. Compounding of offences.  
 
CHAPTER XIV  
BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION  
 
86. Bureau of Investigation.  
 
 
 5 
  
CHAPTER XV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
 
SECTIONS  
87. Appearance before taxing authorities.  
88. Change of an incumbent of an office.  
89. Bar to certain proceedings.  
90. Disclosure of information by public servant.  
91. Agreements to defeat intention and application of this Act to be void.  
92. Write off of dues.  
93. Power to make rules.  
94. Repeal and savings.  
95. Declaratio n of stock of goods held on 1st April, 2005.  
96. Transitory provisions.  
97. Construction of references in any repealed law to officers, authorities, etc.  
98. Removal of difficulty.  
99. Laying of notifications on the table of the State Legislature.  
100. Val idation of Bihar Value Added Tax Ordinance, 2005.  
SCHEDULE I . 
SCHEDULE II . 
SCHEDULE III . 
SCHEDULE IV . 
SCHEDULE V . 
 
 
  6 
 THE BIHAR VALUE ADDED TAX ACT, 2005  
ACT NO. 27 OF 2005  
[23rd June,  2005.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to levy of tax on sales or purchases of goods in the 
State of Bihar and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: – 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, exten t and commencement. –(1) This Act may be called the  Bihar Value Added Tax 
Act, 2005.  
(2) It shall extend to the whole of the State of Bihar.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of April,  2005.  
2. Definitions. –In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, – 
(a) “Assessing Authority ” means any of the authorities referred to in  section 10 who is directed 
under sub -section ( 2) of that section to  exercise or perform all or any of the powers and functions 
conferred on  an Assessing Authority under this Act;  
(b) “Assistant Commercial Taxes Officer ” means an Assistant Commercial  Taxes Officer 
appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(c) “Assistant Commissioner of Commercial Taxes ” means an Assistant  Commissioner of 
Commercial Tax es and Additional Assistant Commissioner  of Commercial Taxes appointed under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 10;  
(d) “business” includes,– 
(i) any trade, commerce, manufacture or any adventure or concern in the  nature of trade, 
commerce, manufacture, whether or  not such trade,  commerce, manufacture, adventure or 
concern is carried on with a motive  to make gain or profit and whether or not any gain or profit 
accrues  from such trade, commerce, manufacture, adventure or concern;  
(ii) any transaction of sale or purc hase in connection with, or  incidental or ancillary to, such 
trade, commerce, manufacture,  adventure or concern; and  
(iii) any transaction in connection with, or incidental or ancillary  to, the commencement or 
closure of such business;  
(e) “capital goods ” means plant, machinery and equipment used in trade  or manufacturing of 
goods;  
(f) “casual trader ” means a person, who, whether as principal, agent or  in any other capacity 
undertakes occasional transactions in the nature  of business involving buying, sell ing, supply or 
distribution of goods  or conducting any exhibition -cum-sale in the State of Bihar, whether  for cash, 
deferred payment, commission, remuneration or other valuable  consideration;  
(g) “Commercial Taxes Officer ” means a Commercial Taxes Officer  appointed under sub -section 
(1) of section 10;  
(h) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of Commercial Taxes appointed  under sub -section 
(1) of section 10 or Additional Commissioner of  Commercial Taxes and any other officer upon whom 
the State Government  may, by notification, confer all or any of the powers and duties of the  
Commissioner under this Act;  
(i) “dealer” means any person who, whether regularly or otherwise, in  the course of business, 
buys,  sells,  supplies,  distributes or does  anything incide ntal to such buying,  selling,  supplying or   7 
 distributing  of goods, directly or indirectly, whether for cash, or for deferred  payment or for 
commission, remuneration or other valuable consideration  and includes – 
(A) a local authority;  
(B) a Hindu undivid ed family;  
(C) a company, or any society (including a co -operative society), club,  firm, association of 
persons or body of individuals, whether  incorporated or not, which carries on such business;  
(D) a society (including a co -operative society), club, firm or  association which buys goods 
from, or sells, supplies or distributes  goods to its members;  
(E) an industrial, commercial, banking or trading undertaking, whether  or not, of the Central 
Government o r of any of the State Governments or  of a local authority;  
(F) a casual trader;  
(G) a commission agent, broker, factor, a del credere  agent, an  auctioneer or any other 
mercantile agent, by whatever name called, who  carries on the business of buying, sellin g, 
supplying or distributing  goods on behalf of the principal.  
Explanation. –Every person who acts as an agent on behalf of a dealer  residing outside the 
State of Bihar and buys, sells, supplies or  distributes goods in the State or acts on behalf of such 
dealer as– 
(a) a commission agent, broker, factor, a del credere  agent, an  auctioneer or any other 
mercantile agent, by whatever name called; or  
(b) an agent for handling goods or documents of title to goods; or  
(c) an agent for the collection or the payment of the sale price of  goods or as a guarantor 
for such collection or payment; or  
(d) a local branch of a firm or company situated outside the State,  shall be deemed to be a 
dealer for the purposes of this Act;  
(j) “declared goods ” means goods declared under section 14 of the  Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 
(74 of 1956) to be of special importance in  inter-State trade or commerce;  
(k) “Deputy Commissioner of Commercial Taxes ” means the Deputy  Commissioner of 
Commercial Taxes or Additional Deputy Commissioner of  Commercial Taxes appointed under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 10;  
(l) “goods” means all kinds of movable property including livestock,  computer software, any 
electronic chip used for the purpose of storing  or trans mitting data or voice and all materials, 
commodities and  articles (as such or in some other form) but excluding newspapers,  electricity, 
actionable claims, stocks, shares or security.  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this clause, materials, commodities  and articles,– 
(i) attached to or forming part of an immovable property which are  agreed to be severed 
under the contract of sale; or  
(ii) sold or supplied as such or in some other form in the execution of  works contract, lease or 
hire purchase,  shall be deemed to be goods within the meaning of this clause;  
(m) “goods carrier ” means a motor vehicle, vessel, boat, animal and any  form of conveyance used 
for carrying goods;  
(n) “Government ” means the Government of the State of Bihar;  
(o) “gross turnover ” means,– 
(i) for the purposes of levy of tax on sales, in respect of sale of  goods, aggregate of sale prices 
received or receivable by a dealer on  sales and includes sale of goods made outside the State of 
Bihar or in  the course of inter -State trade or com merce or export but does not  include sale price of 
goods which have borne the incidence of tax on  purchases under sections 4 and 5;  8 
 (ii) for the purposes of levy of tax on purchase, aggregate of purchase  prices paid or payable 
by a dealer during any given period in respect  of purchase of goods or class or description of 
goods which are liable to  tax under sections 4 and 5; and  
(iii) for the purposes of section 3, the aggregate of the amounts under  sub-clauses ( i) and  (ii) 
above.  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this clause, the amount received by a  dealer on account of price 
variation or price escalation in respect of  sale or supply of goods shall be deemed to form part of gross 
turnover  of the financial year during which it is actually received;  
(p) “importer” means a dealer who brings any goods into the State of  Bihar or to whom any goods 
are despatched from any place outside the  State of Bihar;  
(q) “input” means goods (excluding goods specified in Schedule IV)  purchased i n the course of 
business– 
(a) for re -sale; 
(b) for use in manufacture of goods including packing materials;  
(c) for use as capital goods as defined in clause ( e); 
(r) “input tax” means the amount paid or payable by a registered  dealer, by way of tax under this 
Act, in respect of purc hase of any  taxable goods;  
(s) “Inspector” means an Inspector of Commercial Taxes appointed under  sub-section ( 3) of 
section 10;  
(t) “month” means a calendar month;  
(u) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official  Gazette;  
(v) “output tax” means the tax charged or chargeable in respect of sale  or supply of goods made 
by a registered dealer;  
(w) “place of business ” means any place where a dealer, either usually  or for the time being, 
manufactures, sells or purchases goods or keeps  accounts of stocks, manufactures, sales or purchases, 
execution of  works contracts, hire purchase contracts and lease contracts or any  other place where 
business act ivity takes place and includes – 
(i) the place of business of an agent, in case of a dealer carrying on business through an agent; 
or 
(ii) any place or building in which a person carrying on a business,  keeps any of his books of 
account, documents, stocks or other things,  relating to his business;  
(x) “prescribed authority ” means the authority prescribed by the rules  made under this Act to 
exercise powers conferred under different  provisions and perform such functions as may be conferred 
by or under  this Act;  
(y) “prescribed” means prescribed under the rules made under this Act;  
(z) “purchase price ” means the amount paid or payable by a dealer as a  valuable consideration in 
respect of purchase of goods and includes – 
(i) any amount charged for anything done by the vendor in respect of  the goods at the time of, 
or before, the delivery thereof;  
(ii) transport costs or freight, if any;  
(iii) trade commission, if any, by whatever name called;  
(iv) clearing, forwarding and handling charges, if any;  
(v) insurance charges, if any;  
(vi) taxes or duties under any law for the time being in force (other  than t ax paid or payable 
under this Act) by whatever name called, if  any; 9 
 (vii) cost of packing, if any; and  
(viii) the amount paid or payable by the purchaser by way of non -refundable  deposit, whether 
by way of a separate agreement or not, in  connection with or  incidental or ancillary to, the said 
purchase of  goods;  
(za) “quarter” means the quarter ending on the 30th June, 30 th September,  31st December and 
31st March and the expression “quarterly” shall be  construed accordingly;  
(zb) “registered dealer ” means a dealer in possession of a valid  certificate of registration granted 
to him under section 19 or under  the provisions of the Bihar Finance Act, 1981 (Bihar Act 5 of 1981), 
as it stood before its repeal by section 94;  
(zc) “sale” with all its grammatical variations and cognate expressions  means any transfer of 
property in goods for cash or deferred payment or  for other valu able consideration and includes – 
(i) a transfer, otherwise than in pursuance of a contract, of property  in an y goods for cash, 
deferred payment or other valuable  consideration;  
(ii) a transfer of property in goods (whether as goods or in some other  form) involved in the 
execution of a works contract;  
(iii) a delivery of goods on hire purchase or any system of pay ment by  instalments;  
(iv) a transfer of the right to use any goods for any purpose (whether  or not for a specified 
period) for cash, deferred payment or other  valuable consideration;  
(v) a supply of goods by any unincorporated association or body of  persons to a member 
thereof for cash, deferred payment or other  valuable consideration;  
(vi) a supply, by way of or as part of any service or in any other  manner whatsoever, of 
goods, being food or any other article for human  consumption or any drink (whet her or not 
intoxicating) where such  supply or service is for cash, deferred payment or other valuable  
consideration,  
and such transfer, delivery or supply of any goods shall be deemed to  be a sale of those goods by the 
person making the transfer, delivery or supply and purchase of those goods by the person to whom such 
transfer,  delivery or supply is made;  
(zd) “sale price” means the amount payable to a dealer as valuable  consideration for the sale or 
supply of any goods and includes – 
(i) any  amount charged for anything done by the vendor in respect of  the goods at the time of, 
or before, the delivery thereof;  
(ii) transport costs or freight, if any;  
(iii) trade commission, if any, by whatever name called;  
(iv) clearing, forwarding and handling charges, if any;  
(v) insurance charges, if any;  
(vi) taxes or duties levied under any law for the time being in force  (other than tax paid or 
payable under this Act) by whatever name  called, if any;  
(vii) cost of packing, if any; and  
(viii) the am ount received or receivable by the seller by way of non -refundable  deposit, 
whether by way of a separate agreement or not, in  connection with or incidental to or ancillary to, 
the said sale of  goods;  
Explanation I. –Where goods are sold on hire purchase or any system of  payment by instalments, 
the sale price of such goods shall be inclusive  of insurance charges, interest and hire charges and such 
other charges  related to hire purchase or any system of payment by instalments.  
Explanation II. –Where goods are s old by way of transfer of right to use  such goods, the sale price 
thereof shall be the amount of valuable  consideration received or receivable by the transferor for such  
transfer;  10 
 (ze) “tax” means the tax leviable and payable under this Act;  
(zf) “taxable  goods” means all goods in respect of which tax is payable  under section 14;  
(zg) “Tribunal” means the Tribunal constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 9;  
(zh) “works contract ” means any agreement for carrying out for cash or  deferred payment or other  
valuable consideration, the construction,  fitting out, improvement or repair of any building, road, 
bridge or  other immovable or movable property;  
(zi) “year” means the financial year.  
CHAPTER II  
INCIDENCE OF TAX  
3. Charge of tax. –(1) Every dealer who is registered under the Bihar  Finance Act, 1981 (Bihar Act 5 
of 1981), as it stood before its repeal  by section 94, shall be liable, on or after the commencement of this  
Act, to pay tax under this Act on sale or purchase, made by him.  
(2) Every dealer, to who m sub -section ( 1) does not apply, shall be  liable to pay tax on sale or 
purchase, as the case may be, from the  date on which his gross turnover, during a period not exceeding 
twelve  months, first exceeded five lakh rupees.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything cont ained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section  (2) but subject to the other 
provisions of this Act, every  dealer,– 
(a) being an importer or a manufacturer; or  
(b) who is required to file a return under the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43  of 1961); or  
(c) who  holds any licence under the Explosives Act, 1884 (4 of 1884),  or the Bihar Excise Act, 
1915 (Bihar and Orissa Act 2 of 1915), or the  Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940), or the 
Essential  Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955) or the Mines and Minerals  (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1957 (67 of 1957); or  
(d) being a corporation, constituted under any law for the time being  in force or a company 
incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of  1956), or, is registered under the Central Sales Tax 
Act, 1 956 (74 of  1956); or  
(e) whose place of business is located inside the market yard  established under the Bihar 
Agriculture Produce Market Act, 1960 (Bihar  Act 16 of 1960); or  
(f) who fulfils the following two conditions, namely: – 
(i) uses  a telephone in his place of business or has a mobile  telephone; and  
(ii) the receipts or payments of whose business, either wholly or in  part, are transacted 
through any bank,   
shall be liable to pay tax on sale or purchase, as the case may be,  with effect from the date of the first sale 
of any taxable goods made  by him.  
(4) Every dealer who has become liable to pay tax under sub -sections  (1), (2) and ( 3) shall, subject to 
the provisions of sub -section ( 5), cease to be so liable after the expiry of tw elve consecutive months  from 
the date he either closes or discontinues his business or entirely  transfers his business to another person.  
(5) A registered dealer shall, within a period of twelve consecutive  months, pay tax on the stock of 
goods remaining with him on the date  with effect from which he closes or discontinues his business:  
Provided that the Commissioner may, after recording the reasons, extend  the period of twelve 
consecutive months if the goods are held in stock  beyond the said period of twe lve months because of 
reasons beyond the  control of the dealer.  11 
 (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section  (2) or sub -section ( 3), where 
any person who, is, or was, less  than six months earlier, a member of the partnership fir m, concern or  
Hindu undivided family, which is, or was, less than six months earlier,  liable to pay tax, starts a new 
business, either singly or jointly with  other persons, or joins other business, partnership firm or concern,  
tax as aforesaid, shall likew ise be payable on sales and purchases made  from such business, partnership 
firm or concern, on and from the date  the person starts or joins it, unless the liability in respect of such  
business, partnership firm or concern has arisen from an earlier date  under the said sub -sections.  
(7) The tax for each year or any part thereof, may, with the previous  approval of the Commissioner, 
be estimated and collected in advance, in  the manner prescribed, during a year, in such instalments as may 
be fixed by the prescribed authority.  
(8) For the purposes of sub -section ( 7), the prescribed authority may  require the dealer to furnish an 
advance estimate of his taxable  turnover for that year or any part thereof and may provisionally  determine 
the amount of tax payabl e by the dealer in respect of the  year or any part thereof and thereupon the dealer 
shall pay the amount  so determined by such date as may be fixed by such authority.  
4. Levy of purchase tax. –Subject to the provisions of sections 6 and 7,  every dealer liable to pay tax 
under section 3, who purchases goods in  circumstances in which no tax on sales is payable or has been 
paid on  the sale price of such goods and either consumes such goods in the  manufacture of other goods 
for sale or otherwise disposes of such goods  in any manner other than by way of sale in the State or sale 
in the  course of inter -State trade or commerce, shall be liable to pay tax on  the purchase price of such 
goods at the same rate at which it would  have been leviable on the sale price o f such goods under section 
14. 
5. Liability to pay purchase tax on certain purchases. –Where a dealer  purchases any taxable goods 
from any person within the State of Bihar,  and such person is not a registered dealer and the said goods 
are used  as capital as sets anytime after such purchase, there shall be levied, a  tax on the purchase price of 
such purchases at the rate at which tax on sales is leviable on the said  goods.  
6. Non -levy of tax in certain cases. –(1) No tax shall be payable under  this Act on sales or purchases 
of goods which have taken place – 
(a) in the course of inter -State trade or commerce;  
(b) outside the State of Bihar;  
(c) in the course of import of goods into, or, export of goods out of,  the territory of India.  
(2) The provi sions of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956)  shall apply for determining when 
a sale or purchase of goods shall be  deemed to have taken place in any of the ways mentioned in clause  
(a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1). 
7. Exemptions. –No tax shall be payable on sale or purchase of goods  specified in Schedule I.  
8. Burden of proof. –The burden of proving that any sale or purchase  effected by a dealer is not liable 
to tax under section 6 or section 7  or sub -section ( 2) of section 13, as t he case may be, or that he is  
eligible for an input tax credit under sections 16 and 17 shall be on  the dealer.  
CHAPTER III  
TRIBUNAL AND  TAXING AUTHORITIES  
9. Tribunal. –(1) Subject to such rules, as may be prescribed, the State  Government shall, by a 
notif ication published in the Official Gazette,  constitute a Tribunal to be called the Commercial Tax 
Tribunal  consisting of a Chairperson and two other Members to exercise all the  powers and perform all 
the functions conferred by or under this Act or  any other  law for the time being in force upon such a 
Tribunal:  
Provided that till the Tribunal is constituted under this Act, the  Tribunal constituted under the Bihar 
Finance Act, 1981 (Bihar Act 5 of  1981), as it stood before its repeal by section 94, shall be de emed to  be 
the Commercial Tax Tribunal constituted under this Act and shall  exercise all the powers and perform all 
the functions conferred by or  under this Act or any other law for the time being in force.  12 
 (2) The Chairperson of the Tribunal shall be a re tired High Court  Judge, not exceeding sixty -five 
years of age, or a judicial officer of  the rank of a District Judge.  
(3) One of the other two Members shall be an officer of the Commercial  Taxes  Department of the 
State Government not below the rank of Join t Commissioner and the third Member shall be a person  
(a) who has, for at least ten years, been in the practice of  accountancy as a chartered accountant 
under the Chartered Accountants  Act, 1949 (38 of 1949) or as a registered accountant under any law  
formerly in force or partly as a registered accountant and partly as a  chartered accountant; or  
(b) who is or has been an officer of the Indian Audit and Accounts  Service not below the rank of 
Deputy Accountant -General; or  
(c) who is a Government servant, whether serving or retired having  experience of at least four 
years in the administration of accounts or  financial management in the State Government or public 
sector  undertaking.  
(4)(a) The State Government may, if it considers expedient to do so,  set up by a notification, one or 
more additional benches of the  Tribunal at such places and having jurisdiction over such area as may  be 
specified in the notification.  
(b) It shall consist of such Member or Members, as may be specified in  the notification, posses sing 
such qualifications as are specified in sub -sections  (2) and ( 3): 
Provided that if a judicial officer is appointed to such an additional  bench, he shall be an officer not 
below the rank of an Additional  District Judge.  
(5) Any vacancy in the membership of the Tribunal shall be filled up by  the State Government as 
soon as possible.  
(6) During the vacancy in the post of the Chairperson pending the  appointment of a permanent 
Chairperson, the Government may appoint one  of the remaining members to act as the Chairperson.  
(7) Any person appointed as a member of the Tribunal shall ordinarily  hold office for a period of 
three years:  
Provided that in case a retired High Court Judge is appointed as the  Chairperson or any other 
Government servant is appoi nted as a Member,  after his superannuation to the Tribunal, the terms and 
conditions of  service (including his pay and allowances) shall be such as may be  prescribed.  
(8)(a) The functions of the Tribunal shall be exercised by a bench to  be constituted by the 
Chairperson consisting of one or two or three  members.  
(b) The nature of cases to be disposed of by either of these benches  shall be under the discretion of 
the Chairperson:  
Provided that a bench consisting of only one Member or two Members may  in its discretion refer a 
case to a larger bench of two or three  Members, as the case may be.  
(9)(a) Where an application is heard by all the three Members of the  Tribunal and the Members are 
divided in opinion on any point or points,  such point or points shall b e decided in accordance with the 
opinion of  the majority:  
Provided that if the post of any one of the Members is vacant such  points shall be decided in 
accordance with the opinion of the  Chairperson.  
(b) Where an application is heard by a bench consisting of two Members,  whether it consists of the 
Chairperson or not, and the Members are   divided in opinion on any point or points, such point or points 
shall  be referred to a bench consisting of all the three Members.  
(10)(a) The Members of the Tribunal shall be deemed to be public  servants within the meaning of 
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45  of 1860).  
(b) No Member shall accept any other paid employment outside the duties  of his office during the 
term of his membership of the Tribunal.  13 
 (11) The Tribun al shall, with the previous sanction of the State  Government, make regulations 
consistent with the provisions of this  Act and the rules made thereunder, for regulating its procedure and  
other matters incidental to the disposal of its business and publish  such regulations in the Official Gazette.  
(12) The Members of the Tribunal shall, ordinarily be appointed for a  period of three years from the 
date of their appointment:  
Provided that the period of appointment may be reduced or extended by  the State Government.  
(13) The Chairperson or any other Member may, by notice in writing   under his hand addressed to the 
State Government, resign his office:  
Provided that the Chairperson or any other Member shall, unless he is  permitted by the State 
Government to relinquish his office sooner,  continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from 
the date  of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his  successor enters upon his office 
or until the expiry of his term of  office, whichever is the earliest.  
(14) The Chairperson or any other Member of the Tribunal shall not be  removed from his office 
except by an order by the State Government on  the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an 
inquiry made  by a Judge of the High Court, in  which the Chairperson or any other  member concerned has 
been informed of the charges against him and given  a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of 
those charges.  
(15) The State Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for the  investi gation of 
misbehaviour or incapacity of the Chairperson or any  other Member.  
10. Taxing Authorities and Inspectors. –(1) There shall be the following  classes of authorities to be 
appointed by the State Government, for  carrying out the purposes of t his Act, namely:– 
(a) Commissioner of Commercial Taxes;  
(b) Senior Joint Commissioner of Commercial Taxes;  
(c) Joint Commissioner of Commercial Taxes;  
(d) Deputy Commissioner of Commercial Taxes;  
(e) Assistant Commissioner of Commercial Taxes;  
(f) Commercial Taxes Officer;  
(g) Assistant Commercial Taxes Officer.  
(2) The authorities appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall, within such  areas or in respect of such 
transactions falling within an area as the  State Government may, by notification specify, exercise such 
powers as  may be conferred and perform such duties as may be imposed, by or under  this Act.  
(3) The Commissioner may appoint such number of Inspectors of  Commercial Taxes as may be 
necessary to assist any of the authorities  appointed under sub -section ( 1) and the Inspectors so appointed 
shall, within such areas exercise powers under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 56 and perform such 
other functions in the execution of this  Act in those areas as may be prescribed or as the Commissioner 
may, by  general o r special order, assign to them and such assignment may be  subject to such conditions 
and restrictions as may be specified in the  order.  
(4) All persons appointed under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3) shall be deemed to be public 
servants within the meaning of section 21  of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860).  
(5) The Commissioner may, at any stage, direct transfer of a proceeding  under  section 27 or section 
28 or section 31 or section 32 or section 33 or  section 72 in respect of any dealer from the prescribed 
authority to  another of the same or higher rank appointed under sub -section ( 1) and  where such direction 
is given by the Commissioner the authority to whom  the proceeding is transferred shall proceed to 
dispose it of as if it  had been initia ted by the said authority, irrespective of the local  limits of its 
jurisdiction; such transfer shall not render necessary  the re -issue of any notice already issued before the 
transfer and the  authority to whom the proceeding is transferred may, in its disc retion,  continue it from 
the stage at which it was left by the authority from  whom it was transferred.  14 
 (6) For smooth functioning of the office, it shall be lawful for the  Deputy  Commissioner or the 
Assistant Commissioner in -charge of a circle to  allot wor k and proceedings amongst the officers posted in 
the circle,  as the case may be, and it may include transfer of a proceeding from  one officer to another 
posted in the same office and exercising  concurrent jurisdiction.  
(7) The Commissioner may, from time t o time, issue such orders,  instructions and directions as he 
may deem fit, to the authorities  subordinate to him, for carrying out the purposes of this Act, and such  
authorities shall observe and follow such orders, instructions and  directions of the Commi ssioner:  
Provided that no such orders, instructions and directions shall be  issued– 
(i) so as to require any authority to pass a particular order or to  dispose of a particular case in a 
particular manner; or  
(ii) so as to interfere with the discretion of the Appellate  authorities in a particular case:  
Provided further that if the Commissioner is of the opinion that it is  necessary in the public 
interest so to do, he may cause such orders,  instructions and directions to be published and circulated 
for general  information.  
11. Protection of action taken in good faith. –No suit, prosecution or  other legal proceeding shall lie 
against any servant of the Government  or any officer or authority appointed under section 10 or s ection 
86 of  this Act for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be  done in pursuance or rules made 
thereunder.  
12. Power to issue summons and examine on oath. –(1) The Tribunal  constituted under section 9, or 
the Commissioner or any officer or  authority appointed under section 10 or section 86 shall, for carrying  
out the purposes of this Act, have all the powers of a Civil Court  under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
(5 of 1908) and in particular  in respect of  the following matters, namely: – 
(a) to summon and enforce attendance of any person, including any  officer of a banking 
company, and examine him on oath or affirmation;  
(b) to compel the production of documents or accounts and to impound  and retain them;  
(c) to issue commissions for the ex amination of witness.  
(2) Every proceeding under this Act before the Tribunal, shall be  deemed to be a judicial proceeding 
within the meaning of section 193  and section 228 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860).  
CHAPTER IV  
RATE OF TAX AND POINT OF LE VY 
13. Point or points in series of sales at which sales tax shall be  levied.–(1)(a) Subject to the 
provisions of sections 16 and 17, tax on  sale of goods (other than goods specified in Schedule IV) shall be  
levied at each point in a series of sales in the  State of Bihar by a  dealer liable to pay tax under this Act.  
(b) Where the tax is levied at each point of sale, the tax payable by a  dealer at any point shall be the 
amount arrived at after deducting, the  input tax credit specified under section 16 or sec tion 17, from the 
tax computed at that point of sale.   
(2)(a) The tax on sales, in respect of goods specified in Schedule IV,  shall be levied at the first point 
of their sale in the State of Bihar  by a dealer and subsequent sales of the same goods in the State of  Bihar 
shall not be levied to tax, if the dealer making the subsequent  sale produces before the prescribed 
authority the original copy of the  cash memo, or invoice or bill issued to him and files a true and  complete 
declaration in the form and in t he manner prescribed.  
(b) The declaration referred to in clause ( a) shall be issued by the  selling dealer to the purchasing 
dealer not later than the 30th day of  September of the year following the year to which such sales relate.  
(3) If upon information, the prescribed authority has reasons to  believe that the selling dealer has, 
without reasonable cause, failed  to issue to the purchasing dealer the declaration referred to in sub -section  
(2), he shall, after giving the selling dealer a reasonable  opportunity of being heard, direct that the selling  
dealer shall pay,  by way of penalty, a sum of rupees five thousand per month for every  month of default 
or the amount of tax involved,  whichever is less.  15 
 14. Rate of tax. –(1) Tax shall b e payable on the sale price of – 
(a) the goods specified in the Schedule II, at the rate of one per  cent.;  
(b) the goods specified in the Schedule III, at the rate of four per  cent.;  
(c) the goods specified in the Schedule IV, at the rate not exceeding  fifty per cent. but not less 
than twenty per cent., as the State  Government may, subject to such conditions and restrictions, by  
notification, specify;  
(d) any other goods, not specified in the Schedules I, II, III and IV,  at the rate of twelve and a -half 
per cent.  
(2) The St ate Government may, by notification, alter any Schedule to  this Act.  
15. Compounding of tax liability in certain cases. –(1) Notwithstanding  anything to the contrary 
contained in the Act, the State Government  may, by notification and subject to such conditions and 
restrictions as  may be prescribed, permit any class of registered dealers, whose gross  turnover does not 
exceed the limit specified in the notification to  pay, in lieu of the tax payable by him, an amount 
calculated at such  rate, not exceedi ng four per cent. of his taxable turnover, as may be  specified in the 
notification:  
Provided that no such permission shall be granted to a manufacturer or  a person who imports any 
goods from any place outside the State of  Bihar for the purpose of his busin ess: 
Provided further that the amount so specified shall be in addition to  any tax that may be payable by 
the dealer under section 4.  
(2) The dealers to whom the provisions  of sub -section ( 1) apply shall – 
(a) not charge any tax on the sale of goods specified in Schedule I;  
(b) not charge tax in excess of the rate specified in the notification  issued under sub -section ( 1); 
and 
(c) not be entitled to issue tax invoices in respect of sales made by  them.  
(3) If the Assessing Authority has reasons to believe that the dealer  was not eligible to pay tax at a 
rate specified under sub -section ( 1), the Assessing Authority shall, without prejudice to any action which 
is or may be taken under section 81, impose a penalty equ ivalent to three  times of the amount of tax 
arrived at after applying the rate,  specified under section 14, to the gross turnover of the dealer after  
deducting the value of sales under section 6:  
Provided that no order under this sub -section shall be passe d without  giving the dealer a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard.   
16. Input tax credit. –(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, an  input tax credit as provided in this 
section shall be claimed by a  registered dealer, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may  be 
prescribed, on sales of goods in the following circumstances,  namely:– 
(a) when a registered dealer purchases any input within the State of  Bihar from another registered 
dealer after paying him the tax as  specified under section 14, he shall claim credit of the input tax in  
the manner prescribed, if the goods are sold within the State or in the  course of inter -State trade and 
commerce;  
(b) when a registered dealer – 
(i) purchases any input within the State from another registered deale r after paying him the 
tax under section 14, or  
(ii) purchases any input and pays tax on such purchase under section 4  of the Act,   
and consumes such goods in the manufacture of any goods mentioned in  clause ( a), (b) and ( d) of 
section 14, he shall claim credit of the  said input tax in the manner prescribed, if the goods so 
manufactured  are sold within the State of Bihar or in the course of inter -State  trade and commerce;  16 
 (c) when a registered dealer purchases any capital goods within the  State from anothe r registered 
dealer after paying him the tax as  specified under section 14, and uses such goods in the manufacture 
of any goods mentioned in clauses ( a), (b) and ( d) of section 14 and sells  the manufactured goods 
within the State of Bihar or in the course of inter-State trade or commerce, or otherwise, he shall 
claim and be  allowed, in such manner as may be prescribed, credit of the amount of  input tax;  
(d) when a registered dealer holds in stock, on the 1st day of April,  2005, such goods as have 
been purch ased by him on or after the 1st day  of April, 2004 and which have suffered the incidence of 
tax under the  Bihar Finance Act, 1981 (Bihar Act 5 of 1981), as it stood before its  repeal by section 
94 and– 
(i) he sells such goods within the State of Bihar or in the course of  inter-State trade and 
commerce, or  
(ii) he consumes such goods in the manufacture of any goods mentioned  in clauses ( a), (b) 
and ( d) of section 14 and the goods so manufactured  are sold within  the State of Bihar or in the 
course of inter -State  trade and commerce,  
he shall claim credit of the input tax in the manner prescribed;  
(e) when a registered dealer purchases any input within the State of  Bihar from another such 
dealer after paying him th e tax as specified  under section 14 at a rate higher than four per cent. and 
transfers  such goods or goods manufactured from such goods to another dealer  outside the State of 
Bihar, he shall be allowed credit of such tax in  excess of four per cent. in the manner as may be 
prescribed:  
Provided that if the claim for input tax credit under clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) or clause 
(d) or clause ( e) for any month  exceeds the output tax for the same month, such excess shall be 
carried  forward for adjustment against the output tax of subsequent months, not  being a month later 
than two years after the close of the year during  which such excess had arisen and the amount of input 
tax remaining  unadjusted after two years after the close of the year duri ng which  such excess had 
arisen shall be refunded to the dealer subject to the  provisions of sections 68, 69 and 71 of this Act:  
Provided further that input tax credit in respect of capital goods  shall be allowed in the manner 
and over such period, not exc eeding  thirty -six months from the date of their acquisition, as may be  
prescribed:  
Provided also that no credit of input tax shall be allowed in respect  of capital assets purchased or 
acquired before the commencement of this  Act. 
(2) Notwithstanding anythi ng contained in sub -section ( 1), where a  registered dealer purchases any 
input in the circumstances mentioned in  clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) or clause ( d) of the said  
sub-section  and,– 
(a) he despatches  such goods or the goods manufactured by consuming  such goods, to a 
commission agent registered under this Act or  transfers such goods to its branch or head office within 
the State of  Bihar for sale, as the case may be; or  
 (b) he supplies such goods in th e course of execution of a works  contract to another registered 
dealer to whom he has let out a sub -contract,  for use in the execution thereof,  
the input tax credit on the sale or supply, as the case may be, of such  goods shall be claimed by the 
registered  dealer selling the goods on  commission or using the goods supplied in the execution of  
sub-contract,  as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of sub -section  (1), in such manner as 
may be prescribed.   
(3) No input tax credit under sub -section  (1) shall be claimed or be  allowed to a registered dealer – 
(a) in respect of goods specified in Schedule IV or such other goods as  may be prescribed; or  
(b) in respect of inputs purchased by him from another registered  dealer or manufactured by him 
and the right wherein to use is  transferred to another dealer; or  
(c) in respect of inputs purchased from a registered dealer permitted  to pay tax under the 
provisions of section 15; or   
(d) in respect of inputs consumed for the manufacture of goods  specified in Schedule I; or   17 
 (e) in respect of goods used for self consumption or as gift.   
(4) In case the inputs or goods are used partially for the purpose  specified in sub - section ( 3), the 
claim for input tax credit shall  stand reduced to the extent they are so  used.  
(5)(a) No dealer shall claim an input tax credit in respect of inputs  purchased unless he is in 
possession of an original copy of the tax  invoice, signed and issued by the selling registered dealer, 
containing  the prescribed particulars of sale.   
(b) If the original tax invoice is lost, input tax credit shall be  allowed only on the basis of a duplicate 
copy of the original tax  invoice in the form and manner prescribed.  
17. Exports to be zero -rated.–(1) In the case of a sale in the course  of export un der section 5 of the 
Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of  1956); or sale of any input made to any dealer in a special economic  
zone outside the customs territory of India; or sale (including sale  outside India and Domestic Tariff 
Area) by an export oriented unit, there shall be no tax payable on the turnover of such sale and the  person 
exporting the goods or selling them shall be entitled, in the  manner prescribed , to a credit of input tax 
paid– 
(a) on the purchase of the goods sold in the course of export  (excluding sale to Domestic Tariff 
Area) or purchase of goods sold to  any dealer in the special economic zone or sale (including sale 
outside  India and Domestic Tariff Area) by an export oriented unit, or  
(b) on the purchase of inputs and capital assets which have been used  for the manufacture of 
goods sold in the course of export (excluding  sale to Domestic Tariff Area) or to any dealer in the 
special economic  zone:  
Provided that the input tax credit on account of capital assets shall  be allowed only to the extent 
and in the manner prescribed.  
(2) The organisations specified in the Schedule V to this Act shall be  entitled to claim a refund of tax 
paid on goods purchased in the State  of Bihar, subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be  
prescribe d and such organisation shall be entitled to a refund of the  same only on an application made to 
the prescribed authority within  such time and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
18. Rate of tax on packing materials and containers. –Notwithstanding  anythin g contained in 
section 14, where any goods packed in any  container or packing material are sold or purchased, the 
container or  packing material in which such goods are so packed shall be deemed to  have been sold or 
purchased along with such goods and the t ax under  sections 3, 4 and 5 shall be levied on the sale or 
purchase of such  container or packing material (whether such packing materials or  containers are 
separately charged for or not) at the rate of tax  applicable to the sale or the purchase, as the ca se may be, 
of such  goods:  
Provided that where the price of the goods is less than the container  or packing material in which they 
are packed, the rate of tax specified  in respect of such containers under sub -section ( 1) of section 14 shall  
apply.  
CHAPTER V  
REGISTRATION  
19. Registration. –(1) No person liable to pay tax under section 3 or  section 4, as the case may be, of 
this Act shall sell or purchase goods  unless he has obtained and is in possession of a valid certificate of  
registration:  
Provided that any  dealer not liable to pay tax under this Act may also  apply for grant of a certificate 
of registration.  
(2) Every person, referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall apply for the  grant of certificate of registration 
to the prescribed authority in the  prescribed  manner and the prescribed authority, shall, after verifying  that 
the application has been duly filled in, grant certificate of  registration in the manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that dealers registered under the Bihar Finance Act, 1981(Bihar Act 5 of 1981), as it stood 
before its repeal by section 94,  shall be deemed to be dealers registered under this Act and such  dealers 18 
 shall be granted, a certificate of registration within such  time and in the manner as may be prescribed and 
such dealers may sel l or purchase goods till such time as the certificate of registration is  granted to them:  
Provided further that a dealer, who exclusively sells or purchases,  goods mentioned in Schedule I, 
shall not be liable for registration.  
(3) Every dealer registered under sub -section ( 1) of section 7 of the  Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 
of 1956), shall apply for and obtain a  certificate of registration, notwithstanding whether such dealer is 
not liable to pay tax under this Act.  
(4) Where the prescribed authority, a t any time after the grant of the  certificate of registration, is 
satisfied upon an inquiry, that the  particulars mentioned in the application are incorrect or the applicant  
has suppressed or misrepresented certain material facts, he shall,  after giving th e applicant an opportunity 
of being heard, and after  recording reasons therefor, cancel the certificate of registration  granted to him.  
20. Amendment and cancellation of certificate of registration. –(1) The  prescribed authority may, 
after considering such information as may be  furnished by the dealer under section 23 or as may be 
otherwise  received by the said authority, amend the certificate of registration  of the dealer in respect of 
whom the information has been furnished or  received.  
(2) When– 
(a) any r egistered dealer discontinues or entirely transfers his  business to other persons; or  
(b) the liability of a registered dealer to pay tax under this Act has  ceased,  
the dealer shall, forthwith, surrender his certificate of registration  in the manner prescribed to the 
prescribed authority and the said  authority shall cancel the certificate of registration in the manner  
prescribed:  
Provided that, in a case covered by clause ( a), the certificate of  registration shall be deemed to be 
inoperative with effect from the  date of discontinuance or transfer of the business and, in a case  covered 
by clause ( b), with effect from the date on which the dealer's  liability to pay tax has ceased.  
21. Security. –Where it appears necessary to the prescribed authority t o do so for the proper 
realisation of the tax payable under this Act, he  may, by an order in writing and for reasons to be recorded 
therein,  direct a dealer to furnish such security and in such manner as may be  prescribed.  
22. Declared manager. –(1) Every d ealer, who is liable to pay tax under  this Act, and who is a Hindu 
undivided family, a firm, company or  corporation or a society or club or association or who is engaged in  
business as a guardian or a trustee or otherwise on behalf of another  person, shall  furnish to the prescribed 
authority in the prescribed  manner a declaration stating the name and prescribed particulars of the  person 
or persons who shall be deemed to be the manager or managers of  such dealer's business for the purposes  
of this Act.  
(2) Every dealer shall specifically authorise his manager or officer or  any other person to receive any 
form of declaration, make any  statement, furnish any return, statement, accounts, produce documents  or 
other evidence and any statement made, return or stat ement  furnished, accounts, registers or documents 
produced or evidence given  by the manager or any person authorised by him or by the dealer in this  
behalf, in the course of any proceeding under this Act, shall be  binding on the dealer.  
23. Furnishing of i nformation by dealers. –If any person or dealer  liable to pay tax under this Act – 
(a) transfers or otherwise disposes of his business or any part  thereof, whether by way of sale or 
otherwise, or   
(b) acquires any business or part of any business, whether by  way of  purchase or otherwise, or   
(c) effects any other change in the ownership or constitution of the  business, or   
(d) discontinues his business, or shifts his place of business, or  
(e) changes the name, style or nature of his business or effects any  change in the class or 
description of goods dealt in by him, or   
(f) starts a new business or joins another business either singly or  jointly with other person or 
persons, or   19 
 (g) effects any change in the particulars furnished in an application  under sect ion 19 or 
declaration furnished under section 22, or   
(h) applies for or has an application made against him for insolvency  or liquidation under any law 
for the time being in force, or   
(i) makes a reference or has a reference made under the Sick Industrial  Companies (Special 
Provisions) Act, 1985 (1 of 1986),  
he shall, within seven days of the occurring of any of the events  aforesaid, inform the prescribed authority 
accordingly, and, if any  such dealer dies without doing so, his executor, administ rator,  successor -in-
interest or legal representative, as the case may be,  shall, within fifteen days of the dealer's death, inform 
the said  authority accordingly.  
CHAPTER VI  
RETURNS, ASSESSMENT, RE -ASSESSMENT AND PAYMENT OF TAX  
24. Returns, payment of tax,  interest and penalty. –(1) Every person,  being– 
(a) a dealer, who is not registered under this Act, by a notice served  in the manner prescribed by 
the prescribed authority;  
(b) a registered dealer (other than a dealer permitted under section 15  to pay tax at a fixed rate in 
lieu of the tax payable by him),   
shall furnish a true and complete return in respect of all his  transactions relating to sales, purchases, 
receipts and despatches of  goods and any other transactions prescribed specifically for each  mont h, on or 
before the end of the next following month to the  prescribed authority in such form and in such manner as 
may be  prescribed.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), every person, being – 
(a) a dealer, who is not regis tered under this Act, by a notice served  in the manner prescribed by 
the prescribed authority;  
(b) a registered dealer (other than a dealer permitted under section 15  to pay tax at a fixed rate in 
lieu of the tax payable by him),  
shall furnish a true and c omplete statement in respect of all his  transactions relating to sales and purchases 
of goods and any such  details as may be prescribed for each completed quarter on or before  the end of the 
month following the end of the quarter to the prescribed  authority in such form and in such manner as 
may be prescribed.  
(3) Every registered dealer shall furnish to the prescribed authority,  on or before the due date, a true 
and complete return in respect of  every financial year in the form and manner prescribe d. 
Explanation .–In this  sub-section, “due date” means– 
(a) where the dealer is a company within the meaning of the Companies  Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), 
the 30th day of November of the year following  the year to which such return relates;  
(b) where  the dealer is a person, other than a company, – 
(i) in a case where the accounts of the dealer are required under this  Act or any other law to 
be audited or where the report of an accountant  is required to be furnished under section 54, the 
31st day of Oct ober of the year following the year to which such return relates;  
(ii) in any other case, the 31st day of July of the year following the  year to which such return 
relates.  
(4) Every dealer who has been permitted to pay tax under section 15  shall file a quarterly abstract 
statement for each completed quarter on  or before the end of the month following the end of the quarter to 
the prescribed authority in such form and in such manner as may be  prescribed.  
(5) If the due date prescribed for the filing of qu arterly statement or  monthly return or quarterly 
abstract statement or annual return happens  to be a holiday, the next date on which the office opens shall 
be deemed to be the due date.  20 
 (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section (2), the prescribed authority 
may, for specific reasons to be  recorded in writing, extend the date of filing such return or quarterly  
statement, as the case may be, subject to the condition that such an  extension may be allowed only once 
and for a perio d not exceeding  thirty days from the due date; but the Commissioner may allow extension  
beyond thirty days for reasons to be recorded in writing subject to the  condition that such an extension 
may be allowed only once and that also  for a period not exceeding three months.  
(7) If a dealer, having furnished a monthly return under sub -section  (1) or the quarterly statement 
under sub -section ( 2), discovers any  omission or wrong statement therein, he may furnish a revised return 
or statement, as the case may be, in the form and manner prescribed to the  prescribed authority at any 
time before the due date within the meaning  of sub -section ( 3): 
Provided that no such return or statement shall be taken into  consideration if, upon information or 
otherwise and f or reasons to be  recorded in writing, the prescribed authority is satisfied that the  return or 
statement originally furnished was deliberately false or that  it was furnished with intent to defraud the 
State Government of its  revenue.  
(8) If a dealer fails to furnish the return within the time specified  under sub -section ( 1) or the 
quarterly statement under sub -section ( 2) or the quarterly abstract statement under sub -section ( 4), the  
prescribed authority shall, after giving such a dealer an opportunity  of being heard in the manner 
prescribed, impose a penalty at the rate  of twenty -five rupees for every day of such failure.  
(9) (a) Every dealer liable to furnish the return under sub -section ( 1) shall also deposit the tax 
payable, according to the return on or before the fifteenth day of the following month in such manner as 
may be prescribed and shall enclose the proof of payment in the form and  manner prescribed along with 
the return.  
(b) Every dealer permitted to pay tax under section 15 shall also  deposit  the tax, arrived at after 
applying the rate specified in the  notification issued under section 15 to his quarterly turnover, on or  
before the fifteenth day of the month following the quarter to which it  relates and shall enclose the proof 
of payment in th e form and manner  prescribed along with the statement required to be furnished under 
sub-section  (4). 
(c) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 10), if any registered  dealer submits a revised return 
under sub -section ( 7) and if the amount  of tax due fr om such dealer according to the revised return is 
higher  than the amount which was due according to the original return, such  revised return shall be 
accompanied by a receipt showing the payment of  extra amount of tax in the manner provided in clause 
(a). 
(10) If a dealer, required to furnish the return under sub -section ( 1) or statement under sub -section 
(4), fails to pay the amount of tax  payable according to the provisions of sub -section ( 9), such dealer  shall 
be liable to pay interest – 
(a) in respect of  tax payable under sub -section ( 9), by him in  accordance with the return or the 
quarterly abstract statement or  revised return, as the case may be; or   
(b) in respect of the tax payable for the period for which he has  failed to furnish returns under 
sub-section ( 1) or quarterly abstract  statement under sub -section ( 4),  
at the rate of one and a -half per cent. per month of the amount due  from the date the tax so payable had 
become due to the date of its  payment.  
Explanation. –For t he purposes of this su b-section– 
(i) where the period of default in payment of tax covers a period less  than a month, the 
interest payable on such tax in respect of such  period shall be computed proportionately;  
(ii) “month” shall mean thirty days.  
(11) Any interest levied or penalty imposed under this section shall be  without prejudice to any 
action, which is or may be taken under section  81. 
(12) A rebate at the rate of half per cent. of the amount of tax  admitted to be due in the return 
furnished under sub -section ( 1), subje ct to a maximum of fifty thousand rupees in a year, shall be  allowed 
to a registered dealer who has furnished the return within the  due dates specified under this section and 
has paid such amount in full  on or before the date specified for payment of tax u nder this section.  21 
 25. Scrutiny of returns. –(1) The prescribed authority shall, within the  time and in the manner 
prescribed, scrutinize every return filed under  sub-sections ( 1) and ( 3) of section 24 for the purpose of 
ascertaining  that– 
(a) all calculations contained therein are arithmetically accurate;  
(b) the output tax, the input tax, the tax payable and interest  payable, if any, have been computed 
correctly and properly;  
(c) the rates of tax have been applied correctly; and  
(d) evidence, as prescribed, has been furnished with regard to payment  of tax and interest 
payable, if any.  
(2) If, upon scrutiny under sub -section ( 1), the prescribed authority  discovers any error, he shall serve 
a notice in the prescribed form on  the concerned dealer dir ecting him to – 
(a) pay, within thirty days, the extra amount of tax along with the  interest, if any, payable and 
furnish the challan evidencing such  payment; or  
(b) explain, within thirty days, that the return or returns filed by  him do not suffer from any  error 
and all requirements specified in  clauses ( a) to ( d) of sub -section ( 1) have been complied with.  
(3) (a) The prescribed authority shall, in a case falling under clause  (b) of sub -section ( 2) and after 
giving the dealer a reasonable  opportunity to adduce necessary evidence, pass such order in the matter  as 
it may deem fit.  
(b) If, pursuant to an order under clause ( a), any tax or interest is  found to be payable by a dealer, a 
notice in the form and manner  prescribed, shall be served upon the dealer requiring him to pay the  tax and 
interest within the time as may be prescribed.  
(c) Any tax or interest payable under clause ( b) shall be deemed to be  an arrear of tax within the 
meaning of section 39.  
26. Self -Assessment of tax. –(1) Subject to the provisi ons of section  25, the tax due in respect of a 
financial year from every registered  dealer, who has furnished the return and statement mentioned in 
section  24, shall be deemed to have been assessed.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the  Commissioner may, in the interest of 
revenue, select any registered  dealer for detailed audit of his business, on the basis of a selection  model as 
may be prepared for such purpose, incorporating therein such  criteria as may be deemed fit by the 
Com missioner.  
(3) The audit of the business of a dealer selected under sub -section  (2) shall be conducted, within a 
period of twenty -four months from the  due date within the meaning of sub -section ( 3) of section 24, in 
such manner as may be prescribed.  
27. Assessment of dealer not filing returns. –(1) If a registered dealer  fails to furnish before the due 
date specified under sub -section ( 3) of section 24– 
(a) the returns specified under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3) of section 24; or  
(b) the quarterly abstract statement under sub -section ( 4) of section  24; or  
(c) the statement under sub -section ( 2) of section 24,  
the prescribed authority shall, after giving the dealer a reasonable  opportunity of being heard, assess to the 
best of its judgment, the  amount of tax due from the dealer and interest, if any – 
(2) Any assessment made or interest levied under this section shall be  without prejudice to any action, 
which is, or may be, taken under  section 81.  
28. Assessment of tax of dealers evading registration. –(1) If upon  information which has come into 
his possession, the prescribed  authority is satisfied that reasonable grounds exist to believe that  any dealer 
has been liable to pay tax under this Act in respect of any  period, and has nev ertheless wilfully failed to 
apply for grant of  certificate of registration, or, having so applied, failed to furnish  any particulars or 
information required for the purposes of section 19,  the prescribed authority shall, after giving the dealer a 22 
 reasonab le opportunity of being heard, assess, to the best of its judgment, the  amount of tax due, if any, 
from the dealer in respect of such period  and all subsequent periods; and the prescribed authority may, 
direct  that the dealer shall pay, by way of penalty, in addition to the amount  of tax so assessed, a sum of 
one hundred rupees for every day of the  period during which the dealer failed to apply for registration or  
failed to furnish any particulars or information required for the  purposes of section 19 or an  amount equal 
to the amount of tax  assessed, whichever is higher:  
Provided that no proceeding for such assessment shall be initiated  except before the expiry of two 
years from the expiry of the period to  which it relates:  
Provided further that a proceeding  initiated under this sub -section  shall be completed within a period 
of four years from the date of  initiation.   
(2) Any assessment made, interest levied or penalty imposed under this  section shall be without 
prejudice to any action which is, or may be,  taken under section 81.  
29. Assessment of tax on disputed question. –Notwithstanding anything  contained in any other 
provision of this Act, where the assessment  involves a decision on a point which is concluded against any 
of the  authorities specified in su b-section ( 1) of section 10 by a judgment of  the Tribunal and an appeal 
has been filed under section 79, then unless  otherwise directed by the High Court, the prescribed authority 
may complete the assessment as if the point was not so decided against such  authority, but shall stay the 
recovery of such of the dues including  tax, penalty, interest or amount forfeited, if any, in so far as they  
relate to such point, until the decision by the High Court and after  such decision, may modify the 
assessment order, if found necessary,  after giving the dealer a reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
30. Assessment of tax of non -resident dealer doing business temporarily  by way of fair, mela,  
etc.–(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in  section 19, or section 26 and subject to such rules as may 
be prescribed, it shall be open to the prescribed authority or any other  officer authorised by the 
Commissioner in this behalf to make  provisional or final assessment of turnover of sale or purchase of  
goods, as the case may be, effected by any dealer residing outside the  State of Bihar and carrying on 
business temporarily by way of fair,  mela  or by way of any other similar mode in the State of Bihar.  
(2) If a dealer referred to in sub -section ( 1) claims that the sales  affecte d by him are not of goods 
imported by him, the onus to prove  such claim shall lie on the claimant.  
31. Assessment or re -assessment of tax of escaped turnover. –(1) If the  prescribed authority is 
satisfied, either on the basis of audit  conducted under sub -section ( 3) of section 26 or otherwise, that  
reasonable grounds exist to believe that, in respect of any assessment  under this Act or under the Bihar 
Finance Act, 1981 (Bihar Act 5 of  1981), as it stood before its repeal by section 94, during any period,  
any sale or purchases of goods liable to tax under this Act or the said  Act, for any reason, has been under -
assessed or has escaped assessment,  or has been assessed to tax at a lower rate, or any deduction 
therefrom  has been wrongly made, or an input tax credit has incorrectly been  claimed, the prescribed 
authority shall, in such manner as may be  prescribed and after serving on the dealer a notice in the form 
and in  the manner prescribed, proceed to assess or re -assess, as the case may  be, the tax payable by such 
dealer within four years from the expiry of  the year during which the original order of assessment or re -
assessment  was passed, in a case where the dealer has concealed, omitted or failed  to disclose full and 
correct particulars of such sale or pur chase or  input tax credit, and the provisions of this Act shall, so far 
as may   be, apply accordingly as if the notice under this sub -section was a  notice under section 27:  
Provided that the amount of tax shall be assessed or re -assessed after  allowing suc h deductions as 
were allowable during the said period and  at the rates at which it would have been assessed had the 
turnover not  escaped assessment.  
(2)(a) The prescribed authority shall, in a case where the dealer has  concealed, omitted or failed to 
discl ose full and correct particulars  of such sale or purchase or input tax credit, direct that the dealer  shall, 
besides the amount of interest payable under sub -section ( 10) of section 24, pay by way of penalty, a sum 
equal to three times the  amount of tax wh ich is or may be assessed on the turnover of sale or  purchase 
which escaped assessment.  
(b) The penalty imposed under clause ( a) shall be in addition to the  amount of tax, which is or may be 
assessed on the turnover of sale or  purchase which escaped assessment.  23 
 (3) Any assessment or re -assessment made and any penalty imposed under  this section shall be 
without prejudice to any action, which is or may  be taken under section 81.  
32. Escaped turnover detected before or at the time of assessment of  tax.–(1) If the prescribed 
authority is satisfied that any registered  dealer– 
(a) has concealed any sales or purchases or any particulars thereof,  with a view to reduce the 
amount of tax payable by him under this Act;  or 
(b) has furnished incorrect statement of his turnover or incorrect  particulars of his sales or 
purchases in the return furnished under  sub-section ( 1) of section 24 or quarterly statement under sub -
section  (2) of section 24 or quarterly abstract statement under sub -section ( 3) of section 24; or  
(c) has claimed input tax credit in excess of the amount of input tax  credit to which he is entitled 
under this Act,  
the prescribed authority shall, after giving such a dealer an  opportunity of being heard in the prescribed 
manner, by an order in  writing, d irect that he shall, besides the amount of interest payable  under sub -
section ( 10) of section 24 and in addition to any tax which  may be determined to be payable by him under 
the Act, pay by way of  penalty, a sum equal to three times the amount of tax on t he concealed  turnover or 
on concealed or incorrect particulars or excess input tax  credit claimed.  
(2) The penalty under sub -section ( 1) may be imposed before completion  of assessment, and for 
determining the amount of penalty, the  prescribed authority may  quantify the amount of tax provisionally 
in the prescribed manner.  
(3) Any penalty imposed under sub -section ( 1) shall be without  prejudice to any action, which is or 
may be taken under section 81.  
33. Assessment of tax based on audit objections. –Where an  objection has  been made by the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India in respect of  an assessment or re -assessment made or scrutiny 
of any return filed  under this Act, the prescribed authority shall proceed to re -assess the  dealer with 
respect to whose assessment or re -assessment or scrutiny,  as the case may be, the objection has been 
made in the manner  prescribed:  
Provided that no order under this section shall be passed without  giving the dealer an opportunity of 
being heard.  
34. Assessment of tax proc eedings, etc., not to be invalid on certain  grounds.–No assessment and 
demand on account of any tax, interest or  penalty shall be invalid or affected by reason only of any 
mistake in  the name, residence, place of business or status of any person liable  to pay the tax, interest of 
penalty or by reason only of clerical error  or other defect of form, if the provisions contained in this Act 
and the rules made thereunder have, in substance, been complied with.  
35. Taxable turnover. –(1) For the purposes of this A ct, the taxable  turnover of a dealer shall be that 
part of his gross turnover which  remains after deducting therefrom – 
(a) the aggregate value of the transactions specified in section 6;  
(b) sale price on account of sales exempted under section 7;  
(c) in the case of works contract, the amount remaining after deducting  from the gross value of 
the contract the amount on account of the  following, namely: – 
(i) labour charges for execution of the works contract,  
(ii) amount paid to sub -contractor on account of labour and services,  
(iii) charges for planning, designing and architects fees,  
(iv) charges for obtaining on hire, the machineries and tools used in  the execution of the 
works contract,  
(v) cost of consumables such as water, electricity, fuels, etc., used  in execution of the works 
contract, the property in which is not  transferred in the course of execution of a works contract,  24 
 (vi) cost of establishment of the contractor to the extent, it is  relatable to supply of labour and 
services,  
(vii) other  similar expenses relatable to supply of labour and  services,  
(viii) profit earned by the contractor to the extent it is relatable to  the supply of labour and 
services, and  
(ix) goods or transaction exempted under section 6 or section 7;  
(d) value of goods  transferred otherwise than by way of sale;  
(e) the value of goods sold but returned to the dealer within a period  of six months from the date 
of the original sales and in respect of  which the selling dealer has issued to the purchasing dealer a 
credit  note specified in section 53;  
(f) sale price at the subsequent stages of sale of such goods as are  specified in Schedule IV as 
being subject to tax at the first point of  their sale in the State of Bihar, if necessary evidence as 
required by  sub-section ( 2) of section 13 are filed along with the return filed by  the dealer under sub -
section ( 3) of section 24.  
(2) Where a dealer claims that he is not liable to pay tax on any part  of his gross turnover in respect of 
any goods by reason of transfer of  such goods  by him to any other dealer or to his agent or to his  
principal, as the case may be, for sale, the burden of proving such  claim shall be on the dealer and for this 
purpose, along with other  evidences as may be prescribed, he shall furnish before the prescr ibed authority 
a declaration in a form and in the manner prescribed.  
36. Tax payable by a dealer. –The tax payable by a dealer shall be  calculated according to  the 
following formula, namely: – 
T = A–B 
Where– 
T means the tax payable by the dealer,  
A means the  output tax under this Act, and  
B means the total amount of input tax credit allowable to the dealer  under section 16 or section 
17. 
37. Time limit for completion of proceeding of assessment of tax. –Except for a proceeding under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 26, section  28, sub -section ( 1) of section 31 and section 33, no proceeding for  
assessment of tax payable by a dealer under this Act in respect of any  period shall be initiated and 
completed except before the expiry of two  years from the expiry of such per iod: 
Provided that a proceeding for re -assessment in pursuance of or as a  result of an order on appeal, 
revision or review shall be initiated and  completed before the expiry of one year from the expiry of the 
year during which such order was communicated t o the assessing authority:  
Provided further that the Commissioner may, on being satisfied that it  is necessary so to do and for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, extend  in a case or class of cases, the said period of two years to such  
further period not e xceeding two years.  
38. Exclusion of time  in assessment tax proceedings. –In computing the  period of limitation 
prescribed for assessment or re -assessment, as the  case may be, under section 27 or section 28 or section 
29 or section 30  or section 31 or secti on 32 or section 33, the time during which any  assessment or re -
assessment proceedings remained stayed under the order  of any competent court shall be excluded.  
39. Payment and recovery of tax. –(1) The tax payable under this Act  shall be paid in the manner  
hereinafter provided.  
(2) The amoun t of– 
(i) tax estimated in advance under sub -section ( 7) of section 3, or   
(ii) tax due according to the returns filed by the dealer where full  payment of such amount has not 
been made, or  25 
 (iii) tax assessed or re-assessed under section 26 or section 27 or  section 28 or section 29 or 
section 30 or section 31 or section 32 or  section 33 or in pursuance of or as a result of an order on 
appeal,  revision or review, less the sum, if any, already paid by the dealer,  or 
(iv) interest chargeable or penalty imposed, if any, under any of the  provisions of this Act,   
shall be paid by the dealer or the person concerned into a Government  Treasury or a bank authorised in 
this behalf by the State Government,  or in such other man ner as may be prescribed and by such date as 
may be  specified in a notice issued by the prescribed authority for this  purpose and the date to be 
specified shall, ordinarily, not be less  than thirty days from the date of service of such notice:  
Provided tha t the authority may, in respect of any particular dealer or  a person, and, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, extend the date  of such payment, or allow such dealer to pay tax or interest due and  
the penalty, if any, by instalments in the manner prescri bed: 
Provided further that where the prescribed authority considers it  expedient in the interest of revenue, 
it may, for reasons to be  recorded in writing, require any dealer, or person, to make such  payments 
forthwith.  
(3) If a dealer or a person fails to  make payment of any amount of tax  by the period specified in the 
notice issued under sub -section ( 2) or fails to make payment of tax by the date extended or has defaulted 
in making payment of instalments under the first proviso of the said sub -section,  the dealer shall, for such 
failure or default, pay, in  addition to the amount of tax, an amount by way of simple interest  calculated at 
the rate of one and a -half per cent. for each calendar  month or part thereof on the amount of such tax.  
(4) Where, in co urse of any proceeding, the prescribed authority finds  that any dealer has – 
(i) wrongly claimed either the whole or part of his turnover as not  taxable and, has consequently, 
paid lesser amount of tax than payable  by him; or   
(ii) wrongly declared his turn over or any particulars thereof and  thereby has reduced the amount 
of tax payable under this Act; or   
(iii) wrongly claimed input tax credit in excess of what he is entitled  to under this Act,   
the dealer shall pay, in addition to the amount of tax assessed under  any proceeding as aforesaid, simple 
interest at the rate of one and a  half per cent. for each calendar month or part thereof on the  difference of 
the amount previously admitted and tax fina lly assessed  from the date, the tax would have been payable 
had the dealer not  committed any of the acts mentioned in clause ( i) or clause ( ii) or clause ( iii): 
Provided that where the recovery of tax or any part thereof assessed  under any proceeding under  this 
Act is stayed as a result of an order  on appeal or by any competent court, the amount of such interest shall  
be recoverable after the final order is passed and such order is  confirmed from the date the tax first 
became due.  
(5) If a dealer or a perso n has failed, without reasonable cause, to  make payment of any amount of tax 
by the date specified in the notice  issued under sub -section ( 2) or forthwith as required by the second  
proviso thereto, or in like manner has failed to make payment of tax  and in terest by the date extended 
under the first proviso of the said  sub-section or has defaulted in payment of instalments or has not paid  
the amount of interest due, the prescribed authority, after giving the  dealer a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard, may direct that the  dealer shall pay, in the prescribed manner, by way of penalty for such  
failure, an amount which shall be five per cent. per month of the  amount payable following the expiry of 
such date for each subsequent  month and part thereof.   
(6) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 2), (4) and ( 5), any  amount of tax, interest together with 
penalty, if any, which remains  unpaid after the date specified in the notice issued under sub -section  (2), or 
penalty imposed under sub -section ( 5) and rem aining unpaid  shall, without prejudice to any other mode of 
recovery, be recoverable  as if it were an arrear of land revenue:   26 
 Provided that where an appeal in respect of such amount has been  entertained under section 72, the 
appellate authority may, subje ct to such rules as may be made by the State Government under this Act, 
stay recovery of such amount or portion thereof for so long as the appeal  remains pending or for such 
shorter period as the said authority may  consider to be adequate.   
40. Advance rec overy of tax on sales and supplies to Governments and  other persons. –(1) 
Subject to the provisions of section 6, any person  responsible for paying sale price or any amount 
purporting to be the  full or part payment of sale price in respect of sales or supplies of  taxable goods 
exceeding rupees two lakh fifty thousands during a year  made to the State Government or the Central 
Government or a company,  corporation, Board, authority, undertaking or any other body owned,  financed 
or controlled either wholly or partly by the State Government  or the Central Government, shall, at the 
time of payment, subject to  such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, deduct an amount  at the 
rate as may be specified by the State Government, by a  notification, on ac count of tax on the amount of 
such payment:  
Provided that the rate or rates to be specified by the State Government  shall not be more than the rate 
of tax applicable to the goods sold or  supplied.  
(2) Notwithstanding any law or contract to the contrary, th e person  making such deduction shall be 
lawfully competent to make such  deduction.  
(3) The payment of the amount deducted under sub -section ( 1) into the  Government Treasury in the 
prescribed manner, shall be the liability of  the person making such deduction.  
(4) The payment of the amount deducted under sub -section ( 1) into the  Government Treasury by the 
person making the deduction shall be deemed  to be a payment by or on behalf of the seller or supplier 
concerned.  
(5) If any person contravenes any o r all of the provisions of sub -sections  (1), (3) and ( 4), he shall be 
liable to pay, by way of  penalty, a sum not exceeding twice the amount of tax deductible under  sub-
section ( 1): 
Provided that such penalty shall not be imposed unless the person  contravening the provisions is 
given an opportunity of being heard by  the prescribed authority.   
(6) The provisions of sections 39 and 47 for recovery of any amount of  tax due from a dealer shall, 
mutatis mutandis , apply for recovery of  any amount of tax d educted or any penalty imposed but not 
deposited  under this section.   
Explanation. –For the purposes of this section, the “person” in this  section shall include all officers or 
authorities who are competent or  authorised to make payment of the sale -price in  respect of sales to the  
State Government or the Central Government or to a company,  corporation, Board, authority, undertaking 
or any other body owned,  financed or controlled wholly or partly by the State Government or the  Central 
Government.  
(7) The provisions of sub -section ( 5) of section 41 shall, mutatis  mutandis , apply, so far as it relates, 
to issuance of certificate to  person from whose bills deduction has been made and for filing of  quarterly 
statements by the person making the deductions.  
41. Advance recovery of tax from works contractors. –(1) Subject to the  provisions of section 6, 
every person, responsible for making any  payment in discharge of any liability on account of valuable  
consideration payable in respect of transfer of property in go ods (whether as goods or in some other form) 
vested in the execution of a  works contract shall be lawfully competent to deduct an amount at the  rate or 
rates, not exceeding four per cent. to be specified by the  State Government, in a notification published  in 
the Official Gazette,  purporting to be a part or full amount of tax payable on the sale of  such goods from 
every bill or invoice raised by the works contractor as  payable by the person and no such payment or 
discharge of any such bill  or invoice raised  by a works contractor shall be made without deduction  as 
aforesaid.  27 
 Explanation. –For the purposes of this section, the “person” in this  section shall include all officers 
and authorities of the Central or  the State Government or of a company, corporation,  Board, authority,  co-
operative societies, undertaking or any other body constituted or  formed under any Act and of any firm or 
association of persons and  organisati on:  
Provided that, the State Government may prescribe the conditions  subject to which no s uch 
deductions shall be made.   
(2) No such payment or discharge of any bill or invoice raised in  respect of transfer of property in 
goods (whether as goods or in some  other form) by a works contractor shall be made without the 
deduction  referred to in sub -section ( 1):  
Provided that no deduction under sub -section ( 1) shall be made where  the payment is made as 
advance prior to the commencement of the  execution of such works contract until it forms part of the sale 
price  payable for transfer of property in goods (whether as goods or in some  other form):  
Provided further that no deduction under sub -section ( 1) shall be made  from the pay ment or any part 
thereof, where – 
(a) the payment or any part thereof does not relate to any transfer of  property in goods (wh ether 
as goods or in some other form) involved in  the execution of works contract;  
(b) the dealer produces a certificate issued by the Deputy  Commissioner, Commercial Taxes or 
the Assistant Commissioner,  Commercial Taxes or the Commercial Taxes Officer, in -charge of the  
concerned Circle to the effect that the payment or any part thereof  relates to such transfer of property 
in goods (whether as goods or in  some other form) on which he has no further liability to pay tax in  
terms of the provisions of section 15 of the Central Sales Tax Act,  1956 (74 of 1956);  
(c) the dealer produces a certificate issued by the Deputy  Commissioner, Commercial Taxes or 
the Assistant Commissioner,  Commercial Taxes or the Commercial Taxes Officer, in charge of the  
concerned Circle  to the effect that the payment or any part thereof  relates to such transfer of property 
in goods (whether as goods or in  some other form) on which he has no liability to pay tax in terms of  
the provisions of section 6.  
(3) The amount deducted under sub-section ( 1) shall be adjusted against  the amount of tax finally 
assessed or determined as being payable by  the concerned works contractor and any amount deducted in 
excess of the  tax so assessed or determined shall be refunded in accordance with the  provisions of this 
Act. 
(4) The deduction referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be made in the  manner prescribed.  
(5) The person making the deduction shall issue a certificate, in the  form and manner prescribed, 
containing such particulars as may be  required to be mentioned therein, to the works contractor or person  
from whose bill or invoice such deduction has been made and such  certificate shall be deemed to be a 
valid discharge of liability in  terms of provisions of sub -section ( 9) of section 24 to the exte nt of  amount 
of deduction made under  sub-section ( 1). 
(6) If any person contravenes any or all of the provisions of sub -sections  (1), (2) and ( 5), the 
prescribed authority shall, after  giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard, by order in writing  direct 
that such person shall pay by way of penalty, a sum not  exceeding twice the amount of tax deductible or 
deducted and not  deposited in the Government Treasury.  
(7) The provisions of sections 39 and 47 shall, mutatis mutandis , apply  for recovery of an y amount of 
tax deducted but not deposited into the  Government Treasury or any penalty imposed under this section.  
42. Production of tax clearance certificate. –Notwithstanding anything  contained in any law for the 
time being in force, no person shall be  awarded by– 
(i) the State Government; or  
(ii) the Central Government; or  
(iii) a company, corporation, board, authority, undertaking or any   other body which is owned, 
financed or controlled either wholly or  partly by the State Government or the Central Government,   28 
 any contract involving sale or supply of goods and no person shall be  granted any licence to carry on any 
trade or commerce unless he  produces to the State Government or the Central Government or the  
company, corporation, board, authority, und ertaking or any other body  which is owned, financed or 
controlled either wholly or partly by the  State Government or the Central Government, a tax clearance  
certificate, granted by the prescribed authority in the form and manner  prescribed, to the effect t hat the 
prescribed authority has no  objection to the awarding of such contract or the granting of such  licence to 
the person concerned:  
Provided that no such certificate shall be granted to any person who is  not a registered dealer under 
this Act or, being  a registered dealer,  has made a default in the payment of any tax, penalty or interest due  
under this Act:  
Provided further that if a person not liable to tax under this Act  applies for the grant of certificate 
under this section and in whose  case the val ue of the contract or, as the case may be, the anticipated  
turnover in the immediately succeeding twelve months exceeds the limit  specified in sub -section ( 2) of 
section 3, he shall be granted such  certificate subject to the condition that he shall furnish , to the  
prescribed authority, an undertaking to the effect that he shall apply  for grant of certificate of registration 
in the manner and within the  period prescribed and in the event of failure to do so the concerned  
Government or person or authority sha ll terminate the contract awarded   to the person.  
43. Restriction on collection of tax by dealers. –(1) Without prejudice  to the provisions of sections 
40 and 41, no person, who is not a  registered dealer, shall collect from any person any amount, by  
whatever name or description it may be called, towards or purporting to  be tax on sale of goods.  
(2) No registered dealer shall collect from any person any such amount  exceeding the amount arrived 
at after applying the rate of tax  specified under section 14 to the sale price of the goods sold.  
(3) If any person or a registered dealer contravenes the provisions of  sub-section ( 1) or sub -section 
(2), the prescribed authority shall,  after giving an opportunity of being heard in the manner prescribed, by  
an or der in writing direct that such person or registered dealer shall  pay by way of penalty a sum equal to 
twice the amount collected in  contravention of the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2).  
44. Forfeiture of tax collected in violation of this Act. –(1) Any amount collected, by any person in 
contravention of the provisions of  sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 43 or any amount  collected 
by any person by way of tax, by whatever name called, or in  any other manner not payable under any 
provision  of this Act, shall be  liable to forfeiture to the State Government.  
(2) If the prescribed authority, in the course of any proceeding under  this Act or otherwise, has reason 
to believe that any amount is liable  for forfeiture under sub -section ( 1), it shal l serve, on the person who  
has collected such amount, a notice in the prescribed form requiring  him to show cause why the said 
amount should not be forfeited to the  State Government and on receipt of the reply, if any, and after 
making  such inquiries as ma y be deemed fit, he shall make an order of  forfeiture if the amount is found so 
liable.  
(3) Where an order of forfeiture under sub -section ( 2) has been made,  the person making the 
unauthorised collection shall forthwith pay the  amount so forfeited to the State Government, if it has not 
already been  paid and on his failure to do so, such amount shall be recoverable from  him as if it were a 
tax due from him.  
(4) Where an order for forfeiture is passed, the Commissioner shall  publish or cause to be published,  
in the prescribed manner, a notice  for information of the persons from whom the amount so forfeited had  
been collected giving such details as may be prescribed.  
(5) On the publication of the notice under sub -section ( 4) a refund of  such amount or part the reof may 
be claimed from the State Government  within one year from the date of publication of the said notice by 
the person from whom it was unauthorisedly realised by way of tax and for  this purpose the person 
claiming the refund shall make an application  in the prescribed form.  
(6) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 5), the  Commissioner shall hold such enquiry as 
he deems fit and if he is  satisfied that the claim is valid and admissible and that the amount so  claimed as 
refund was actually pa id to the State Government and no  refund or remission in respect of that amount 
was granted, the  Commissioner shall refund such amount or any part thereof to the person  concerned.  29 
 (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law  for the time being in force, 
where any amount collected by any person  is forfeited to the State Government under this section, such  
forfeiture shall, if the amount forfeited has been paid to the State  Government, discharge him of the 
liability to refund the amo unt to the  person from whom it was so collected.  
45. Rounding off of tax liability. –Any tax, interest or penalty payable  under this Act shall be 
rounded off to the nearest ten rupees and shall  be paid accordingly.  
46. Recovery of tax as arreears  of land revenue. –(1) All authorities  appointed under section 10 
shall, for the purpose of recovery of tax,  interest and penalty under this Act, have the same powers as are 
vested  in the certificate officer under the Bihar and Orissa Public Demand  Recovery  Act, 1914 (Bihar and 
Orissa Act 4 of 1914).  
(2) Any proceeding under sub -section ( 1) before any authority appointed  under  section 10 shall be 
deemed to be a proceeding for recovery of the  public demand under the Bihar and Orissa Public Demands 
Recovery Ac t, 1914 (Bihar and Orissa Act 4 of 1914) and all provisions of the said  Act for recovery, 
attachment, sale, arrest shall mutatis mutandis  apply.  
47. Special mode of recovery of tax and other liabilities under this  Act.–(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in section 39 or any law or  contract to the contrary, the prescribed authority may, at 
any time or  from time to time, by notice in writing (a copy of which shall be  forwarded to the dealer at his 
last address known to the said  authority) direct –  
(a) any person from whom any money is due or may become due to a dealer  who has failed to 
comply with a notice of demand served under section  39; or  
(b) any person who holds or may subsequently hold any money for or on  account of such dealer,  
to pay into Government treasury, in the manner specified in the notice  issued under this sub -section, 
either forthwith or upon the money  becoming due or being held, or within the time specified in the notice  
(not being before the money becomes due or it is held) so mu ch of the  money as is sufficient to pay the 
amount of tax due from the dealer,  together with interest and penalty, if any, under this Act or the whole  
of the money when it is equal to or less than that amount.  
(2) The authority issuing a notice under sub -section ( 1) may, at any  time or from time to time, amend 
or revoke any such notice or extend  the time for making any payment in pursuance of the notice.  
(3) Any person making any payment in compliance with a notice issued  under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
deem ed to have made the payment under  the authority of the dealer and the receipt from the Government  
Treasury shall constitute a good and sufficient discharge of the  liability of such person to the dealer to the 
extent of the amount  specified in the receipt.  
(4) Any person discharging any liability to the dealer after service on  him of the notice issued under 
sub-section ( 1) shall be personally  liable to the State Government to the extent of the liability  discharged 
or to the extent of the liability of the dealer for tax,  interest and penalty, whichever is less.  
(5) Where a person on whom a notice is served under sub -section ( 1) proves to the satisfaction of the 
authority which issued the notice  that the money demanded or any part thereof was not due to the dealer  
or that he did not hold any money for or on account of the dealer, at  the time the notice was served on 
him, nor is the money demanded or any  part thereof, likely to become due to the dealer or be held for or 
on account of the dealer, nothing contai ned in this section shall be  deemed to require such person to pay 
into the Government Treasury any  such money or part thereof, as the case may be.  
(6) If any person contravenes any of the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 4) of this section, the 
prescrib ed authority shall after giving an  opportunity of being heard by an order in writing direct that such  
person shall pay by way of penalty a sum not exceeding twice the amount  payable under sub -section ( 1). 
(7) Any amount of money which a person is directed to pay under subsection  (1) or for which he is 
personally liable to the State  Government under sub -section ( 4), shall, if it remains unpaid, be  recoverable 
as an arrear of land revenue.  
(8) No action shall be taken under this section in respect of any  amount of tax, interest and penalty, if 
any, the date of payment of  which has been extended or the realisation of which has been stayed  under 
this Act during the period of such extension or stay.  30 
 (9) The provisions of this section shall be without prejudic e to any  action that may be taken for 
recovery of the arrears of tax, interest  and penalty, if any, due from the dealer or person.  
48. Liability of surety. –The liability of a surety under this Act shall  be co -extensive, to the extent of 
the amount of secur ity, with that of  the defaulting dealer and all modes of recovery enforceable against 
the dealer shall be enforceable against the surety by the prescribed  authority.  
49. Transfers to defraud revenue void. –Where, during the pendency of  any proceeding relati ng to 
assessment, re -assessment or recovery of any  tax, interest or penalty payable under this Act or the Bihar 
Finance  Act, 1981 (Bihar Act 5 of 1981), as it stood before its repeal by  section 94, any person or dealer 
creates a charge on or parts with the  possession, by any mode of transfer whatsoever including sale,  
mortgage, gift or exchange, of any of his assets in favour of any  person with the intention of defrauding 
the revenue, then,  notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any Act or  contract, such charge 
or transfer shall be void as against any claim inrespect of any tax or any other sum payable by the dealer 
as a result  of the completion of such proceeding or otherwise.  
50. Period of limitation for recovery of tax. –Notwithstanding anything  contained in any other law 
for the time being in force, no proceeding,  for the purposes of sub -section ( 6) of section 39 or sub -section 
(7) of section 47, shall be initiated under this Act except before the expiry  of twelve years from due date 
within the meaning of sub -section ( 3) of section 24:  
Provided that the period of limitation for the registered dealer  availing of the tax deferment under 
section 23A of the Bihar Finance  Act, 1981 (Bihar Act 5 of 1981), as it stood before its repeal by  sectio n 
94, shall be reckoned from the last date of repayment of the  deferred amount of tax:  
Provided further that when an appeal or application for review has been  filed, the period of limitation 
as aforesaid shall run from the date of  order passed on such appe al, application for review or from the 
date of  order passed in pursuance of or as a result of such order, whichever is  later.  
51. Tax to be first charge on property. –Notwithstanding anything to the  contrary contained in any 
law for the time being in force,  any amount  of tax and interest and penalty, if any, payable by a dealer or 
any other person under this Act shall be a first charge on the property of  the dealer or such person.  
CHAPTER VII  
BOOKS OF ACCOUNT AND FURNISHING OF INFORMATION  
52. Maintenance of accounts.–(1) Every registered dealer (other than a  dealer permitted to pay tax 
under section  15), shall– 
(a) keep in such manner as may be prescribed a true and complete  account in respect of all goods 
produced, raised, manufactured,  processed, bought, so ld or delivered or transferred to or by him;  
(b) maintain in such manner as may be prescribed correct and complete  accounts of despatches 
and  arrivals of goods as also of stock of goods  manufactured or transferred.  
(2) Such dealers or persons, as may be p rescribed, and such other  dealers to whom sub -section ( 1) 
applies, shall, at the end of each  financial year, draw up, in t he manner as may be prescribed, – 
(a) a manufacturing, trading and profit and loss account and a balance  sheet, in the case of a  
manufacturer; and  
(b) such accounts as may be prescribed, in any other case:  
Provided that no accounts referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be  considered, true and complete unless 
such accounts enable the  prescribed authority to compute the tax payable and the entitlement of  input tax 
credit under the provisions of this Act:  
Provided further that the accounts referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall  not be considered true and 
complete unless they give a true and fair  view– 
(i) of the state of affairs of the deal er or the person as at the end  of the financial year, in the case 
of the balance sheet; and   
(ii) of the working results of the dealer or the person for the  financial year, in the case of the  
anufacturing, trading and profit  and loss account.  31 
 (3) Every dealer or a person required to keep accounts by sub -section  (1) shall– 
(a) issue a challan in respect of all transfers of goods from his place  of business otherwise than as 
a result of sale, in such form as may be  prescribed; and  
(b) preserve  all invoices for a period of not less than six years from  the end of the year to which 
they  relate, or for a period of two years  after the completion of assessment, appeal or revision for the 
year,  whichever is later.  
(4) Every dealer permitted to  pay ta x under section 15 shall – 
(a) maintain accounts showing his purchases and sales during the year  and such other accounts, as 
may be prescribed; and  
(b) draw up, at the end of each financial year, in the manner as may be  prescribed, a trading and 
profit and loss account.  
53. Issue of tax invoice and debit and credit notes. – (1) A registered  dealer, making a sale liable to 
tax under this Act, to another  registered dealer shall, provide the purchaser at the time of sale, a  tax 
invoice containing the particulars  specified in sub -section ( 2) and  retain a copy thereof:  
Provided that a tax invoice shall not be is sued– 
(a) by a dealer permitted to pay tax under section 15; or  
(b) for the sale in the course of inter -State trade or commerce or  export by a dealer,   
and in such cases a retail invoice shall be issued:  
Provided further that not more than one tax invoice shall be issued for  each such sale:  
Provided also that if an invoice has been issued under the provisions  of the Central Excise Act, 1944 
(1 of 1944), it shall be deemed to be a  tax invoice if it contains the particulars specified in sub -section  (2). 
(2) The tax invoice issued under sub -section ( 1) shall contain the  following particulars on the original 
as well as copies thereof, namely :– 
(a) the words “Tax Invoice” in a prominent place;  
(b) the name, address and tax payer identification number of the  selling  registered dealer;  
(c) the name, address and tax payer identification number of the  purchaser;  
(d) an individual pre -printed serialised  number and the date on which  the tax invoice is issued;  
(e) description, quantity, volume and value of goods sold and the  amount of tax charged thereon 
indicated separately;  
(f) the signature of the selling dealer or his manager, agent or  servant duly authorised by him; and  
(g) the name and address of the printer and first and last serial  number of tax invoices printed and 
supplied by him to the dealer.  
(3) A tax invoice in respect of a sale shall be issued in duplicate and  the original of which shall b e 
issued to the purchaser (or the person  taking the delivery, as the case may be) and the duplicate shall be  
retained by the selling dealer.  
(4) Except when a tax invoice is issued under sub -section ( 1), if a  dealer sells any goods exceeding 
such amount in  value as may be  prescribed, in any one transaction to any person, he shall issue to the  
purchaser a retail invoice containing the particulars specified in sub -section  (5) and retain a copy thereof.  
(5) The retail invoice issued under sub -section ( 4) shall  contain the  following  particulars on the 
original as well as copies thereof, namely: – 
(a) the words “Retail Invoice ” or “Cash Memorandum ” or “Bill” in  a prominent place;  
(b) the name, address and tax payer identification number of the  selling dealer, if registered;  32 
 (c) in case the sale is in the course of inter -State trade or commerce,  the name, registration 
number and address of the purchasing dealer and  type of any form, under the Central Sales Tax Act, 
1956 (74 of  1956),  if any, against which the sale  has been made;  
(d) an individual pre -printed serialised number and the date on which  the retail invoice is issued;  
(e) description, quantity, volume and value of goods sold and amount of  tax charged thereon 
indicated separately; and  
(f) the signature of t he selling dealer or his servant, manager or  agent, duly authorised by him.  
(6) The retail invoice shall be issued in duplicate, and the original  of which shall be issued to the 
purchaser and the duplicate copy of  which shall be retained by the selling dea ler. 
(7) The Commissioner may, by notification, specify the manner and form  in which the particulars on 
a tax invoice or retail invoice are to be  recorded.  
(8) If a purchaser claims to have lost the original tax invoice, the  selling dealer may, subject to such 
conditions and restrictions as may  be prescribed, provide a copy of such tax invoice clearly marked as a  
copy of the original tax invoice.  
(9) Where a tax invoice has been issued in respect of a sale and – 
(a) the amount shown as tax in that tax invoice exceeds the tax payable  in respect of the sale, the 
dealer shall provide the purchaser with a  credit note, containing such particulars as may be 
prescribed; or  
(b) the tax payable in respect of the sale exceeds the amount shown as  tax on the tax in voice, the 
dealer shall provide the purchaser with a  debit note, containing such particulars as may be prescribed.  
(10) Every dealer referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall preserve books  of account  including tax invoices 
and  retail invoices until the expiry of six  years after the end of the year to which they relate or for such 
other  period as may be prescribed.  
(11) If a registered dealer contravenes the provisions of this section,  the prescribed authority shall, 
after giving the d ealer an opportunity  of being heard, direct him to pay by way of penalty a sum 
equivalent to  twice the amount of tax payable for each sale in respect of which such  contravention has 
taken place.  
54. Accounts to be audited in certain cases. –(1) Every dealer  whose  gross turnover exceeds forty 
lakh rupees shall, for the purposes of  this Act, get his annual accounts audit ed by an accountant by – 
(i) the 30th day of November of the following year, in the case of a  company formed and 
registered under the Companies  Act, 1956 (1 of  1956); and  
(ii) the 31st day of October of the following year, in any other case.  
(2) Every dealer referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall obtain, by the  date specified in that sub -section, a 
report of such audit in the  prescribed form duly s igned and verified by such accountant and setting  forth 
such particulars as may be prescribed and true copy of such  report shall be furnished, on or before the due 
date, by such dealer to  the prescribed  authority.  
Explanation 1 .–In thi s sub -section, “due date” means– 
(a) where the dealer is a company within the meaning of the Companies  Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), 
the 30th day of November of the year following  the year to which such return relates;  
(b) where the dealer is a person, other than a company, – 
(i) in a case where the accounts of the dealer are required under this  Act or any other law to 
be audited or where the report of an accountant  is required to be furnished under this section, the 
31st day of October  of the year following the year to which such ret urn relates;  
(ii) in any other case, the 31st day of July of the year following the  year to which such return 
relates.  33 
 Explanation 2 .–For the purposes of this section, “accountant ” means a  Chartered Accountant within 
the meaning of the Chartered Accountant s Act, 1949 (38 of 1949) and includes a person who, by virtue of 
the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956), is entitled to be 
appointed to act as an auditor of  companies registered in any State.  
(3) If the accounts of a registered dealer are not required to be  audited in terms of the provisions of 
sub-section ( 1), such dealer  shall furnish, to the prescribed authority, the accounts and statements  
mentioned in sub -section ( 2) of section 52 on or before the 31 st day of  July of the year following the year 
to which such accounts or  statements relate.  
(4) If a dealer contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 2) or sub -section  (3), the prescribed 
authority shall, after giving the dealer a  reasonable opportunity of  being heard, impose on him, in addition 
to any tax payable, a sum by way of penalty equivalent to two per cent. of the tax payable by him under 
section 36 for every month, or part  thereof, of such default.  
55. Furnishing of information by Government departments, banks,  financial institutions 
clearing and forwarding agents and owners of  warehouses, godowns and o thers.–(a) Every bank, 
including any branch of  a bank, or any clearing house in the State or any financial  institution, department 
of the Gover nment, corporation, institution,  organisations or companies, boards, authorities, undertakings 
or any  bodies owned, financed or controlled wholly or partly by the State  Government or the Central 
Government; and  
(b) every clearing, forwarding or booking age nt or dalal as defined in  clause ( a) of the Explanation  to 
section 59 or a person engaged in the  business of transporting goods,  
shall, if so required by any authority appointed under section 10,  furnish any such particulars as may be 
required by such auth ority in  respect of the transactions relating to sales or purchases of goods by  such 
dealers or any dealer with or through such banks or clearing house  or any financial institution, department 
of the Government,  corporations, institutions, organisations or  companies, boards,  authorities, 
undertakings or any other body owned, financed or  controlled wholly or partly by the State Government 
or the Central  Government.  
CHAPTER VIII  
INSPECTIONS, SEARCH AND SEIZURE   
56. Production of books of account, inspection, search and seizure. –(1) Subject to such rules as 
may be made by the State Government under this  Act, any authority appointed under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 10 may,  either before or after assessment, require any dealer to produce before  it or him any 
accounts, registers or documents or to furnish any  information relating to the details of his purchases and 
sales and the  stock of goods produced, raised, processed, manufactured, bought, sold  or delivered by such 
dealer, and the dealer shall comply with such  requirement.  
(2) If reasonabl e grounds exist to suspect that – 
(a) a dealer, with an intention to reduce his tax liability under the  Act, has suppressed any 
financial transaction, element of value  addition implicit in the transaction or the stock of goods 
produced,  raised, processed, manufactured, bought, sold or delivered by such  dealer or has claimed 
input tax credit in excess of his entitlement; or  
(b) any clearing or forwarding agent or a person engaged in the  business of transporting goods or 
owner of a warehouse or a godown is  keeping or has kept his accounts in such a manner as is likely to 
cause  evasion of tax payable under this Act,  
the prescribed authority shall, after making such further inquiries as  may be deemed fit and after 
obtaining such auth orisation in the manner  prescribed, proceed to inspect all the places of business of the 
dealer  or the clearing or forwarding agent or the person engaged in the   business of transporting goods or 
the owner of warehouse or godown:  
Provided that if the presc ribed authority is satisfied that delay in  obtaining such authorisation may be 
prejudicial to the interest of  revenue, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, proceed to  inspect all 
the places of business of the dealer or the clearing or  forwarding agent or the person engaged in the 34 
 business of transporting  goods or the owner of warehouse or godown without obtaining such  
authorisation which may be granted subsequently.  
(3) The prescribed authority shall have the powers to enter into and  search the pr emises, including the 
place of business, of such dealer or  the person and, for reasons to be recorded in writing, seize such  
accounts, registers or documents of the dealer or the person as may be  necessary, in the manner 
prescribed, and shall retain the same for so  long as may be necessary in connection with any proceeding 
under this  Act or for a prosecution under any law:  
Provided that if the dealer or person whose accounts, registers or  documents have been seized, applies 
for a copy of the same, he shal l be supplied with a photo -copy of the same on payment of appropriate cost  
into a Government Treasury or a bank authorised in this behalf by the  State Government:  
Provided further that such authority or inspector may take or cause to  be taken such copies o f, or 
extracts from, the accounts, registers or  documents, as such authority or inspector may consider 
necessary.  
(4) (a) Any authority referred to in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall  have the powers to seize any goods 
not properly accounted for in the  books , accounts, registers and other documents of the dealer or the  dalal 
as defined in clause ( a) of the Explanation to section 59, or the  owner of the warehouse, or the clearing, 
booking or forwarding agent,  or the person engaged in the business of transporti ng goods in the  manner 
prescribed.  
(b) The authority referred to in clause ( a) shall, in a case where the  dealer or the person in -charge of 
goods as mentioned in clause ( a) fails to produce any evidence or fails to satisfy the said authority  
regarding the proper accounting of goods, impose a penalty, after  allowing an opportunity of hearing in 
the prescribed manner to the  dealer or such person, which shall be equal to three times the amount  of tax 
calculated on the value of such goods and the goods shall be  released as soon as the penalty is paid.  
(c) If the dealer or the person in -charge of the goods mentioned in  clause ( a) requests for time for 
production of necessary documents in  support of proper accounting, the authority referred to in clause ( a) 
shall release the goods on the condition that the dealer or such person  deposits a security equivalent to 
three times the amount of tax  calculated on the value of the goods, either in the form of cash, to be  
deposited in the Government Treasury, or in the form o f bank guarantee  acceptable to the authority.  
(d) If the goods seized under clause ( a) are not claimed by any person,  the authority referred to in the 
said clause shall arrange for the safe  custody of goods.  
(e) In case the penalty imposed under clause ( b) is not paid or the  goods remain unclaimed for a 
period of thirty days or more from the  date of seizure, the goods so seized shall be sold by auction in the  
prescribed manner and the sale proceeds shall be appropriated towards  the amount of penalty imposed  
under clause ( b); and the balance of the  sale-proceeds, if any, shall be deposited in the Government 
Treasury  and shall be refunded to the lawful claimant in the prescribed manner:  
Provided that in the case of goods of a perishable nature, the  prescribed authority may decide to sell 
the goods by auction before a  period of thirty days.  
(f) In case where the goods have been released on the deposit of a  security as  mentioned in clause ( c) 
and evidence regarding proper accounting of  goods, to the satisfaction of the auth ority referred to in 
clause ( a) is not produced within thirty days from the date on which the security  is deposited, the amount 
of security shall stand forfeited to the State  Government:  
Provided that in case evidence or document to the satisfaction of the  authority mentioned in clause ( a) 
regarding the proper accounting of  goods is produced within the said period of thirty days, the security  
shall be released in the prescribed manner.  
(5) (a) The power conferred under sub -sections ( 3) and (4) shall  include the power to break open the 
lock of any box or receptacle or  door of any other place or premises where any accounts, registers or  other 
documents or goods may be kept or are reasonably suspected to be  kept.  
(b) The powers conferred unde r sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) shall also  include the power to seal any box 
or receptacle, godown or building  where any accounts, registers or other documents or goods may be kept  
or are reasonably suspected to be kept.  35 
 (6) An authority appointed under section  10 may require the assistance  of any person, public servant 
or police officer in making a search and  a seizure or for safe custody of goods seized under this section, 
and such person, public servant or police officer shall render necessary  assistance in t he matter.  
(7) Where any books of account, other documents, money or goods are  found in the possession or 
control of any person in the course of any  search under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), it shall be 
presumed,  unless it is proved to the contrary,  that such books of account,  documents, money or goods 
belong to such person.  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this section the expression “proper  accounting ”, shall– 
(i) in the case of a dealer, mean that the goods have either not been  entered in the books of 
account or they have been classified in a  manner which is likely to lead to evasion of tax payable 
under this  Act; or  
(ii) in the case of the owner of a warehouse, or a clearing, booking or  forwarding agent, or a 
person engaged in the business of transporting  goods, mean properly entered in such registers and 
accounts as may be  prescribed under sub -section ( 2) of section 59.  
(8) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974),  relating to searches and 
seizure shall apply, so far as may be, to  searches and seizure under this section.  
57. Cross checking or verification of transactions. –(1) With a view to  preventing evasion of tax 
payable under this Act and ensuring proper  compliance with the provisions of this Act, the prescribed 
authority  may, from time to time, collect information regarding sales and  purchases effected by any class 
of dealers and cause any of such  transactions of sale and purchase to be cross -checked.  
(2) For this purpose, the prescribed authority may, from time to  time and by issuing a notice, in the 
manner and form prescribed, require any  class of dealers to furnish, before such authority and by such 
date as  may be specified in the said notice, such information, details and  particulars as may be specified in 
the n otice, regarding the  transactions of sales and purchases effected by the dealers during the  period 
mentioned in the said notice.  
(3) The prescribed authority shall cause any of such transactions to be  cross -checked with reference to 
the books of account of  the purchasing  and selling dealers and for this purpose, the prescribed authority  
shall send an intimation required for the purpose of cross -checking,  stating therein the details of the 
transactions proposed to be cross -checked  and the time and date on wh ich any officer or person duly  
authorised to cross check the transaction shall visit the place where  the books of account are ordinarily 
kept by the dealer.  
58. Survey. –(1) With a view to identifying dealers who are liable to  pay tax under this Act, but ha ve 
remained unregistered, the prescribed  authority, shall, from time to time, cause a survey of unregistered  
dealers to be done for this purpose.  
(2) For the purposes of the survey, the prescribed authority may, by  notice in the prescribed form, 
require an y dealer or class of dealers  to furnish the names, addresses and other particulars, in the manner  
specified, of the persons and dealers who have purchased or sold any  goods from, or, to, such dealer or 
class of dealers during a given  period.  
(3) For the pu rposes of survey, the prescribed authority may call for,  by notice in the prescribed form, 
details and particulars regarding the  services provided by public utilities, financial institutions including  
banking companies, clearing and forwarding agents, owne rs of  warehouses, dalals  and persons engaged 
in the business of transporting  goods which such authority is of the opinion, shall be relevant and  useful 
for the purposes of this Act.  
59. Control on clearing, forwarding or booking agent and any person  transporting goods. –(1) 
Every clearing, forwarding or booking agent or  dalal  or a person transporting goods, who during course 
of his business  handles the document of title to the goods or transports goods or takes  delivery of goods 
for or on behalf of a d ealer and having his place of  business in the State of Bihar, shall furnish true and 
complete  particulars and information relating to his place of business to the  prescribed authority, within 
such time and in such manner as may be  prescribed.  36 
 (2) Every age nt or person referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall  maintain true and complete accounts, 
registers and documents, as may be  prescribed, in respect of the goods handled by him and the documents 
of title relating thereto and shall produce the said accounts, r egisters  and documents before the prescribed 
authority as and when required by  him. 
(3) If any agent or person referred to in sub -section ( 1) contravenes  the provisions of sub -section ( 1) 
or sub -section ( 2) in a manner which  is likely to lead to evasion of  any tax payable under this Act, the  
prescribed authority may, without prejudice to any action under section  81, on charge of abetment, after 
giving such agent or person an  opportunity of being heard, direct him to pay by way of penalty an  amount 
which shall be equal to three times the amount of tax calculated  on the value of goods in respect of which 
complete particulars have not  been furnished or incorrect particulars or information have been  furnished.  
Explanation. –For t he purposes of this sub -section– 
(a) “dalal” shall include a person who renders his services for booking  of, or taking delivery of, 
consignment of goods at a railway station,  booking agency, goods transport company office, or any 
place of loading  or unloading of goods or contrives, makes and concludes bargains and  contracts for 
or on behalf of any dealer for a fee, reward, commission,  remuneration or other valuable 
consideration or otherwise;  
(b) “person transporting goods ” shall, besides the owner, include the  manager, agent, driver  or 
employee of the owner, or person in -charge of  a place of loading or unloading of goods other than a 
rail-head, or a  post office, or of a goods carrier carrying such goods, or a person who  accepts 
consignments of such goods for despatch to other places or gives delivery of any consignment of such 
goods to the consignee.  
CHAPTER IX  
CHECK -POSTS AND RESTRICTIONS ON MOVEMENT   
60. Establishment of check -posts.–(1) The State Government may, by  notification, set up and erect, 
in such manner as may be prescribed,  check -posts and barriers at any place in the State with a view to  
preventing evasion of tax payable under this Act.  
(2) Every person transporting goods, other than those specified in  Schedule I and subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribe d, shall,  at any check -post or barrier, referred to in sub -section ( 1) and 
before  crossing such check -post or barrier, file before such autho rity or  officer as may be authorised by 
the State Government in this behalf, a  correct and complete declaration in such form and manner as may 
be prescribed.  
(3) Any authority or officer who may be authorised by the State  Government in this behalf, may, for 
the purpose of verifying, whether  any goods are being transported in contravention of the provisions of  
sub-section ( 2) and in such manner as may be prescribed, intercept,  detain and search any goods carrier; 
and the person, transporting goods  or for the time being in -charge of goods, shall render all possible  
assistance to such authority or officer in carry ing out the search.  
(4) (a) The authority or any officer referred to in sub -section ( 3) may  seize any goods along with the 
vehicle or carrier, which, he suspects,  are being transported in contravention of the provisions of  
sub-section  (2) together with an y container or material for the packing of such  goods:  
Provided that a list of all the goods seized under this sub -section  shall be prepared by such officer and 
be signed by the officer, the  dealer or the person in -charge of goods and not less than two wit nesses  and a 
copy of the seizure list shall be made over to the dealer or the  person in charge of the goods, as the case 
may be.  
(b) The provisions of section 56 shall, mutatis mutandis , apply in  matters relating to such seizure, 
penalty, security, release  and confiscation of goods.  
61. Restriction on movement of goods. –(1) A person transporting goods – 
(a) from any place outside the State of Bihar to any place inside the  State of Bihar, or  
(b) from  any place inside the State of Bihar to any place outside the  State of Bihar, or  
(c) from any place within the State of Bihar to any other such place,   37 
 shall carry a declaration in such form as may be prescribed supported   by a cash memo, retail invoice, bill 
or tax invoice, as the case may  be, in case the movement is as a result of sale or a challan in case  the 
movement is otherwise than as a result of sale, in respect of goods  which are being transported on a goods 
carrier, vehicle or a vessel or  is othe rwise in transit or in transit storage and shall produce such  cash memo 
or bill or tax invoice or challan, as the case may be, along  with the aforesaid form of declaration on 
demand before the prescribed  authority:   
Provided that the Commissioner may exemp t, by notification in the  Official Gazette, consignments 
below a particular value or quantity  from the requirement of this sub -section in so far as it relates to  
carrying of a declaration.  
(2) Any authority or officer who may be authorised by the State  Government in this behalf may, for 
the purpose of verifying whether any  goods are being transported in contravention of the provisions of 
sub-section  (1) intercept, detain and search any goods carrier, vehicle or  vessel and may also search the 
warehouse or  godown or any other such  place of transit storage, where goods are kept in course of  
transportation and if the said authority is satisfied on such  verification and search that transportation of 
goods is being made in  contravention of the provision of sub -section ( 1), he may seize any  such goods 
together with any container or material for the packing of  such goods:  
Provided that a list of all the goods seized under this sub -section  shall be prepared by such officer and 
be signed by the officer, the  dealer o r the person in -charge of goods and not less than two witnesses  and a 
copy of the seizure list shall be made over to the dealer or the  person in charge of the goods, as the case 
may be.  
(3) The provisions of section 56 shall, mutatis mutandis , apply in  matters relating to such seizure, 
penalty, security, release and  confiscation of goods.  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this section, the power to seize any  goods shall also include the 
power to seize the goods carrier on which  the goods are being transporte d. 
62. Transportation of goods through State of Bihar. –(1) If any  consignment of goods is being 
transported by road from a place outside  the State of Bihar to another such place and the vehicle carrying 
the consignment passes through the territory of the State, the driver or  any other person in -charge of the 
vehicle shall obtain transit  permission in the prescribed manner from the authority of the first  check -post 
falling en route after entry into the State and shall  surrender the same transit permission t o the authority of 
the last  check -post before leaving the State and in the event of failure to do  so within seventy -two hours 
of leaving the first check -post falling en route,  it shall be deemed that goods so transported have been 
sold by  the owner or the person in -charge of the vehicle within the State of  Bihar.  
(2) In case the driver or person referred to in sub -section ( 1) fails  to comply with the provisions of 
sub-section ( 1), he shall be liable to  pay penalty at the rate of rupees five hundred for ever y day of the  
default or a sum twice the amount of tax calculated on the value of the  goods transported in contravention 
of that sub -section, whichever is  higher:  
Provided that no such penalty shall be levied without giving the person  an opportunity of bein g heard:  
Provided further that if the person proceeded against, justifies,  beyond any doubt, the reasons for any 
delay exceeding seventy -two hours, the prescribed authority shall, for reasons to be recorded in  writing, 
condone the delay.  
CHAPTER X  
LIABILIT IES OF REPRESENTATIVE CHARACTER  
63. Liabilit y to pay tax in case of transfer of business. –(1) When the  ownership of the business of a 
dealer liable to pay tax under this Act  is entirely transferred, the transferor and the transferee, shall  jointly 
and severally be liable to pay any tax, interest and penalty,  if any, payable in respect of such business and 
remaining unpaid at the  time of the transfer and the transferee shall also be liable to pay tax  on sales or 
purchases made by the transferee on and fr om the date of  such transfer and shall forthwith apply for the 
grant of a registration  certificate unless such certificate is already possessed by him.  38 
 (2) Where a dealer liable to pay tax under this Act transfers the  ownership or a part of his business, 
the transferor shall be liable to  pay tax in respect of the stock of goods transferred with that part of  the 
business.  
64. Tax payable by deceased dealer shall be paid by his  representative. –(1) Where a dealer dies 
after assessment but before  payment of the  tax, interest or penalty payable by him under this Act,  his 
executor, administrator, successor -in-interest or legal  representative shall be liable to pay out of the 
property of the  deceased, to the extent to which it is capable of meeting the charge,  the amount payable by 
such dealer.  
(2) When a dealer dies without having furnished the return under  section 24 or after having furnished 
the return but before assessment,  the prescribed authority may proceed to make an assessment and  
determine the amount payable under this Act by the deceased and for the  said purpose he may require the 
executor, administrator, successor -in interest  or legal representative, as the case may be, of the deceased  
to perform all or any of the obligations, which he might, under t he provisions of this Act, have required 
the deceased to  perform and the amount thus determined shall be payable by the  executor, administrator, 
successor -in-interest or legal representative  of the deceased to the extent to which the property of the 
deceas ed is capable of meeting the charge.  
65. Tax -liability of guardian and trustee, etc. –Where the business in  respect of which tax is 
payable under this Act is carried on by, or is  in charge of, any guardian, trustee or agent of a minor or 
other  incapacitated  person on behalf of and for the benefit of, such minor or  other incapacitated person, 
the tax shall be assessed upon and  recoverable from such guardian, trustee or agent, as the case may be,  in 
the manner and to the same extent as it would be leviable upo n and   recoverable from any such minor or 
incapacitated person, if he were of  full age and sound mind, and if he were conducting the business 
himself  and all the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly.  
66. Tax -liability of court of wards. –Where the  estate or any portion  thereof of a dealer owning a 
business in respect of which tax is  payable under this Act is under the control of the court of wards, the  
Administrator - General, the official trustee, or any receiver or  manager, including any person, w hatever 
his designation who in fact  manages the business, appointed by, or under the order of a court, the  tax shall 
be assessed upon and recoverable from such court of wards,  Administrator -General, official trustee, 
receiver or manager in like  manner and to the same extent as it would be assessable upon and  recoverable 
from the dealer if he were conducting the business himself;  and all the provisions of this Act shall apply 
accordingly.  
67. Liabilit y in case of dissolution of firm, etc. –Where a dealer is a  Hindu undivided family, firm or 
association of persons, and such  family, firm or association is partitioned, dissolved or disrupted, as  the 
case may be – 
(a) the tax, interest and penalty payable under this Act by such  family, firm or association of 
person s for the period up to the date of  such partition, dissolution or disruption may be assessed as if 
no partition, dissolution or disruption had taken place and all the  provisions of this Act shall apply 
accordingly; and  
(b) every person who was at the time of such partition, dissolution or  disruption a member or 
partner of a Hindu undivided family, firm or  association of persons shall, notwithstanding such 
partition,  dissolution or disruption, be liable severally and jointly for the  payment of tax, interest 
including penalty, if any, payable under this  Act, by such family, firm or association of persons, 
whether dues of  tax, interest or penalty is for the period prior to or after such  partition, dissolution or 
disruption.  
CHAPTER XI  
REFUNDS AND ADJUSTMENTS  
68. Refunds. –(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act and the  rules made thereunder, the 
prescribed authority shall refund to a  person the amount of tax, penalty and interest, if any, paid by such  
person in excess of the amount due from him in such ma nner as may be  prescribed.  39 
 (2) Where on account of death, incapacity, insolvency liquidation or  other cause a person is unable to 
claim or receive any refund due to  him, his legal representative or the trustee or guardian or receiver,  as 
the case may be, shall be entitled to claim or receive such refund  in the manner prescribed:  
Provided that the prescribed authority shall first apply such excess  amount towards the recovery of 
any amount for any period in respect of  which a notice under section 39 has been  issued and shall then 
refund  the balance, if any.  
69. Provisional refunds. –(1) If a registered dealer files any returns  or produces any other evidence as 
required by or under this Act, and  the return or evidences produced show any amount to be refundable to 
the dealer, then the dealer may apply in the prescribed form to the  prescribed authority for grant of 
provisional refund.  
(2) The prescribed authority may require the said dealer to furnish  such security as may be prescribed 
for an amount equal to the a mount of  refund and on receipt of such security, the prescribed authority 
shall,  subject to rules, grant the dealer a provisional refund of the amount  claimed refundable as aforesaid.  
(3) (a) Subject to other provisions of this Act, the refund under sub -section  (1) shall  be deemed to be 
final if the dealer has no liability under the Act as  per his annual return filed under section 24 and the 
report submitted  under sub -section ( 2) of section 54.  
(b) Upon the said refund being final, the security, if any, furnished  under sub -section ( 2) shall be 
returned to the said dealer.  
(c) If any amount in excess of the amount refunded under sub -section  (1) is found to be payable by 
the said dealer in respect of the period  for which he had claimed and was allowed such provisional refund, 
such excess shall be recovered as arrears of tax from the dealer and he  shall be liable to pay simple 
interest on such excess amount at the  rate of one and half per cent. per month or part thereof from the date  
of grant of provisional r efund till the date of the payment of such  excess amount.  
70. Interest on delayed refund. –(1) Where an amount required to be  refunded by the prescribed 
authority to any person is not refunded to  him or the application for refund is not rejected, as the cas e may 
be, within ninety days of the amount having become refundable, the  prescribed authority shall pay such 
person simple interest at the rate  of six per cent. per annum or part thereof on the said amount from the  
date immediately following the expiry of the period of ninety days to  the date of the refund:  
Provided that where the amount becomes refundable by virtue of an order  of the Tribunal or the High 
Court or the Supreme Court, the interest  under the provisions of this section shall be payable from the  
date immediately following the expiry of the period of ninety days from the  date of receipt of the order of 
the Tribunal, the High Court or the  Supreme Court, by the officer whose order forms the subject matter of  
the proceedings before the Tribunal, the High Court or the Supreme  Court, to the date of refund.  
(2) If the delay in granting the refund within the period of ninety  days aforesaid is attributable to the 
said person, whether wholly or in  part, the period of the delay attributable to him shall be excluded  from 
the period for which interest is payable.  
(3) Where any question arises as to the period to be excluded for the  purposes of calculation of 
interest under the provisions of this  section, such question shall be determined by the Commissioner, 
whose decision shall be final.  
71. Power to withhold refund in certain cases. –Where an order giving  rise to a refund is the 
subject -matter of an appeal or further  proceeding or where any other proceeding under this Act is 
pending, and  the authority competen t to grant such refund is of the opinion that the  grant of the refund is 
likely to adversely affect the revenue, such  authority (not being the Commissioner) with the previous 
approval of  the Commissioner may withhold the refund till such time as is deemed  fit: 
Provided that the Commissioner may, on application or otherwise, order  for release of such refund if 
he is of the opinion that the situation  does not require such action on the part of the prescribed authority.  
CHAPTER XII  
APPEAL, REVISION AND REVIEW  
72. Appeal to Deputy Commissioner and Joint Commissioner. –(1) Subject  to such rules as may be 
made by the State Government under this Act,  any dealer, objecting to an order of assessment or an order 
levying  interest or penalty passed by the prescribed auth ority against him, or  an order under section 25 or 40 
 a person, objecting to an order of penalty  passed against him or an order under section 47, may appeal to 
the Joint Commissioner, or, the Deputy Commissioner specially authorised in  this behalf.  
(2) No appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be admitted unless the dealer  objecting to an order of 
assessment has paid twenty -five per cent. of the tax assessed or full amount of admitted tax, whichever is 
higher.  
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be filed,  in such form and  the manner, as may be prescribed, 
within forty -five days of the receipt  of the notice of demand but where the appellate authority is satisfied  
that the appellant had sufficient reason for not preferring the appeal  within time, it may cond one the 
delay.  
(4) The appellate authority while disposing of an appeal against an  order, other than  an order under 
section 47, may – 
(a) (i) confirm, annul, reduce, enhance or otherwise modify such order;  or 
(ii) set aside the order directing the authority  below to make fresh  order after further enquiry on 
specific points as directed; and  
(b) in other cases, pass such order as it may, for reasons to be  recorded in writing, deem fit.  
(5) No order under this section shall be passed without giving  reasonable o pportunity of hearing to 
the appellant as also the  authority whose order has been appealed against.  
73. Appeal to Tribunal. –(1) Subject to such rules as may be made by the  State Government, any of 
the authorities mentioned in section 10 or any  person aggrieved by an order made by the Deputy 
Commissioner or Joint  Commissioner under section 72 or the Commissioner under section 74 or  section 
77, may, prefer an appeal to the Tribunal.  
(2) Where an appeal is preferred by a dealer, such appeal shall not be  entertained by the Tribunal 
unless such dealer has deposited in the  manner sp ecified by the Tribunal, twenty -five per cent. of the 
amount  in dispute:  
Provided that the Tribunal may, for reasons to be recorded in writing,  waive or reduce the amount 
required to be deposited under this section.  
(3) Every application for appeal under this section shall be filed  within ninety days of the 
communication of the order which is sought to  be appealed, but where the Tribunal is satisfied that the 
applicant had  sufficien t cause for not applying within time, it may condone the  delay.  
(4) No order under this section shall be passed without giving the  applicant as also the authority 
whose order is sought to be appealed or  their representative a reasonable opportunity of bein g heard.  
(5) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the Tribunal may,  after giving the parties to the 
appeal, an opportunity of being heard,  pass such order thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or  
setting aside the order appealed against . 
(6) The Tribunal shall send the copy of every order made by it to the  parties to the appeal and to the 
concerned authority against whose  order the appeal had been preferred.  
(7) The appeal filed before the Tribunal under sub -section ( 1) shall be  dealt with by it as 
expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be  made by it to dispose of the appeal finally within six 
months from the  date of receipt of the appeal.  
74. Revisionary powers of Commissioner. –The Commissioner may, suo motu,  call for and examin e 
the record of any proceeding recorded by any  authority, officer or person subordinate to him under this 
Act and if  he considers that any order passed therein is erroneous in so far as it  is prejudicial to the 
interest of revenue, pass such order as he de ems fit after giving the dealer or the person concerned an 
opportunity of  being heard.  
75. Additional evidence in appeal or revision. –A dealer shall not be  entitled to produce additional 
evidence whether oral or documentary in  appeal before the appellate a uthority or in revision before the  
Commissioner or the Tribunal except where the evidence sought to be  adduced is evidence, which the 
prescribed authority had wrongly refused  to admit or which, after exercise of due diligence, was not 41 
 within his  knowledge or could not be produced by him before the prescribed   authority or for the 
production of which adequate time was not given by   the prescribed authority and in every such case upon 
the additional  evidence being taken on record reasonable opportunity for ch allenge or  rebuttal shall be 
given.  
76. Review. –Subject to such rules as may be made by the State  Government under this Act, any 
authority appointed under section 10 or  the Tribunal may review any order passed by it, if such review is, 
in the opinion of the said authority or the Tribunal, as the case may be,  necessary on account of a mistake 
which is apparent from the record:  
Provided that no such review, if it has the effect of enhancing the  tax, interest or penalty or of 
reducing a refund shall be made unless  the said authority or the Tribunal, as the case may be, has given 
the dealer, or the person concerned a reasonable opportunity of being  heard.  
77. Determination of disputed questions. –(1) If any question arises,  otherwise than in proceedings 
before a court, or before the prescribed  authority has commenced assessment of a dealer under section 27 
or section 28 or section 29 or section 30 or section 31 or section 32 or  section 33, whether , for the 
purposes of this Act, – 
(a) any person, society, club or association or any firm or any branch  or department of any firm, 
is a dealer, or   
(b) any particular thing done to any goods amounts to or results in the  manufacture of goods, 
within the meaning of that term, or   
(c) any transaction is a sale or a purchase , or where it is a sale or a  purchase the sale price or the 
purchase price, as the case may be,  thereof, or   
(d) any particular person or dealer is required to be registered, or  
(e) in the case of any person or dealer liable to pay tax, any tax is  payable by such person or 
dealer in respect of any particular sale or  purchase, or if tax is payable, the rate thereof, or  
(f) input tax credit can be claimed on any particular transaction of  purchase and if it can be 
claimed, what are the conditions and  restrictions subject to which such input tax credit can be 
claimed, or  
(g) the order passed under sub -section ( 2) of section 25 is just and  proper, or  
(h) any other question involving interpretation of any provisions of  this Act,  
the Commissioner shall, su bject to such rules as may be made, make an  order determining such question.  
Explanation. – For the purposes of this sub -section, the prescribed  authority shall be deemed to have 
commenced assessment of the dealer  under section 27 or section 28 or section 2 9 or section 30 or section  
31 or section 32 or section 33, when the dealer is served with any  notice by the prescribed authority under 
the said sections.  
(2) The Commissioner may direct that the determination shall not affect  the liability of any person 
under this Act, as respect any sale or  purchase affected prior to the determination or such date as he may  
specify.  
(3) If any such question arises from any order already passed by any  authority or court under this Act 
or the Bihar Finance Act, 1981 (Bihar  Act 5 of 1981), as it stood before its repeal by section 94, no such  
question shall be entertained for determination under this section; but  such question may be raised in 
appeal against such order.  
78. Power to transfer proceedings. –(1) The Commissioner ma y, after  giving the parties a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in the  matter, by order in writing after recording his reason for so doing,  
transfer any proceedings or class of proceedings under any provision of  this Act, from himself to any 
other officer and he may likewise  transfer any such proceeding, including a proceeding pending with any  
officer or already transferred under this section, from any officer to  any other officer.  
(2) For the purpose of this section, any proceeding shall be deemed to have commenced only when 
any authority having appropriate jurisdiction  issues notice under the provisions of this Act, rules or 
notifications  and the proceedings shall be deemed to be pending only after the issue  of such notice.  42 
 (3) Where no proceedings  are pending before any authority, then any  authority having appropriate 
jurisdiction over a person or dealer, may  initiate and complete any proceedings whatsoever.  
Explanation. –In this section, the word “proceedings ” in relation to  any dealer means all pr oceedings 
under this Act in respect of any year,  which may be pending on the date of such order or which may have 
been  completed on or before such date, and also includes all proceedings  under this Act which may be 
commenced after the date of such order in  respect of the said year in relation to such dealer.  
79. Appeal before High Court. –(1) An appeal shall lie to the High Court  from every order passed by 
the Tribunal, if the High Court is satisfied  that the case involves a substantial question of law.  
(2) The Commissioner or a dealer aggrieved by any order passed by the  Tribunal,– 
(i) under the Bihar Finance Act, 1981 (Bihar Act 5 of 1981), as it  stood before its repeal by 
section 94, on or after the date of  commencement of this Act; or  
(ii) under this Act,  
may file an appeal to the High Court, and such appeal under this  section shall be filed within ninety days 
from the date of the  communication to the dealer or the Commissioner on any question of law  arising out 
of such order.  
(3) Where the High Court is satisfied that a substantial question of  law is involved in any case, it shall 
formulate the question.  
(4) The appeal shall be heard only on the question so formulated and  the respondents shall, at the 
hearing of the appeal, be allowed to  argue that the ca se does not involve such question:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall be deemed to take away  or abridge the power of the 
High Court to hear, for reasons to be  recorded, the appeal on any other substantial question of law not  
formulated by it, if it is satisfied that the case involves such  question.  
(5) (a) The High Court shall decide the substantial question of law so  formulated or involved and 
deliver such judgment thereon containing the  grounds on which such decision is founded and may award 
such costs as  it deems fit.  
(b) The High Court may determine any issue which – 
(i) has not been determined by the Tribunal, or  
(ii) has been wrongly determined by the Tribunal, by reason of a  decision on such question of law 
as is referred to in sub -section  (1). 
(6) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code  of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 
1908) relating to appeals to High Court,  shall as far as may be, apply in the case of appeals under this  
section.  
80. Case before High Court to be h eard by not less than two Judges. –(1) When an appeal has 
been filed before the High Court under section 79,  it shall be heard by a bench of not less than two Judges 
of the High  Court, and shall be decided in accordance with the opinion of such  Judges or of  the majority, 
if any, of such Judges.  
(2) Where there is no such majority, the Judges shall state the point  of law upon which they differ and 
the case shall then be heard upon  that point only by one or more of other Judges of the High Court and  
such point  shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of  Judges who have heard the case 
including those who first heard it.  
CHAPTER XIII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
81. Offences and penalties. –(1) Whoever– 
(a) carries  on business as a dealer without being registered in wilful contravention of section 19, 
or 
(b) fails without sufficient cause to furnish any information required  by section 23, or  43 
 (c) fails, without sufficient cause, when directed so to do under  section 5 9, to keep any accounts 
or record in accordance with the  directions, or  
(d) fails, without sufficient cause, to furnish any return as required  by section 24 by the date and 
in the manner prescribed,  
shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment, of e ither description, for a term which shall not be 
less than three months but  which may extend to six months and with fine not exceeding one thousand  
rupees.  
(2) Whoever – 
(a) knowingly keeps false account of the value of the goods bought or  sold by him in 
contravention of sub -section ( 1) of section 52 or  section 53, or  
(b) wilfully attempts, in any manner whatsoever, to evade any payment  of any tax, penalty or 
interest,  
shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment, of either  description, for a term w hich shall not be 
less than six months but  which may extend to one year and with fine not exceeding two thousand  rupees.  
(3) Whoever – 
(a) not being a registered dealer under section 19, falsely represents  that he is or was a registered 
dealer at the time w hen he sells or buys  goods; or  
(b) knowingly furnishes a false return; or  
(c) knowingly produces before the prescribed authority, false bill, tax  invoice, cash -
memorandum, voucher, declaration, certificate or other  document for any of the purposes of this Act; 
or 
(d) issues to any person a certificate or declaration under this Act or  the rules framed or 
notifications issued thereunder, a bill, cash  memorandum,  tax invoice, voucher or other document 
which he knows or  has reason to believe to be false; or  
(e) obstructs any officer making inspection or search or seizure under  section 56 or section 61 or 
section 62,  
shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment, of either  description, for a term which shall not be 
less than one year but which  may extend to  three years and with fine not exceeding three thousand  rupees.  
(4) Whoever aids or abets any person in the commission of any offence  specified in sub -section ( 1) or 
sub-section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) shall, on conviction, be liable for punishment of the d escription  
specified in respect of the offence in the commission of which he has  aided or abetted.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) to ( 4), no  person shall be proceeded 
against under these sub -sections for the  commission of the of fences referred therein if the total amount of 
tax, interest or penalties evaded or attempted to be evaded is less than  five thousand rupees.  
(6) Where a dealer is accused of an offence specified in sub -section  (1) or sub -section ( 2) or sub -
section ( 3), the person declared as  manager of the business of the dealer under section 22 shall also be  
deemed to be guilty of such offence, unless he proves that the offence  was committed without his 
knowledge or that he had exercised all due  diligence to prevent the  commission thereof.  
82. Cognizance of offences. –(1) Save as provided in section 81, the  punishments inflicted under the 
said section shall be without prejudice  to any penalty which may be imposed under the provisions of this 
Act. 
(2) No court shall take c ognizance of any offence under this Act except  with the previous sanction of 
the Commissioner or any officer specially  empowered in this behalf and no court inferior to that of a 
Magistrate  of the first class shall try any such offence.  
(3) Notwithstanding  anything contained in the Code of Criminal  Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), all 
offences punishable under section 81  shall be cognizable and bailable.  
83. Investigation of offences. –(1) Subject to such conditions as may be  prescribed, the 
Commissioner may aut horise either generally or in  respect of a particular case or class of cases, any 
officer or person  subordinate to him to investigate all or any of the offences punishable  under this Act.  44 
 (2) Every officer so authorised shall, in the conduct of such  investigation, exercise the powers 
conferred by the Code of Criminal  Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) upon an officer in -charge of a police  
station for the investigation of a cognizable offence.  
84. Offences by companies and others. –(1) Where an offence under t his Act has been committed by 
a company, every person who at the time the  offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the  company for the conduct of business of the company as well as the  company shall be 
deemed to be guilty of the off ence and shall be liable  to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that, nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any  such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act if he proves  that the offence was committed without h is knowledge or 
that he had  exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an  offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved  that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of,  or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director,  manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director,  manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty  
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and  punished accordingly.  
Explanation. –For the purposes o f this section – 
(a) “company” means a company incorporated under the Companies Act,  1956 (1 of 1956), and 
includes a body corporate, a firm or other  association of individuals;  
(b) “director” in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.  
(3) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a Hindu  undivided family, the karta  
thereof shall be deemed to be guilty of the  offence and sha ll be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished  accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render the  karta  liable to any punishment if 
he proves that the offence was  committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised al l due  
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence:  
Provided further that, where an offence under this Act has been  committed by a Hindu undivided 
family and it is proved that the offence  has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is  
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any adult member of the  Hindu undivided family, such member 
shall also be deemed to be guilty  of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and on  
conviction punished accordingly.  
85. Compounding of offences.–(1) The Commissioner may, either before or  after the institution of 
proceedings under section 81, accept from any  person charged with an offence under sub -section ( 1) or 
sub-section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of the said section by  way of  composition of the 
offence, a sum not exceeding ten thousand rupees and  where the offence charged was likely to cause or 
caused evasion of any  amount of tax payable under this Act, a sum not exceeding three times  of such 
amount, whichever is higher . 
(2) On payment of such sum as may be determined by the Commissioner  under sub -section ( 1), no 
further proceeding shall be taken against the  accused person in respect of the same offence.  
CHAPTER XIV  
BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION  
86. Bureau of Investigation. –(1) The State Government may, by an order  published in the Official 
Gazette, constitute a Bureau of Investigation  and it shall consist of such personnel and such number of 
officers and  such hierarchy of supervision and control as may be specified by the  State Government in the 
said order:  
Provided that if authorities appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section  10 are specified as such they 
shall, without prejudice to the powers  under sub -section ( 1) of section 10, exercise the powers of an  
authority under sections 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61 and 62 for carrying  out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) (a) The State Government may, by an order published in the Official  Gazette, vest an officer of 
the Bureau of Investigation with the powers  of an officer in -charge of  a police station under the Code of 45 
 Criminal  Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) and with such other powers under different  Acts, as it may consider 
necessary.  
(b) The Commissioner may, by an order published in the Official  Gazette, authorise an officer of the 
Bureau of Investigation to  exercise the powers of an authority appointed under section 10 in  respect of 
such matters as may be specified in the order.  
(3) The Bureau of Investigation shall function under the control and  supervision of the Commissioner, 
and discharge such duties as may be  assigned to it by the Commissioner, including investigation of 
offences  under section 83 of this Act.  
CHAPTER XV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
87. Appearance before taxing authorities. –Any person, who is required  to appear before any 
authority appointed under section 10 or before the  Tribunal or before an officer of the Bureau of 
Investigation  constituted under section 86 in connection with any proceeding under  this Act, may appea r 
before such authority through – 
(a) a person authorised  in the prescribed manner by him in this behalf,  being his relative or person 
in his regular and whole time employment,  
(b) a sales tax practitioner who possesses the prescribed  qualifications; or  
(c) a legal practitioner, or  
(d) subject to such conditions  as may be prescribed, a chartered  accountant, or company 
secretary, or cost accountant.  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this section, – 
(a) “chartered accountant ” means a chartered accountant as defined in  clause ( b) of sub -section 
(1) of section 2 of the  Chartered Accountants  Act, 1949 (38 of 1949) and who has obtained a 
certificate of practice  under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(b) “company secretary ” means a company secretary as defined in clause  (c) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Company Secretaries Act,  1980 (56 of 1980) and who has obtained a certificate of 
practice under  sub-section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(c) “cost accountant ” means a cost accountant as defined in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Cost and  Works Accountants Act,  1959 (23 of 1959) and who has obtained a 
certificate of practice under  sub-section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(d) “legal practitioner ” means an advocate, vakil or an attorney of any  High Court, and includes a 
pleader in practice.  
88. Change of an incumbent of an office. –Whenever, in respect of any  proceeding under this Act, 
any person or authority appointed under  section 10 ceases to exercise jurisdiction and is succeeded by 
another  person who has and exercises jurisdiction, the person so succeeding may  continue the proceeding 
from the stage at which the proceeding was left  by his predecessor:  
Provided that the dealer concerned may demand that before the  proceeding is so continued, the 
previous proceeding or any part thereof  be re opened or that before any order is passed against him, he be  
heard.  
89. Bar to certain proceedings. –Save as provided in section 79, no  assessment made and no order 
passed under this Act or rules made  thereunder by any authority appointed under section 10 o r by the 
Bureau  of Investigation or by the Tribunal shall be called in question in any  court, and save as is provided 
in section 72 or section 73 or section  74 or section 76, no appeal or application for revision or review 
shall  lie against any such assess ment or order.  
90. Disclosure of information by public servant. –(1) All particulars  contained in any statement 
made, return furnished or accounts or  documents produced in accordance with this Act, or in any record 
of evidence given in the course of any pro ceedings under this Act (other  than proceeding before a 
criminal court), or in any record of any  assessment proceeding, or any proceeding relating to the recovery 46 
 of a demand, prepared for the purposes of this Act, shall, save as provided  in sub -section ( 3), be treated as 
confidential; and notwithstanding  anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), no  
court shall save as aforesaid, be entitled to require any servant of  the Government to produce before it any 
such statement, return,  account, document or record or any part thereof, or to give evidence  before it in 
respect thereof.  
(2) If, save as provided in sub -section ( 3), any servant of the  Government discloses any of the 
particulars referred to in sub -section  (1), he shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment, which 
may extend to six months or with fine or with both.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to the disclosure of any of the  particulars, refer red to in sub -
section ( 1), made–  
(a) for the purposes of a prose cution under the Indian Penal Code, 1860  (45 of 1860) in respect of 
any statement, return, accounts, registers,  documents or evidence, or any part thereof; or   
(b) for the purposes of a prosecution under this Act; or  
(c) for regulating any inquiry under the Public Servant (Inquiries)  Act, 1850  (37 of 1850) , into the 
conduct or behaviour of any authority or Inspector  appointed under section 10 or an officer of the 
Bureau of Investigation  constituted under section 86 or into the behaviour of any other offic er 
appointed to conduct such inquiry; or  
(d) in connection with the trial of a suit in a civil court to which  the State of Bihar is a party and 
which relates to any matter arising  out of any proceeding under this Act; or  
(e) for the purposes of enabling an  officer of the Central Government  or of any State Government 
to levy or recover any tax or duty imposed  by it;  or 
(f) to any officer of the State Government where it is necessary to  make such disclosure for the 
purposes of this Act; or  
(g) to any officer of the Central Government or of the State Government  for the purpose of 
enabling such officer to perform his executive  functions relating to the affairs of the Union or the 
State.  
91. Agreements to defeat intention and application of this Act to be  void.–(1) If the 
Commissioner is satisfied that an arrangement has been  entered into between two or more persons or 
dealers to defeat the  application or purposes of this Act or any provision of this Act, then,  the 
Commissioner may, by order, declare the arrangement to be null and void as regards the application and 
purposes of this Act and he may, by  the said order, provide for increase or decrease in the amount of tax  
payable by any person or dealer who is affected by the arrangement,  whether or not such dealer or person 
is a party to the arrangement, in  such manner as the Commissioner considers appropriate so as to counter  
act any tax advantage obtained by that dealer from or under the  arrangement.  
(2) For the purposes of this section – 
(i) “arrangement ” includes any contract, agreement, plan or  understanding whether enforceable in 
law or not, and all steps and  transactions by which the arrangement is sought to be carried into  effect;  
(ii) “tax advantage ” includes,– 
(a) any  reduction in the liability of any dealer to pay tax,  
(b) any increase in the entitlement of any dealer to claim input tax  credit or refund,  
(c) any reduction in the sale price or purchase price receivable or  payable by any dealer.  
(3) Before passing any o rder under this section, the Commissioner shall  afford a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard to any such person or  dealer whose tax advantage is sought to be counter 
acted.  
92. Write off of dues. –Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,  the State Government, by 
notification to be published in the Official  Gazette, may, subject to such rules as may be prescribed, 
declare any  dues created under this Act or the Bihar Finance Act, 1981 (Bihar Act 5  of 1981), as it stood 
before its repeal by section 94,  as unrecoverable.  47 
 93. Power to make rules. –(1) The State Government may, subject to the  condition of previous 
publication, by notification, make rules to carry  out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the  foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following  matters, namely: – 
(a) the manner in which the advance tax may be collected under sub -section  (7) of section 3;  
(b) constitution of the Tribunal under sub -section ( 1) of section 9;  
(c) the terms a nd conditions of service of the Chairperson or any other  Government servant 
appointed as a member of the Tribunal under sub -section  (7) of section 9;   
(d) the areas and functions of inspectors under sub -section ( 3) of section 10;  
(e) the  form and manner in which the true and complete declaration  referred to in clause ( a) of 
sub-section ( 2) of section 13 shall be  filed;  
(f) the conditions and restrictions subject to which the registered  dealers may be permitted to pay 
an amount under sub -section ( 1) of section 15;  
(g) the conditions and restrictions subject to which an input tax  credit shall be claimed under  
sub-section ( 1) section 16;  
(h) the manner and the period within which the input tax credit in  respect of capital goods shall be 
allowed under clauses ( a), (b), (c), (d) and ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 16;  
(i) the manner in which the input tax credit on the sale or supply of  goods shall be claimed by the 
registered dealer selling the goods or  using them in the execution of sub -contract under  
sub-section ( 2) of section 16;  
(j) the other goods on which input tax credit shall not be claimed or  allowed under clause ( a) of 
sub-section ( 3) of section 16;  
(k) the particulars of sale in the original copy of the tax invoice and  the form and manner of the 
duplicate copy of the original tax invoice  under sub -section ( 5) of section 16;  
(l) the manner in which input tax credit on goods and the manner and  extent in which the input 
tax on account of capital assets shall be  allowed under sub -section ( 1) of section 17;  
(m) the restrictions and conditions subject to which and the time and  manner in which the 
organisations specified in the Schedule V to this  Act may apply for refund of tax paid on goods 
purchased under sub -section  (2) of section 17;  
(n) the manner of application for and the grant of certificate of  registration  under sub -section ( 2) 
of section 19;  
(o) the manner in which the certificate of registration shall be  surrendered and the manner in 
which the certificate of registration  shall be cancelled under sub -section ( 2) of section 20;  
(p) the security and the manner in which such security shall be  furnished under section 21;   
(q) the manner in which the declaration shall be furnished and the  particulars of the person under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 22;  
(r) the form and manner in which the returns or statements or notice,  as the case may be, under 
sub-sections ( 1), (2), (3), (4) and ( 7) of section 24 shall be furnished;  
(s) the manner in which the opportunity of being heard is to be  provided under sub -section ( 8) of 
section 24;  
(t) the manner of depositing tax and the form and manner of enclosing  the proof of payment of 
such tax under sub -section ( 9) of section 24;  
(u) the time and manner of scrutiny of return under sub -section ( 1) of section 25;  
(v) the form of notice to the concerned dealer under sub -section ( 2) of section 25;  48 
 (w) the form and manner of serving a notice and the time within which  the dealer is required to 
pay the tax and interest under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 3) of section 25;  
(x) the manner of conducting an audit of the business of a dealer under  sub-section ( 3) of    
section 26;  
(y) making of provisional or final assessment of turnover of sale or  purchase of goods under    
sub-section ( 1) of section 30;  
(z) the fo rm and manner of notice and the manner of assessment or  re-assessment under           
sub-section ( 1) of section 31;  
(za) the manner in which the opportunity of being heard is to be  provided under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 32;  
(zb) the manner in which the  amount of tax may be provisionally  quantified under sub -section ( 2) 
of section 32;  
(zc) the manner in which the re -assessment may be made under section  33; 
(zd) the other evidence to prove and the form and manner of declaration  required to be furnished 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 35;  
(ze) such other manner of payment of tax and the manner of payment of  tax, interest due or the 
penalty by instalments under sub -section ( 2) of section 39;  
(zf) the manner of payment of penalty under sub -section ( 5) of sec tion 39; 
(zg) the conditions and restrictions subject to which the deduction of  tax may be made under   
sub-section ( 1) of section 40;  
(zh) the manner of payment of amount into the Government Treasury under  sub-section ( 3) of 
section 40;  
(zi) the conditions subject to which no deduction of tax shall be made  under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 41;  
(zj) the manner in which tax referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section  41 shall be deducted under 
sub-section ( 4) of section 41;  
(zk) the form and manner of certificate by the person making deduction  under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 41;  
(zl) the form and manner of granting tax clearance certificate under  section 42;  
(zm) the manner in which the opportunity of being heard is to be  provided under sub -section ( 3) 
of section 43;  
(zn) the form of notice by the prescribed authority under sub -section  (2) of section 44;  
(zo) the manner of publication of notice and the details therefor under  sub-section  (4) of  
section 4 4; 
(zp) the form of application in which the perso n may claim the refund  under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 44;  
(zq) the manner of keeping a true and complete accounts under sub -section  (1) of section 52;  
(zr) the dealers or persons and the manner of drawing up the  manufacturing, trading and profit 
and loss  account and a balance -sheet  and other accounts under sub -section ( 2) of section 52;  
(zs) the form of challan to be issued by every dealer or a person under  sub-section ( 3) of     
section 52;  
(zt) the accounts and the manner in which the trading and profit  and loss account shall be drawn 
up under sub -section ( 4) of section 52;  
(zu) the value of goods exceeding which the retail invoice is required  to be issued by the dealer 
under sub -section ( 4) of section 53;  49 
 (zv) the period for which invoices under sub -section ( 7) of section 53  may be required to be 
preserved;  
(zw) the conditions and restrictions subject to which a copy of the  original tax invoice may be 
provided by the selling dealer under sub -section  (8) of section 53;  
(zx) the particulars of the credit n ote and the debit note under sub -section  (9) of section 53;  
(zy) the other period for which the tax invoices and retail invoices  are required to be preserved 
under sub -section ( 10) of section 53;  
(zz) the form of audit report and the particulars thereof under sub -section  (2) of section 54;  
(zza) the manner of authorisation to inspect all places of business  under  sub-section ( 2) of   
section 56;  
(zzb) the manner of seizure of accounts, registers or documents under  sub-section ( 3) of      
section 56;  
(zzc) the manner of seizure of goods under clause ( a) of sub -section  (4) of section 56;  
(zzd) the manner in which the opportunity of being heard is to be  provided under clause ( b) of 
sub-section ( 4) of section 56;  
(zze) the manner of auction of goods and the manner in which the sale  proceeds shall be refunded 
under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 4) of section 56;  
(zzf) the manner of release of security under clause ( f) of sub -section  (4) of section 56;  
(zzg) the manner and form of notice by the prescribed authorit y under  sub-section  (2) of  
section 57; 
(zzh) the form of notice by the prescribed authority under sub -sections  (2) and ( 3) of section 58;  
(zzi) the time and manner of furnishing information under sub -section  (1) of section 59;  
(zzj) the accounts, registers and documents required to be maintained  under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 59;  
(zzk) the manner of erecting check posts and barriers under sub -section  (1) of section 60;  
(zzl) the form and manner of furnishing declaration and the conditions  subject  to which such 
declaration shall be furnished under sub -section  (2) of section 60;  
(zzm) the manner of intercepting, detaining and searching any goods  carrier under sub -section ( 3) 
of section 60;  
(zzn) the form of declaration required by a person transport ing goods  under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 61;  
(zzo) the manner of obtaining transit permission under sub -section ( 1) of section 62;  
(zzp) the manner of refund to a person who paid in excess of the amount  due under                  
sub-section ( 1) of secti on 68;  
(zzq) the manner of claiming or receiving the refund under sub -section  (2) of section 68;  
(zzr) the form of application for grant of provisional refund under  sub-section ( 1) of section 69;  
(zzs) the security to be furnished by the dealer under sub -section ( 2) of section 69;  
(zzt) the form and manner of filing an appeal under section 72;  
(zzu) the conditions subject to which the offences punishable under  this Act may be investigated 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 83;  
(zzv) the manner of authorisation and the conditions subject to which  an accountant, company 
secretary or sales tax practitioner may appear  before taxing  authorities under section 87;   
(zzw) declaration by the State Government relating to any dues as  unrecoverable under secti on 92;  
(zzx) the manner of imposition of penalty for breach of any rules made  under this section;  50 
 (zzy) the manner and time in which, the particulars of, and the  authority to whom, goods held in 
stock is to be declared under section  95; 
(zzz) the manner of  claiming input tax credit under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 96;  
(zzza) the manner and extent of deferment of tax liability under sub -section  (3) of section 96;  
(zzzb) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in  respect of which p rovision is 
to be made, or may be, made by rules.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be  after it is made, before each 
House of the State Legislature while it  is in session for a total period of fourteen days, which may be  
comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if, before  the expiry of the session in which it 
is so laid or the session  immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in  the rule 
or both Houses agree that the rule should  not be made, the  rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of  no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification  or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything  previously done under that ru le. 
(4) Any rule made under this section may provide that the contravention  thereof shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to five thousand  rupees and where the contravention is continuing one, with a 
further  fine which may extend to one hundred rupees per day for every day  during which such 
contravention continues.  
94. Repeal and savings. –(1) The Bihar Finance Act, 1981 (Bihar Act 5 of  1981) (hereinafter referred 
to as “the repealed Act ”) is hereby  repealed from the date of commencement of this A ct. 
(2) The repeal shall not affect, – 
(a) any legal proceeding or remedy whether initiated or availed of  before or after this repeal, in 
respect of any such right, title,  obligation or liability;  
(b) affect any right, privilege, obligation, or liability ac quired,  accrued or incurred under the 
repealed Act except the right or  privilege accrued under the repealed Act or the rules framed or  
notifications issued thereunder, to industries, granted under any  industrial policy or industrial policy 
resolution of the State  Government; or  
(c) the levy, assessment or recovery of any tax or the imposition or  recovery of any pena lty, in 
respect of such period,  
under the provision  of the repealed Act; and all proceedings under the repealed Act in  respect of matters 
aforesaid shall be initiated and disposed of or  continued and disposed of, as the case may be, as if this Act 
has not  been passed; and for this purpose all taxing authorities or Inspectors  appointed under section 10, 
and the Tribunal constituted under section  9 of, shall exercise all powers and perform all duties conferred 
by or  under the repealed Act upon the corresponding authorities appointed  under section 9 or section 8 
thereof:  
Provided that any appeal or any revision arising out of any order under  the Bih ar Finance Act, 
1981 (Bihar Act 5 of 1981) shall be filed  before, or heard or disposed of by, the appropriate 
authorities  mentioned in sections 72, 73 and 74 in the manner as provided therein.  
(3) All rules, orders and appointments made, notifications publ ished,  certificates granted, powers 
conferred and other things done under the  said Act and in force on the commencement of this Act, shall, 
so far as  they are not inconsistent with or until they are not modified,  superseded or cancelled under this 
Act, be deemed to have been  respectively made, published, granted, conferred or done under this  Act. 
(4) Save as otherwise provided in sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), the mention  of particular matters in those 
sub-sections shall not be held to  prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the General  
Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) with regard to the effect of repeal.  
95. Declaration of stock of goods held on 1st April, 2005. –Every dealer  who was registered under 
the Bihar Finance Act, 1981 (Bihar Act 5 of  1981), as it stood before its repeal by section 94, or who 
makes an  application for registration as a dealer on the 1st day of April, 2005  shall declare such details 
regarding the stock of goods held by him on  the 31st March, 2005 in such manner and with such 
particulars and  within such time and to such authority, as may be prescribed.   51 
 96. Transitory provisions. –(1) Where any goods, other than those  specified under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 13 of this Act, held in  stock by a registered dealer on the date  of commencement of this Act,  are 
goods which have already suffered tax on the first point of their  sale within the meaning of the Bihar 
Finance Act, 1981 (Bihar Act 5 of  1981), as it stood before its repeal by section 94, are sold by him or  are 
consumed i n manufacture of other goods on or after the date of  commencement of this Act, he shall claim 
and be allowed, in such manner  as may be prescribed, an input tax credit under sections 16 and 17 of  this 
Act. 
(2) Where any goods, other than those specified und er sub -section ( 2) of section 13 of this Act, held 
in stock by a registered dealer on the  date of commencement of this Act, are goods which have already 
suffered  tax on the first point of their sale within the meaning of the Bihar  Finance Act, 1981 (Bihar Act 5 
of 1981), as it stood before its repeal  by section 94, are used or consumed by him for the manufacture of 
goods  for sale within the State of Bihar or in the course of inter -State  trade and commerce under section 3 
of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956  (74 of 1956) or in the course of export within the meaning of section 5  
of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 on or after the date of commencement  of this Act, he shall claim and 
be allowed, in such manner as may be  prescribed, an input tax credit under sectio ns 16 and 17 of this Act.  
(3) Where– 
(a) any dealer has been granted the facility of deferment of tax  payable under section 23A of the 
Bihar Finance Act, 1981 (Bihar Act 5  of 1981), as it stood before its repeal by section 94, and who 
has, on  the commencement of this Act, not availed of the full entitlement, he  shall be allowed to 
continue to defer the tax payable under this Act,  in the manner and to the extent prescribed;   
(b) any dealer has been granted the facility of exemption from payment  of tax under clause ( b) of 
sub-section ( 3) of section 7 of the Bihar  Finance Act, 1981 (Bihar Act 5 of 1981), as it stood before 
its repeal  by section 94, and who has, on the commencement of this Act, not  availed of the full 
entitlement, he shall be allowed to  opt for  deferment of his tax liability under this Act, in the manner 
and to the  extent prescribed.  
(4) Where– 
(a) the tax has been collected under the Bihar Finance Act, 1981 (Bihar  Act 5 of 1981) as it stood 
before its repeal by section 94, but the  same has not been deposited before the date of commencement 
of this  Act, the tax so collected by any person under the said Act shall be  deposited in accordance 
with the provisions of the aforesaid Act and  the rules made thereunder, as if this Act has not come 
into force and  the said Act had not been repealed;  
(b) a return or statement is required to be filed under the Bihar  Finance Act, 1981 (Bihar Act 5 of 
1981) as it stood before its repeal  by section 94, but the same had not been filed before the 
commencement  of this Act, such return or statement, as the case may be, shall be  filed in accordance 
with the provisions of the aforesaid Act and by the  person liable to file such return or statement;  
(c) a return has been filed, under the Bihar Finance Act, 1981 (Bih ar Act 5 of 1981) as it stood 
before its repeal by section 94, by any  dealer for any year and no assessment in respect of that year 
has been  made before the commencement of this Act, the proceedings for the  assessment of that 
dealer for that year shall be made or be continued  as if this Act had not come into force and the said 
Act had not been  repealed and such assessment shall be made by the prescribed authority  under this 
Act; 
(d) a person has been aggrieved by any decision made or order passed  under the Bihar Finance 
Act, 1981 (Bihar Act 5 of 1981) as it stood  before its repeal by section 94, and he has not filed any 
appeal or an  application for review or revision, such person may file an appeal or  make an application 
for revision or review, as the case m ay be, in  accordance with the provision of the said Act and the 
rules made  thereunder to the prescribed authority for disposing of such appeal or  application;  
(e) any liability of any dealer to pay tax, under the Bihar Finance  Act, 1981 (Bihar Act 5 of 
1981), as it stood before its repeal by  section 94, had been affected, and such person was entitled to 
make a  reference before the High Court under section 48 of the said Act,  before the date of 
commencement of this Act, such person may, draw up,  within two months of the date of 
commencement of this Act, a reference  (if not already made such reference) and refer it to the High 52 
 Court in  accordance with the provisions of said section 48, as if the aforesaid  Act had not been 
repealed.  
(5) No interest or penalty shall be leviable or imposable or no  prosecution shall be initiated for any 
offence committed under this  Act during the period beginning on the 18th April, 2005 and ending on  the 
day preceding the day on which this Act comes into force.  
97. Construction of  references in any repealed law to officers,  authorities, etc. –Any reference in 
any provision of the Bihar Finance  Act, 1981 (Bihar Act 5 of 1981), as it stood before its repeal by  
section 94, to an officer, authority or tribunal shall, for the purpose  of carrying into effect the provisions 
contained in section 83, be  construed as a reference to the corresponding officer, authority or  tribunal 
appointed or constituted by or under this Act; and if any  question arises as to who such corresponding 
officer, aut hority or  tribunal is, the decision of the Commissioner thereon shall be final.  
98. Removal of difficulty. –(1) If any difficulty arises in giving  effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the State Government may, by  order published in the Official Gazette, ma ke such provisions not  
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be  necessary or expedient for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the  expiry of a period of two years from 
the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may  be after it is made, before each 
House of State Legislature.  
99. Laying of notifications on the table of the State Legislature. –Every notification issued under 
this Act shall be laid, as soon as may  be, after it is published in the Official Gazette, before each House of  
State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of fourteen  days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two successive  sessions,  and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so  laid or the 
session immediately following, both Houses agree in making  any modification in the notification or both 
Houses agree that the  notification should be annulled, the notification shall th ereafter have  effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may  be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be  without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under  that notification.  
100. Validation of Bihar Value Added Tax Ordinance, 2005. –Anything done  or any action taken 
under the Bihar Value Added Tax Ordinance, 2005  (Bihar Ord. 1 of 2005) (including any order passed, 
notification issued  and rules made) shall be deemed to be valid and be deemed to ha ve been  done or taken 
under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
  53 
 SCHEDULE I  
(See section 7)  
Serial 
Number  Goods  
1 Coarse grains.  
2 Fresh vegetables and fresh fruits.  
3 Fresh meat, fresh fish and livestock.  
4 Unprocessed and unbranded salt.  
5 Fresh milk and pasteurized milk.  
6 Fresh eggs.  
7 Unpacked plain water.  
8 Book s, periodicals and journals.  
9 Unbranded bread . 
10 Handlooms excluding handloom products.  
11 Betel leaves.  
12 Condoms an contraceptives.  
13 Curd, lassi and butter milk.  
14 Electrical energy . 
15 Glass bangles.  
16 Kumkum and bindi.  
17 Aids and implements used by handicapped persons.  
18 Poultry feed and aquatic feed.  
19 Green garlic and green ginger.  
20 Firewood.  
21 Agricultural implements exclusively worked by human or animal power such as rahat, water 
lift, ploughs and parts thereof, spades (kudali), hoes, phavras, harrows, sickles, khurpies, 
karing, kundi, mowers, cultivators, ridgers, land leve llers, axe, gandasa,  shears, yokes, hand 
dusters.  
22 Raw silk.  
23 Indigenous hand -made musical instruments.  
24 Raw wool.  
25 Fresh flowers.  
26 Saplings.  
27 Cotton yarn in hank.  
28 Cart driven by animals.  
29 Rakhi.  
30 Sacred thread, commonly known as yagyopawit . 
31 Idols made of clay.  
 
  54 
 Serial  
Number  Goods  
32 Clay lamps.  
33 Bangles made of shell, plastic, lac or glass.  
34 Kites.  
35 Takhti.  
36 Poha, murmura, laktho, lai and mukundana.  
37 Sattu.  
38 Goods mentioned in clauses ( iia), (vii), (viii), (ix) and ( x) of section 14 of the Central Sales 
Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956).  
  55 
 SCHEDULE II  
(See section 14)  
Serial  
Number  Goods  
1 Gold, silver and other precious metals.  
2 Articles of gold, silver and precious metals including jewellery  made of gold, silver and 
precious metals.  
3 Precious stones.  
  56 
 SCHEDULE III  
(See section 14)  
PART I 
Serial  
Number  Goods  
1 Acids.  
2 Agarbatti.  
3 All kinds of bricks including refractory bricks and asphaltic  roofing.  
4 All types of yarn except cotton hank yarn.  
5 Aluminium conductor steel reinforced.  
6 Aluminium utensils.  
7 Aluminium, aluminium alloys, their products (including  extrusions) not elsewhere mentioned 
in this Schedule or in any other  Schedule.  
8 Article made of rolled gold and imitation  gold.  
9 Artificial silk yarn, polyster fibre yarn, and staple fibre  yarn.  
10 Bagasse.  
11 Basic chromium sulphate, sodium bi -chromate, bleach liquid.  
12 Beedi leaves.  
13 Bicycles, tricycles and their spare parts.  
14 Bone meal.  
15 Bran oil.  
16 Branded bread.  
17 Castor oil.  
18 Charcoal.  
19 Chemical fertilizers, pesticides, weedicides and insecticides  excluding mosquito repellants.  
20 Chemicals including caustic soda, caustic potash, soda ash,  bleaching powder, sodium bi -
carbonate, sodium hydrosulphite, sulphate  of alumina, sodium nitrate, sodium acetate, sodium 
sulphate, acid  slurry, tri -sodium phosphate, sodium tripoly phosphate, sodium  silicate, 
sodium metasilicate, carboxy methyl cellulose, sodium  sulphide, acetic acid, sodium bi -
sulphi te, oxalic acid, sodium thiosulphate,  sodium sulphite, sodium alginate, benzene, citric 
acid,  diethylene glycol, sodium nitrite, hydrogen peroxide, acetaldehyde,  pentaerythritol, 
sodium alpha olefin sulphonate, sodium formate,  chemical components and mixtu res and all 
other chemicals not specified  elsewhere in this Schedule or in any other Schedule.  
21 Chillies.  
22 Clay.  
23 Cumin seed.  
24 Declared goods under section 14 of the Central Sales Tax Act,  1956 (74 of 1956) except 
goods   mentioned in clauses ( iia), (vii), (viii), (ix) and ( x) of that section.  
25 De-oiled cake.  
  57 
 Serial  
Number  Goods  
26 Dyes, that is to say, –(i) Acid dyes; ( ii) Alizarine dyes;  (iii) Bases; ( iv) Basic dyes; ( v) Direct 
dyes; ( vi) Naphthols; ( vii) Nylon dyes; ( viii) Optical whitening agents; ( ix) Plastic dyes; ( x) 
Reactive dyes; ( xi) Sulphur dyes; ( xii) Vat dyes; ( xiii) all other dyes  not specified elsewhere 
in the Schedule.  
27 Edible oils and oil cake.  
28 Electrodes.  
29 Embroidery or  zari articles, that is to say, –(i) imi ; (ii) zari; ( iii) kasab; ( iv) saima; ( v) dabka; 
(vi) chumki; ( vii) gota;  (viii) sitara; ( ix) naqsi; ( x) kora; ( xi) glass bead; ( xii) badla;  (xiii) glzal, 
(xiv) embroidery machines, ( xv) embroidery needles.  
30 Fireclay, coal ash, coal boiler ash, coal cin der ash, coal  powder, clinker.  
31 Flour -atta, maida, suji, bran and besan.  
32 Galvanized iron Pipes.  
33 Gingili oil.  
34 Gur and Jaggery.  
35 Hand pumps and spare parts.  
36 Hose pipes.  
37 Hosiery goods.  
38 Ice. 
39 Industrial cables.  
40 Industrial inputs as specified in Part III of this Schedule used  exclusively as industrial inputs.  
41 Information Technology products, as given in Part II of this  Schedule, including computers, 
telephone and parts thereof, teleprinter  and wireless equipment.  
42 Khandsari.  
43 Kirana goods such as:  
i. Spices e.g. garlic, haldi, gol mirch, tejpatta, dhania,  jira, laung, ilaichi, sahjira, mangraila, 
dalchini, jaffer, hing,  methi, jabitri, saunf, all kinds of adrakh, jatamanshi, tamarind,  sonth, 
ajwain, kawabchini  and pepper;  
ii. Medical herbs, and  
iii. Miscellaneous articles like rori, gulal, mica dust,  camphor, peppermint, dhup, broom 
sticks, lohban, arrowroot, sohaga,  nausad ar, alum, posta and mitha soda.  
44 Knitting wool.  
45 Lignite.  
46 Lime, lime stone, products of lime, dolomite and other white  washing materials not elsewhere 
mentioned in this Schedule or in any  other Schedule.  
47 Linear alkyl benezene.  
48 Maize products.  
49 Medicine and Drugs of all varieties excluding any cosmetics,  perfumery, toiletry and hair oil, 
whether or not such cosmetics,  perfumery, toiletry and hair oil is manufactured under any 
Drug Licence  and whether or not such cosmetics, perfumery, toiletry and hair oil  contains any 
medicinal properties.  58 
 Serial  
Number  Goods  
50 Metals, alloys, metal powders, metal pastes of all types and  grades and metal scraps other 
than those declared under section 14 of  the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956.  
51 Mixed PVC stabilizer.  
52 Napa Slabs (rough flooring stones).  
53 Ores and minerals.  
54 Organic manure.  
55 Palm fatty acid.  
56 Paper and newsprint including exercise books, paperboard, mill  board, straw board, blotting 
paper, cardboard, waste paper (cutting  paper), cartridge paper, packing paper, paper bags, 
cartons, cards,  blank registers, note books, envelopes, labels, letter pads, writing  tablets and 
flat files.  
57 (i) Paraffin wax of all grade standards other than food grade  standard including standard wax 
and match wax;  
(ii) Slack wax.  
58 Pens of all kinds including refills.  
59 Plastic footwear.  
60 Plastic granules.  
61 Power operated agricultural implements.  
62 Printing ink excluding toner and cartridges.  
63 Processed and branded salt.  
64 Pulp of bamboo.  
65 PVC pipes.  
66 Ready -made garments.  
67 Rubber that is to say, –(a) Raw rubber, latex, dry ribbed sheet  of all RMA Grades, tree lace, 
earth scrap, ammoniated latex, prescribed  latex, latex concentrate, centrifugal latex, dry crepe 
rubber, dry  block rubber, crumb rubber, skimmed rubber and all other qualities and  grade s of 
latex; ( b) Reclaimed rubber all grades and qualities; ( c) Synthetic rubber.  
68 Safety matches.  
69 Seeds.  
70 Sewing thread.  
71 Ship (including ship building).  
72 Silk fabrics.  
73 Solvent oils other than organic solvent oil.  
74 Sponge iron.  
75 Stainless steel.  
76 Starch.  
77 Tamarind.  
78 Tractors, harvesters, their implements and spare parts.  
  59 
 Serial 
Number  Goods  
79 Transmission wires and towers.  
80 Turmeric.  
81 Vanaspati.  
82 Vegetable oil.  
83 Water when sold in sealed container.  
84 Writing instruments.  
85 Renewable energy devices and spare parts such as flat solar  collectors, concentrating and pipe 
type solar collectors, solar water  heaters and systems, air/gas/fluid heating systems, solar crop 
dealers  and systems, solar stills and declination systems, solar pumps based on  solar thermal 
and solar photovoltaic conversion, solar power generating  systems, solar photovoltaic nodules 
and panels for water pumping and  other applications, wind mills and any specially designed 
devices on  wind  mills, any special devices including electric generators and pumps  running 
on wind energy, bio -gas plants and bio -gas engines and bio -gas fires, agricultural and 
municipal water conversion devices producing  energy, equipment for utilising geothermal 
energ y, portable varieties  of improved solar chullah, solar refrigeration, solar cold storage and  
solar air conditioning systems, electricity operated vehicles including  battery powered or fuel 
cell powered vehicles.  
PART II 
1 Word processing machines and electronic typewriters.  
2 Electronic calculators.  
3 Computer systems and peripherals, electronic diaries.  
4 Parts and accessories of goods sp ecified at serial numbers 1, 2,  3 above.  
5 DC Micrometers/stepper motors of an output not exceeding 37.5  watts.  
6 Parts of goods specified at serial number 5 above.  
7 Uninterrupted Power Supplies and their parts.  
8 Permanent magnets and articles intended to become permanent  magnets (Ferrites).  
9 Electrical apparatus for line telephony or line telegraphy,  including line telephone sets with 
cordless handsets and  telecommunication apparatus for carries -current line systems or for  
digital line systems; Videophones.  
10 Microphones, Multimedia speakers, headphones, earphones and  combined microphone/  
speaker sets and their parts.  
11 Telephone answering machines.  
12 Parts o f telephone answering machines.  
13 Prepared unrecorded media for sound recording or similar  recording of other phenomena.  
14 Information Technology software on any media.  
15 Transmission  apparatus other than apparatus for radio  broadcasting or TV broadcasting, 
transmission apparatus incorporating  reception apparatus, digital still image video cameras.  
16 Radio communication receivers, Radio pagers.  
  60 
 Serial  
Number  Goods  
17 (i) Aerials,  antennas and their parts.  
(ii) Parts of goods specified at serial number 14 and 15 above.  
18 LCD Panels, LED Panels and parts thereof.  
19 Electrical capacitors, fixed, variable or adjustable (Pre -set) and parts thereof.  
20 Electrical resistors (including rheostats and potentiometers),  other than heating resistors.  
21 Printed circuits.  
22 Switches, connectors and Relays for up to 5 Amps at voltage not  exceeding 250 volts, 
electronic fuses.  
23 Data/Graphic display tubes, other than TV picture tubes and  parts thereof.  
24 Diodes, transistors and  similar semi -conductor devices, Photosensitive semi -conductor 
devices, including Photovoltaic cells  whether or not assembled in modules or made up into 
panels; Light  emitting diodes; Mounted piezo -electr ic crystals.  
25 Electronic Integrated Circuits and Micro -assemblies.  
26 Signal generators and parts thereof.  
27 Optical fibre cables.  
28 Optical fibre and optical fibre bundles and cables.  
29 Liquid Crystal Devices, Flat Panel Display Devices and parts  thereof.  
30 Cathode ray oscilloscopes, Spectrum Analyzers, Cross -talk meters, Gain measuring 
instruments, Distortion factor meters,  Psophometers, Network and Logic Analyzer and Signal 
Analyzer.  
PART III 
1 Animal (including fish) fats and oils, crude, refined or  purified.  
2 Glycerol, crude, glycerol waters and glycerol lyes.  
3 Vegetable waxes (other than triglycerides), beeswax, other  insect waxes and spermacell, 
whether or not refined or coloured;  degras; residues resulting from the treatment of tall 
substances or  animal or vegetable waxes.  
4 Animal or vegetable fats boiled, oxidized, dehydrated,  sulphurised, blown, polymerized by 
heat in vacuum or in inert gas or  otherwise chemically modified  inedible mixtures or 
preparations of fats and oils. 
5 Liquid glucose (non -medicinal).  
6 Denatured ethyl alcohol of any strength.  
7 Manganese ores and concentrates, including ferruginous manganese  ores and concentrates 
with a manganese content of 20% or more,  calculate on dry weight.  
8 Copper ores and concentrates.  
9 Nickel ores and concentrates.  
10 Cobalt ores and concentrates.  
11 Aluminium ores and concentrates.  
12 Lead  ores and concentrates.  
13 Zinc ores and concentrates.  61 
 Serial  
Number  Goods  
14 Tin ores and concentrates.  
15 Chromium ores and concentrates.  
16 Tungsten ores and concentrates.  
17 Uranium or thorium ores and concentrates.  
18 Molybdenum ores and concentrates.  
19 Titanium ores and concentrates.  
20 Niobium, tantalum, vanadium or zirconium ores and concentrates.  
21 Precious metal ores and concentrates.  
22 Other ores and concentrates.  
23 Granulate slag (slag sand) for the manufacture of iron or steel.  
24 Benzole.  
25 Toluole.  
26 Xylole.  
27 Naphthalene.  
28 Phenols.  
29 Creosote oils.  
30 Fluorine, chlorine, bromine and iodine.  
31 Sulphur, sublimed or precipitated; colloidal sulphur.  
32 Carbon (carbon blacks and other forms of carbon not elsewhere  specified or  included).  
33 Hydrogen, rare gases and other non -metals.  
34 Alkali or alkaline -earth metals; rare -earth metals, scandium and  yttrium, whether or not 
intermixed or inter alloyed; mercury.  
35 Hydrogen chloride (hydrochloric acid); chlorosulphuric acids.  
36 Sulphuric acid and anhydrides thereof; oleum.  
37 Nitric acid; sulphonitric acids.  
38 Diphosphorus pentaoxide; phosphoric acid and polyphosphoric  acids.  
39 Oxides of boron: boric acids.  
40 Halides and halide oxides of non -metals.  
41 Sulphides of non -metals; commercial phosphorus trisulphide.  
42 Ammonia, anhydrous or in aqueous solution.  
43 Sodium hydroxide (caustic soda); potassium hydroxide (caustic  potash); peroxides of sodium 
or potassium.  
44 Hydroxide and peroxide of magnesium; oxides, hydroxides and  peroxides of  strontium or 
barium.  
45 Aluminium hydroxide.  
46 Chromium oxides and hydroxides.  
47 Manganese oxides.  62 
 Serial  
Number  Goods  
48 Iron oxides and hydroxides.  
49 Cobalt oxides and hydroxides; commercial cobalt oxides.  
50 Tatanium oxide.  
51 Hydrazine and hydroxylamine and their inorganic salts; other  inorganic bases; other metal 
oxides, hydroxides and peroxides.  
52 Fluorides; fluorosilicates, fluoroaluminates and other complex  fluorine salts.  
53 Chlorides, chloride oxides and chloride hydroxides, bromides and  bromide  oxides; iodides 
and iodide oxides.  
54 Chlorates and perchlora tes; bromates and perbromates; lodates  and periodates.  
55 Sulphides; polysulphides.  
56 Dithionites and sulphoxylates.  
57 Sulphides; thiosulphates.  
58 Copper sulphate.  
59 Nitrites; nitrates.  
60 Phosphinates (hypophosphites), phosphonates (phosphates),  phosphates and polyphosphates.  
61 Carbonates; peroxocarbonates (percarbonates); commercial  ammonium.  
62 Cyanides, cyanide oxides and complex cyanides.  
63 Fulminates, cyanates and thiocyanates.  
64 Borates; peroxoborates (perborates).  
65 Sodium dichromate.  
66 Potassium dichromate.  
67 Radioactive chemical elements and radioactive isotopes  (including the fissile chemical 
elements and isotopes) and their  compounds; mixtures and residues containing these 
products.  
68 Isotopes compounds, inorganic or organic of such isotopes,  whether or not  chemically 
defined.  
69 Compounds, inorganic or organic, of rare earth metals, of  yttrium or of scandium or of 
mixtures of these metals.  
70 Phosphides, whether or not chemically defined excluding  ferrophosphours . 
71 Calcium carbide.  
72 Cyclic hydrocarbons.  
73 Halogenated derivatives of hydrocarbons.  
74 Sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives of hydrocarbons,  whether or nor halogenated.  
75 Cyclic alcohols and their halogenated, sulphonated nitrated or  nitrosated  derivatives.  
76 Halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives of  phenols or  phenol -alcohols.  
77 Ethers, ether -alcohols, ether -phenols, ether -alcoholphenols,  alcohol peroxides, ether 
peroxides, ketone peroxides (whether or not  chemically defined) and their halogenated, 
sulphonated, nitrated or  nitrosated, derivatives.  
  63 
 Serial  
Number  Goods  
78 Epoxidees, epoxyalcohols, epoxyphenols and epoxyethers, with a  three -membered ring and 
their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or  nitrosated derivatives.  
79 Acetals and hemiacetals, whether or not with other oxygen  function and their halogenated, 
sulphonated, nitrated or nitorsated  derivatives.  
80 Aldehydes, whether or not with other oxygen function; cyclic  polymers of aldehydes; 
paraformaldehyde.  
81 Halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives.  
82 Saturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids and their anhydrides,  halides, peroxides and 
peroxyacides; their halogenated, sulphonated,  nitrated or nitrosated derivatives.  
83 Unsaturated acyclic monocarboxylic acid, cyclic monocarboxylic  acid, their  anhydrides, 
halides, peroxides and peroxyacids; their halogenated,  sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated 
derivatives.  
84 Polycarboxylic  acids, their anhydrides, halides, peroxides and  peroxyacids; their halogenated 
sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated  derivatives.  
85 Carboxylic acids with additional oxygenfunction and their  anhydrides, halides, peroxides and 
peroxyacids; their halogenated , sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives.  
86 Phosphoric esters and their salts including lactophosphates;  their halogenated sulphonated, 
nitrated nitrosated derivatives.  
87 Esters of other inorganic acids (excluding esters of hydrogen  halides) a nd their salts; their 
halogenated; sulphonated, nitrated or  nitrosated derivatives.  
88 Amine -function compounds.  
89 Oxygen -function amino -compounds.  
90 Quaternary ammonium salts and hydroxides, leetcithins and other  phosphoaminolipids.  
91 Carboxyamind -function compounds: amide -function compounds of  carbonic acid.  
92 Carboxyamide function compounds (including saccharin andnits  salts) and  iminefunction 
compounds.  
93 Nitrile -function compounds.  
94 Diazo, Axo -orazoxy compounds.  
95 Organic derivatives of hydrazine or of hydroxylamine.  
96 Organo -sulphou compounds.  
97 Ethylene Diamine Tetra Acetic Acid. Nitrillo Triaccetric acid  and their derivatives.  
98 Hetrocyclic compounds with oxygen heteroatom(s) only.  
99 Hetrocyclic compounds with nitrogen heter oatom(s) only.  
100 Nucleic acids and their salts; other heterocyclic compounds.  
101 Sulphonamides.  
102 Glycosides, natural or reproduced by synthesis and their salts,  ethers, esters and other 
deritaves.  
103 Vegetable alkaloids, natural or reproduced by  synthesis and  their salts, ethers, esters and 
other derivatives.  
104 Ethylene Diamine Tetra Acetic Acid, nitrillo triaccetric acid  and their derivatives.  64 
 Serial  
Number  Goods  
105 Tanning extracts of vegetable origin; tannis and their salts,  ethers, esters and other 
derivatives.  
106 Synthetic organic tanning substances; inorganic tanning  substances; tanning preparations 
whether or not containing natural  tanning substances; enbzymatic preparations for 
pretanning.  
107 Colouring matter of vegetable or animal origin (including dyeing  extracts but excluding 
animal black), whether or not chemically  defined; preparations based on colouring matter of 
vegetable or animal  origin.  
108 Synthetic organic colouring matter; synthetic organic products  of a kind used as fluorescent 
brightening agents or as luminophores,  whether or not chemical  defines.  
109 Colour lakes; preparations based on colour lakes.  
110 Glass frit and other glass, in the form of powder, granules or  flakes.  
111 Prepared driers.  
112 Printing ink whether or not concentrated or solid.  
113 Casein, caseinates and other casein derivatives, casein glues.  
114 Enzymes; prepared enzymes not elsewhere specified or included.  
115 Artificial graphite: colloidal or semi -colloidal graphite;  preparations based on graphite or 
other carbon in the form of pastes,  blocks, plated or other semi -manufactures.  
116 Activated carbon: activated natural mineral products: animal  black, including spent animal 
black.  
117 Residual lyes  from the manufacture of wood pulp, whether or not  concentrated, desugared or 
chemically treated, including ligning  sulphonates.  
118 Resin and resin acids, and derivatives thereof: resin spirit and  resin oils; run gums.  
119 Wood tar; wood tar oils; wood creosote; woods naptha; vegetable  pitch; brewers pitch and 
similar preparations based on rosin, resin  acids or on vegetables pitch.  
120 Finishing agents, dye carriers to accelerate the dyeing or  fixing of dye -stuffs and other 
products and preparations (fo r example,  dressing) and mordant of kind used in textile, paper, 
leather or liked  industries, not elsewhere specified or included.  
121 Prepared rubber accelerator; compound plasticisers for rubber or  plastics, not elsewhere 
specified or included anti -oxidising  preparations and other compound stabilisers for rubber or 
plastics.  
122 Reducers and blanket wash/roller wash used in the printing  industry.  
123 Reaction intiators, reaction accelerators and catalytic  preparations, not elsewhere specified or 
included.  
124 Mixed alkylbenzenes and mixed alkyaphthalaenes.  
125 Chemical elements doped for use in electronics, in the form of  dises, wafers or similar forms: 
chemical compounds doped for use in  electronic.  
126 Industrial monocarboxylic fatty acids; a cid oils from refining;  industrial fatty alcohols.  
127 Retarders used in the printing industry.  
128 Polymers of propylene or of other olefins, in primary forms.  
129 Acrylic polymers in primary forms.  65 
 Serial 
Number  Goods  
130 Polyacetals, other polyethers and expoxide resins in primary  forms, polycarbonates, alkyd 
resins, polyallyl esters and other  polyesters in primary forms.  
131 Polyamides in primary forms.  
132 Amino -resins, polyphenylene oxide, phenolic resins and  plyurethanes  in primary forms.  
133 Silicones in primary forms.  
134 Petroleum resins, coumarone -indene resins, polyterpenes,  polysulphides, polysulphides.  
135 Cellulose and its chemical derivatives, and cellulose ethers,  not elsewhere specified or 
included in primar y forms.  
136 Natural polymers (for example alginic acid) and modified natural  polyers (for example, 
hardened proteins, chemical derivatives of  natural rubber), not elsewhere specified or 
included, in primary forms.  
137 Ion-exchangers based on polymers.  
138 Self adhesive plates, sheets, film foil, tape, strip of plastic  whether or not in rolls.  
139 Flexible plain films.  
140 Articles for the packing of goods of plastics; namely; boxes,  cases crates, containers, carboys, 
bottles, jerry cans and their  stoppers, lids caps of plastics but not including insulated ware.  
141 Natural rubber, balata, gutta percha, Guayule, chicle and  similar natural gums, in primary 
forms or in plates, sheets or strips.  
142 Synthetic rubber and factice derived from oils in primary forms  or in plates, sheets or strip; 
mixtures of any produce of this heading  in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip.  
143 Reclaimed rubber in primary form or in plates, sheets or strip.  
144 Compounded rubber, unvulcanised, in primary forms  or in plates,  sheets or strip other than 
the forms and articles of unvulcanised  rubber.  
145 Mechanical wood pulp, chemical wood pulp, semi -chemical wood  pulp and pulps of other 
fibrous cellulosic materials.  
146 Cartons (including flattened or folded car tons), boxes  (including flattened or folded boxes), 
cases, bags and other packing  containers, of paper, paperboard, whether in assembled or 
unassembled  condition.  
147 Paper printed labels and paperboard printed labels.  
148 Paper self adhesive tape and pr inted wrappers used for packing.  
149 Sacks and bags of a kind used for the packing of goods, of jute  or of other textile based 
fibres.  
150 Carboys, bottles, jars phials of glass, of a kind used for the  packing of goods; stoppers, lids 
and other closures of glass.  
151 Stoppers, caps and lids (including crown corks, screw caps and  pouring stoppers) capsules 
for bottles, threaded bungs, bung covers,  seals and other packing accessories of base metal.  
  66 
 SCHEDULE IV  
(See section 14)  
 
Serial 
Number  Goods  
1 Country liquor including spiced country liquor  
2 Potable spirit, wine or liquor whether imported or manufactured  in India  
3 High Speed Diesel Oil and Light Diesel Oil  
4 Motor Spirit  
5 Natural Gas  
6 Aviation Turbine Fuel  
  67 
 SCHEDULE V  
(See section 17)  
 
Serial 
Number  List of organisations which can claim refund  
1. AFGHANISTAN.  
H.E. Ambassador of Republic of Afghanistan.  
The Embassy of Republic of Afghanistan.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  of Afghanistan.  
2. AFRO -ASIAN  RURAL RECONSTRUCTION ORGANISATION.  
3. ALGERIA.  
The Embassy of Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria.  
4. ANGOLA.  
The Embassy of Angola on the purchases made by the diplomats for  Official and personal 
use. 
5. APOSTOLIC NUNCIATURE.  
6. ARGENTINA.  
The Embassy of Argentina Republic on the purchases made by its  diplomats for official as 
well as personal use.  
7. ARMENIA.  
The Embassy of Armenia on the purchases made by the mission for  official use.  
8. ASIAN AFRICAN LEGAL CONSULTIVE COMMITTEE,  
for its official use.  
9. ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK.  
10. AUSTRALIA.  
The High Commission and its Diplomatic Officers in respect of  purchases made from 
bounded stores only for their official and personal  use. 
11. AUSTRIA.  
The Embassy of Austria in India (for sales intended for their  official use).  
The Diplomatic Officers of the Embassy of Austria in India (for  sales intended for their 
personal use).  
12. BANGLADESH.  
The High Commission for the Peoples Republic of Bangladesh in  India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the High  Commission for the Peoples 
Republic of Bangladesh in India.  
13. BELARUS.  
The Embassy of Belarus in India. Purchases made for its  diplomatic and 
administrative/technical personnel for official as well  as personal use.  
  68 
 Serial  
Number  List of organisations which can claim refund  
14. BELGIUM.  
H.E. the Ambassador of Belgium in India.   
The Embassy of Belgium in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers of the Belgium Embassy in India.  
15. BHUTAN.  
The Royal Bhutan Mission for sales intended for official use of  Mission.  
The Representative of Bhutan for sales intended for personal  use. 
The Diplomatic Officers of the Royal Bhutan Mission for sales  intended for  personal use.  
16. BRAZIL.  
The Embassy of the Federative Republic of Brazil i n India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  of Federative Republic of 
Brazil in India.  
17. BRITAIN.  
The High Commission for Britain in India (all sales for official  use).  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the High  Commission for Britain in 
India (sales of imported goods from bonded  stocks only).  
18. BRUNEI DARUSSALAM.  
The Embassy of Brunei Darussalam on the purchases made by its  Diplomats for Official as 
well as personal use.  
19. BULGARIA.  
H.E. the Ambass ador of the Peoples Republic of Bulgaria in  India.  
The Embassy of the Peoples Republic of Bulgaria in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  of the Peoples  Republic of 
Bulgaria in India.  
20. CANADA.  
H.E. the High Commissio ner for Canadian in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers of the Canada High Commission.  
The Canadian High Commission.  
21. CENTRAL AFRICA.  
The Embassy of the Central African Empire (for sales intended  for official use).  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  of the Central African 
Empire (for sales intended for their personal  use).  
22. CHINA.  
H.E. the Chinese Ambassador in India.  
The Embassy of the Peoples Republic of China.  
The Diplomatic officers of the Chinese Embassy in India.  
  69 
 Serial  
Number  List of organisations which can claim refund  
23. COLUMBIA.  
The Embassy of Columbia in India.  
24. COMBODIA.  
H.E. the ambassador of Combodia in India.  
The Embassy of Combodia in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the  Embassy  of Combodia in India.  
25. (A) Officials of the COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES for  
setting up their office.  
(B) Personnel of the delegation holding diplomatic status (other  than Indian nationals and 
persons permanently resident in India  Employed by the said Commission).  
26. COMMON EDUCATIONAL MEDIA CENTRE FOR ASIA.  
Common Educational Media Centre on the purchase made for  official use and by its 
President and Vice -President for personal use.  
27. CONGO.  
The Congolese Embassy and their Diplomatic Officers.  
28. CROATIA.  
The Embassy of Croatia on the purchases made by its diplomats  for official as well as for 
personal use of their officials.  
29. CUBA.  
The Embassy of the Republic of Cuba in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the  Republic of Cuba in India.  
30. CYPRUS.  
The Cyprus High Commission (for sales intended for official  use).  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Cyprus  High Commission (for sales 
intended for their personal use).  
31. CZECH REPUBLIC.  
The Embassy of Czech Republic on the purchases made by its  diplomats for  
official as well as for personal use of their officials.  
32. DENMARK.  
The Royal Danish Embassy in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Roya l Danish Embassy in India.  
33. DOMINICA.  
The High Commission for the Commonwealth of Dominica (for its  official  purchases).  
The Diplomatic Officials of the High Commission for the  Commonwealth of Dominica (for 
their personal use).  
  70 
 Serial  
Number  List of  organisations which can claim refund  
34. EGYPT.  
The Embassy of the Arab Republic of Egypt in India.  
The Diplomatic officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  of the Arab Republic of 
Egypt in India.  
35. ETHOPIA.  
The Ethopian  Embassy in India (for its official purchases).  
The Diplomatic Officers of the Ethopian Embassy in India (for  their personal purchases).  
36. FINLAND.  
The Embassy of Finland on the purchase of following items made  by its diplomats for 
official purpose.  
(1) Construction materials as well as commodities to be used  for the interior decoration and 
furnishing of building.  
(2) Commodities used in representational functions.  
(3) Motor vehicles as well as spare parts and equipment for  Motor vehicles.  
(4) Work perfo rmances concerning the premises of a mission  or office and the commodities 
referred to in items ( 1) to ( 3) or the  rental of those commodities.  
(5) Telecommunication services, energy commodities and fuel  purchased for the building of 
a mission or office.  
(6) Fuels for motor vehicles.  
37. FRANCE.  
The Embassy of France on the purchases made by its diplomats for  Official  purposes and for 
the residence of the Ambassador.  
38. GERMANY.  
The Embassy of Germany in India (for sales intended for official  use only).  
The Diplomatic Officers of the German Embassy in India (for  sales intended for personal 
use).  
39. GHANA.  
The High Commissioner for Ghana in India.  
The Diplomatic officers (including their spouses) of the High  Commissioner for Ghana in 
India.  
40. GREECE.  
The Royal Greek Embassy in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Royal  Greek Embassy in India.  
41. GUYANA.  
The High Commission for Guyana, and its Diplomatic Officers  (including their spouses).  
  71 
 Serial  
Number  List of organisations which can claim refund  
42. HUNGARY.  
H.E. The Ambassador of the Hungarian Peoples Republic in India.  
The Embassy of the Hungarian Peoples Republic in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  of the  Hungarian Peoples 
Republic in India.  
43. INDONESIA.  
The Embassy of Indonesia on all its official purchases and the  purchases made by its officials 
for their personal use.  
44. INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT IN INDIA  
and Employees, other than  those recruited locally of the International  Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development in India.  
45. INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR GENETIC ENGINEERING AND  BIOTECHNOLOGY, 
(for all its official purchases).  
46. (A) Office of the INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (for sales  intended for official 
use).  
(B) Dr. Nagendra Singh an elected judge of the International  Court of Justice, (for sales 
intended for his personal use).  
47. INTERNATIONAL LABOUR OFFICE.  
48. IRAN.  
The Embassy of Iran in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  of Iran in India.  
49. IRAQ.  
H.E. the Ambassador of the Republic of Iraq in India.  
The Embassy of Republic of Iraq in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  of Iraq in India . 
50. IRELAND.  
The Embassy of Ireland in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  of Ireland in India.  
51. ISRAEL.  
The Embassy of Israel on purchases made by its diplomats for  official as well as for personal 
use. 
52. ITALY.  
The Embassy of Italy on the purchases made by its diplomats for  official use as well as for 
personal use of their officials.  
53. JAPAN.  
The Embassy of Japan and its Diplomatic Officers.  
  72 
 Serial  
Number  List of organisations which can claim refund  
54. JORDAN.  
The Embassy of Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  of the Hashemite Kingdom 
of Jordan in India.  
55. KAZAKHSTAN.  
The Embassy of Kazakhstan on the purchases made by its diplomats  for official as well as for 
personal use.  
56. KENYA.  
For official use as well as Diplomatic Officers (including their  spouses) of the Kenya High 
Commission in India.  
57. KOREA.  
H.E. the Ambassador of Korea.  
The Embassy of the Republic of Korea . 
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  Republic of Korea.  
58. KOREA (D.P.R.).  
H.E. The Ambassador of the Democratic Peoples Republic of Korea.  
The Embassy of the Democratic People Republic of Korea.  
The Diplomatic Officers (inc luding their spouses) of the Embassy  of the  Democratic Peoples 
Republic of Korea.  
59. KUWAIT.  
H.E. the Ambassador of the State of Kuwait in India.  
The Embassy of the State of Kuwait in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers of the Embassy of the State of Kuwait in India.  
60. KYRGHYSTAN.  
The Embassy of Kyrghystan on the purchases made by its diplomats  for official as well as for 
personal use.  
61. LAOS.  
The Royal Embassy of Laos in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of Royal  Embassy of Laos in India.  
62. LEAGUE OF ARAB STATES MISSION.  
League of Arab States Mission.  
Chief Representative, Deputy Chief Representative, their spouses  and minor  children of the 
league of Arab States Mission.  
63. LEBANON.  
H.E. the Ambassador of Lebanon in India.  
The Embassy of Lebanon in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  of Lebanon.  
  73 
 Serial  
Number  List of organisations which can claim refund  
64. LIBERIA.  
The Embassy of Liberia on all its official purchases as well as  purchases made by its officials 
for their personal use.  
65. LIBYA.  
The Embassy of the Libyan Arab Republic in India (for sales  intended for official use).  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  of the Libyan Arab 
Republic in India (for sales intended for their  personal use).  
66. LUXEMBOURG.  
The Embassy of Grand Duchy of Luxembourg in respect of goods  purchased by them for 
official use only.  
67. MALAYSIA.  
The High Commissioner for Malaysia in India.  
The Diplomatic Officer (including their spouses) of the High  Commissioner for Malaysia in 
India.  
68. MAURITIUS.  
The High Commission of Mauritius and its Diplomatic Officers.  
69. MEXICO.  
The Embassy of Mexico in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Em bassy  of Mexico in India.  
70. MONGOLIA.  
H.E. the Ambassador of the Mongolian Peoples Republic in India.  
The Embassy of the Mongolian Peoples Republic in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers of the Embassy of the Mongolian Peoples  Republic in India.  
71. MOROCCO  
The Embassy of Morocco on the purchases made by its diplomats  for official as well as 
personal use.  
72. MOZAMBIQUE.  
High Commission of the Republic of Mozambique in respect of  goods purchased by them for 
official use only.  
73. MYANMAR.  
The Embassy of th e Republic of the Myanmar in India. (Restricted  to sale of goods from 
bonded stocks).  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  of the Union of Myanmar 
in India. (sale of petrol only).  
74. NAMIBIA.  
The Namibian High Commission on the purchase made by its  diplomats for  official as well 
as for personal use.  
  74 
 Serial  
Number  List of organisations which can claim refund  
75. NEPAL.  
The Royal Nepalese Embassy in India, and   
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Royal  Nepalese Embassy in India.  
76. NETHERLANDS.  
The Royal Netherlands Embassy in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Royal  Netherlands  Embassy in 
India.  
77. NICARAGUA.  
The Embassy of Nicaragua on all its official purchases as well  as the purchases made by its 
officials for their personal use.  
78. NIGERIA.  
H.E. the High Commission of the Federal Republic of Nigeria in  India.  
The High Commission for the Federal Republic of Nigeria.  
The Diplomatic Officers of the High Commission for  the Federal  Republic of  Nigeria in 
India.  
79. NORWAY.  
H.E. the Norwegian Ambassador in India.  
The Royal Norwegian Embassy in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Royal  Norwegian  Embassy in India.  
80. OMAN.  
The Embassy of Sulta nate of Oman and its Diplomatic Officers.  
81. PAKISTAN.  
The Embassy of Pakistan in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  of Pakistan in India.  
82. PANAMA.  
The Embassy of Panama and its Diplomatic Officers in respect of  purchases made from 
bonded stores only.  
83. PHILIPPINES.  
H.E. the Ambassador of the Philippines in India.  
The Embassy of Philippines in India, and   
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  of the  Philippines in India.  
84. PLO.  
The Embassy of the Palestine Liberation Organisation (for sales  intended for official use).  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  of the Palestine Liberation 
Organisation (for sales intended for  personal use).  
85. POLAND.  
The Embassy of the Polish Peoples Republic and their Diplomatic  Officers.  
  75 
 Serial  
Number  List of organisations which can claim refund  
86. PORTUGAL.  
The Embassy of Portugal in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  of Portugal in India (for 
sales intended for their personal use).  
87. QATAR.  
The Embassy of the State of Qatar.  
The Diplomatic Officers of the Embassy of the State of Qatar,  and their spouses for sales 
intended for their personal use.  
88. ROMANIA.  
H.E. the Ambassador of the Socialist Republic of Romania in  India.  
The Embassy of the Socialist Republic of Romania in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  of the Socialist Republic 
of Romania.  
89. RUSSIA.  
The Embassy of the Russian Federation on the purchases made by  the Diplomats for official 
and personal use.  
90. RWANDA.  
The Embassy of Republic of Rwanda on the purchases made by its  diplomatic and 
administrative/technical personnel for official as well  as personal use.  
91. SAHRAWI ARAB DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC.  
The Embassy of Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic.  
The Diplomatic Officers of the Embassy of Sahrawi Arab  Democratic Republic.  
92. SAUDI ARABIA.  
H.E. the Ambassador of Saudi Arabia in India.  
The Embassy of Saudi Arabia in  India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  of Saudi Arabia in India.  
93. SENEGAL.  
The Embassy of Republic of the Senegal in India (for sales  intended for the official use of the 
Embassy).  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) the Embassy of  the Republic of Senegal in 
India (for sales intended for personal use).  
94. SINGAPORE.  
The High Commission for Singapore.  
Their Diplomatic Officers.  
95. SLOVAK REPUBLIC.  
The Embassy of Slovak Republic on the purchases made b y its diplomats for  official as well 
as for personal use of their officials.  
  76 
 Serial  
Number  List of organisations which can claim refund  
96. SOMALIA.  
The Embassy of Somalia in India (for sales intended for official  use).  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  of the Somali in India (for 
sales intended for their personal use).  
97. SOUTH AFRICA.  
The Embassy of South Africa on the purchases made by its  diplomats for official as well as 
for personal use.  
98. SOUTH WEST AFR ICAN PEOPLES ORGANISATION (SWAPO).  
The Embassy of South West African Peoples Organi sation (SWAPO) – on all its official 
purchases and the purchases made by its officials  for their personal use.  
99. SPAIN.  
H.E. the Ambassador of Spain in India.  
The Embassy  of Spain in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers of the Embassy of Spain in India.  
100. SRI LANKA.  
The High Commission for the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri  Lanka for  purchases 
made for its official use as well as by diplomats.  
101. SUDAN.  
The Embassy  of Democratic Republic of Sudan in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  of the  Democratic 
Republic of Sudan in India.  
(Exemption extended to purchases from places other than bonded  stocks).  
102.  SURINAME.  
The Embassy of Republic of Suriname on the purchases made for  official use as well as 
personal use of the diplomats.  
103. SWEDEN.  
The Royal Swedish Embassy in India (for its official purchases).  
The Diplomatic Officers of the Royal Swedish Embassy in India  (for their  personal use).  
104. SWITZERLAND.  
The Embassy of Switzerland on the purchases made by its  diplomats for official as well as 
for personal use of their officials.  
105. SYRIA.  
The Embassy of the Syrian Arab Republic and their Diplomatic  Officers.  
106. THAI LAND.  
The Royal Thai Embassy in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Royal  Thai Embassy in India.  
  77 
 Serial  
Number  List of organisations which can claim refund  
107. TRINIDAD.  
The High Commission for Trinidad and Tobago in India.  
The members of the Diplomatic Staff of the said High Commission.  
(Exemption restricted to ( i) sale intended for the official use  of the Commission and ( ii) sale 
intended for personal use).  
108. TUNISIA.  
The Embassy of Tunisia on the purchases made by its  Diplomats  for official as well as 
personal use.  
109. TURKEY.  
The Embassy of Turkey on the purchases made by its diplomats for  official as well as for 
personal use.  
110. U.A.E.  
The Embassy of the United Arab Emirates, for its official use.  
The Diplomatic  Officers of the Embassy of the United Arab  Emirates, and their spouses for 
sales intended for their personal use.  
111. UGANDA.  
The High Commission for the Republic of Uganda in India.  
The Diplomatic officers (including their spouses) of the High  Commissi on for the Republic 
of Uganda in India.  
112. UKRAINE.  
The Embassy of Ukraine on the purchases made by its diplomats  for official as well as for 
personal use.  
113. UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME.  
114. The Regional Office for India, Nepal, Ceylon, Iran, Afghanistan  and Pakistan of THE 
UNITED NATIONS ECONOMIC COMMISSION FOR ASIA and Far  East (Division of 
Social Affairs).  
115. UNITED NATIONS EDUCATION SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANISATION.  
116. UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGAN ISATION  
RESEARCH CENTRE ON SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC  DEVELOPMENT IN SOUTHERN 
ASIA.  
117. UNITED NATIONS FOOD AND AGRICULTURAL ORGANISATION.  
118. UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSION FOR REFUGEES.  
(Exemption for official use only).  
119. UNITED NATIONS INFORMATION CENTRE.  
120. UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CHILDREN'S EMERGENCY FUND.  
121. UNITED NATIONS MILITARY OBSERVERS GROUP IN INDIA AND  PAKISTAN.  
122. UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR POPULATION STUDIES.  
  78 
 Serial  
Number  List of organisations which can claim refund  
123. (A) The Regional Office of the UNITED NATIONS WORLD HEALTH  ORGANISATION 
for South East Asia, (for sales intended for official  use).  
(B) The Regional Director (including his spouses) of the United  Nations World Health 
Organisation for South East Asia, (for sales  intended for personal use).  
124. UNITED STATES AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT MISSION.  
United States Agency for International Development Mission and  Employees other than the 
locally recruited staff of the United States  Agency for Interna tional Development Mission.  
125. URUGUAY.  
H.E. the Ambassador of the Oriental Republic of Uruguay in  India.  
The Embassy of the Oriental Republic of Uruguay in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the  Oriental Republic of Uruguay in 
India.  
126. U.S.A.  
The Embassy of the U.S.A. in India.  
H.E. the Ambassador of the U.S.A. in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses and dependents)  of the Embassy of U.S.A. 
in India.  
127. RUSSIAN FEDERATION.  
H.E. the Ambassador of the Russian Federation in India.  
The Embassy of the Russian Federation in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers of the Embassy of Russian Federation in  India.  
128. UZBEKISTAN.  
The Embassy of Republic of Uzbekistan on the purchases made by  its diplomats for official  
as well as for personal use.  
129. VIETNAM (DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC).  
H.E. the Ambassador of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam in  India.  
The Embassy of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  of the Democratic 
Republic of Vietnam in India.  
130. VIETNAM (REPUBLIC).  
The Counsel General of the Republic of Vietnam in India.  
The Consulate General of the Republic of Vietnam in India.  
The Consular Officer of the Consulate General of the Repub lic of  Vietnam in India.  
131. VENEZUELA.  
The Embassy of Venezuela in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  of Venezuela in India.  
  79 
 Serial  
Number  List of organisations which can claim refund  
132. YEMEN.  
The Embassy of the Peoples Democratic Republic of Yemen in  India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  of Peoples Democratic 
Republic of Yemen in India.  
133. YUGOSLAVIA.  
The Embassy of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslav ia in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  of Federal Republic of 
Yugoslavia in India.  
134. ZAIRE.  
H.E. the Ambassador of the Republic of Zaire in India.  
The Embassy of the Republic of Zaire in India.  
The Diplomatic Officers (including their spouses) of the Embassy  of the Republic of Zaire in 
India (exemption restricted to goods from  bonded stores only).  
135. ZAMBIA.  
The High Commission of Zambia in India (for sales intended for  official use).  
The Diplomatic Officers  (including their spouses) of the Zambian  High Commission in India 
(for sales intended for personal use),  (exemption is restricted to goods manufactured or 
produced in India and  not imported from out of India).  
136. ZIMBABWE.  
The Zimbabwe High Commission for its official purchases only  upon certification of the 
Head of Mission Charged Affairs.  
––––––––  
--------------------------The Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act, 2005--------------------------
1 
 THE COASTAL AQUACUL TURE AUTHORITY ACT, 2005  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTION S 
___________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER  II 
GENERAL POWERS OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  
3. Power of Central Government to take measure s to protect environment.  
 
CHAPTER III 
THE COASTAL AQUACULTURE AUTHORITY  
4. Establishment of Authority and appointment of Chairperson and members.  
5. Disqualifications for appointment as member.  
6. Eligibility of member for reappointment.  
7. Meetings of Authority.  
8. Vacancy in Authority not to invalidate proceeding.  
9. Appointment of officers, consultants and other employees of Authority.  
10. Authentication of orders and other instruments of Authority.  
 
CHAPTER IV 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF AUTHORITY  
11. Functions of Authority.  
12. Power to enter.  
13. Registration for coastal aquaculture.  
14. Punishment for carrying on coastal aquaculture without registration.  
15. Cognizance of offence.  
 
CHAPTER V 
FINANACE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
16. Payment to Authority.  
17. Fund of Authority.   
18. Budget.  
19. Annual report.  
20. Accounts and audit.  
 
  2 
 CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS  
21. Chairperson and other members, officers and other employees of Authority, etc., to be public 
servants.  
22. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
23. Power to remove difficulties.  
24. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
25. Power of Authority to make regulations.  
26. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
27. Validation.  
  3 
 THE COASTAL A QUACUL TURE AUTHORITY ACT, 2005  
ACT NO. 24 OF 2005  
[23rd June, 2005.]  
An Act to provide for the establishment of a Coastal Aquaculture Authority for regulating the 
activities connected with coastal aquaculture in the coastal areas and for matters connected 
therewith or incident al thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -sixth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Coastal A quaculture Authority 
Act, 2005.  
(2) Provisions of section 27 shall come i nto force at once and the remaining provisions of this Act 
shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in  the Official 
Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Authority ” means the Coastal Aquaculture Authority established unde r sub -section ( 1) of 
section 4;  
(b) “Chairperson ” means th e Chairperson of the Authority;  
(c) “coastal aquaculture ” means culturing, under controlled conditions in ponds, pens, enclosures 
or otherwise, in coastal areas, of shrimp, prawn, fish or any other aquatic life in saline or brackish 
water; but does not i nclude fresh water aquaculture;  
(d) “coastal area ” means the area declared as the Coastal Regulation Zone, for the time being, in 
the notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Environment and Forests (Department 
of Environment, Forests and Wildlife) No. S.O. 114(E), dated the 19th Februar y, 1991 and includes 
such other area as the Central Government may, by notification in  the Official Gazette, specify;  
(e) “member” means the member of the Authority appointed under sub -section ( 3) of section 4 
and includes the Chairp erson and the member -secretary;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “regulations ” means the regulations made b y the Authority under this Act.  
(2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Environment (Protection) 
Act, 1986 (29 of 1986) shall have the meanings respectivel y assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II 
GENERAL POWERS OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  
3. Power of Central Government to take measure s to protect environment .—The Central 
Government shall take all such measures  as it deems necessary or expedient for regulation of coastal 
aquaculture by prescribing guidelines, to ensure that coastal aqu aculture does not cause any det riment to 
the coastal environment and the concept of responsible coastal aquaculture contained in such guidelines 
shall be followed in regulating the coastal aquaculture activities to protect the livelihood of various 
sections of the peop le living in the coastal areas.  
CHAPTER  III 
THE COASTAL AQUACULTURE AUTHORITY  
4. Establishment of Authority and appo intment of Chairperson and members .—(1) With effect 
from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this  
behalf, there shall be established for the purposes of this Act an Authority to be called the  Coastal  
Aquaculture Authority.  
                                                           
1.16th December, 2005, ss. 2 to 26 (both inclusive), vide notification No. S.O. 1771(E), dated 16th December, 2005, see Gazette  
of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii).  4 
 (2) The head office of the Authority shall be at such place as the  Central Government may decide.  
(3) The Authority shall consist of the following members who shall be appointed by t he Central 
Government, namely: — 
(a) the Chairperson who is, or has been, a  Judge of a High Court;  
(b) one member who is an expert in th e field of coastal aquaculture;  
(c) one member who is an expert in the field of coastal ecology nominated by the Department of 
Ocean Develop ment of the Central Government;  
(d) one member who is an expert in the field of environment protection or pollution control 
nominated by the Ministry of Environment and For ests of the Central Government;  
(e) one member to represent the Ministry of Agricul ture of the Central G overnment;  
(f) one member to represent the Ministry of Comm erce of the Central Government;  
(g) four members to represent the co astal States on rotation basis;  
(h) one member -secretary.  
(4) The term of office of the Chairperson and every oth er member shall be three years.  
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
members shal l be such as may be prescribed.  
5. Disqualifications for appointment as member .—A person shall be disqualified for bei ng 
appointed  as a member if he — 
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which, in the opinion of the 
Central Governmen t, involves moral turpitude; or  
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so de clared by a competent court; or  
(d) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the Government or a Corporation owned 
or controlled by the Government; or  
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, such financial or other interest in the Authority 
as is l ikely to affect prejudicially the discharge by hi m of his functions as a member.  
6. Eligibility of member for reappointment .—Subject to sub -section ( 5) of section 4, any person 
ceasing to be a member shall be eligible for reappointment as such member for n ot more than two 
consecutive terms.  
7. Meetings of Authority .—(1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe 
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum 
thereat) as may be specified by regu lations.  
(2) If for any reason the Chairperson is unable to attend any meeting of the Authority any other 
member chosen by the members present at the meetin g shall preside at the meeting.  
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided by a majority 
of votes of the members present and voting and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson or in 
his absence the person presiding, shall have and exe rcise a second or casting vote.  
8. Vacancy in Aut hority not to invalidate proceeding .—No act or proceeding of the Authority shall 
be invalidated merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the co nstitution of, the Authority; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting a s a membe r of the Authority; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure adopted by the Authority not af fecting the merits of the case.  5 
 9. Appointment of officers, consultants and other employees of Authority .—(1) For the purposes 
of discharging its functions, the Aut hority shall appoint such number of officers and other employees as it 
may consider necessary on such terms and conditions as may b e specified by the regulations.  
(2) The Authority may appoint, from time to time, any person as adviser or consultant as it m ay 
consider necessary on such terms and conditions as may b e specified by the regulations.  
10. Authentication of orders and other instruments of Authority .—All orders, decisions and other 
instruments of the Authority shall be authenticated under the signat ure of the Chairperson or any other 
member or any officer of the Authority authorised by the Chairperson in this behalf.  
CHAPTER IV 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF AUTHORITY  
11. Functions of Authority .—(1) Subject to any guidelines issued by the Central Government  under 
section 3, the Authority shall exercise the following powers and perform th e following functions, 
namely:— 
(a) to make regulations for the construction and operation of aquaculture farms within the coastal 
areas;  
(b) to inspect coastal aquaculture farms with a view to ascertaining their environmental impac t 
caused by co astal aquaculture;  
(c) to reg ister co astal aquaculture farms;  
(d) to order removal or demolition of any coastal aquaculture farms which is causing polluti on 
after hearin g the occupier of the farm; and  
(e) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed.  
(2) Where the Authority orders removal or demolition of any coastal aquaculture farm under clause 
(d) of sub -section ( 1), the workers of the said farm shall be paid such compensation as may be settled 
between the workers and the management through an authority consisting of one person only to be 
appointed by the Authority and such authority may exercise such powers of a District Magistrate for such  
purpo se, as may be prescribed.  
12. Power to enter .—Subject to any rule made in this behalf, any person generally or specially 
authorised by the Authority in this behalf, may, wherever it is necessary to do so for any purposes of this 
Act, at all reasonable time s, enter on any coastal aquaculture la nd, pond, pen or enclosure and — 
(a) make any inspection, survey, mea surement, valuation or inquiry;  
(b) remove or demolish any structure therein; and  
(c) do such other acts or things as may be prescribed:  
Provided that  no such person shall enter on any coastal aquaculture land, pond, pen or enclosure 
without giving the occupier of such aquaculture land, pond, pen or enclosure at least twenty -four hours' 
notice in wri ting of his intention to do so.  
13. Registration for c oastal aquaculture .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, no person 
shall carry on, or cause to be carried on, coastal aquaculture in coastal area or traditional coastal 
aquaculture in the traditional coastal aquaculture farm which lies within th e Coastal Regulation Zone 
referred to in sub -section ( 9) and is not used for coastal aquaculture purposes on the appointed day unless 
he has registered his farm with the Authority under sub -section ( 5) or in pursuance of sub -section ( 9), as 
the case may be . 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a person engaged in coastal aquaculture, 
immediately before the appointed day, may continue to ca rry on such activity without such registration 
for a period of three months from that day and if h e makes an application for such registration under           
sub-section ( 4) within the said period of three months, till the communication to him of the disposing of 
such application by the Authority.  
 6 
 (3) The registration made under sub -section ( 5) or in  pursuance of sub -section ( 9)— 
(a) shall be va lid for a period of five years;  
(b) may be renewed from time  to time for a like period; and  
(c) shall be in such form and shall be subject to such conditions as may b e specified by the 
regulations.  
(4) A person  who intends to carry on coastal aquaculture shall make an application for registration of 
his farm before the Authority in such form accompanied with such fees as may be prescribed for the 
purpose of registration under sub -section ( 5). 
(5) On receipt of a n application for registration of a farm under sub -section ( 4), the Authority shall 
consider the application in the prescribed manner and after considering the application either register the 
farm or reject the application:  
Provided that the Authority shal l not reject the application without recording  the reason for such 
rejection.  
(6) The Authority shall, after registering a farm under sub -section ( 5), issue a certificate of 
registration in the prescribed form to the person who has made the app lication for  such registration.  
(7) In the case of a farm comprising more than two hectares of water spread area, no application for 
registration to commence any activity connected with coastal aquaculture shall be considered under     
sub-section ( 5) unless the Authority, after making such inquiry as it thinks fit, is satisfied that registration 
of such farm shall not be detrimental to the coastal environment.  
(8) Notwithstanding anyth ing contained in this section, — 
(a) no coastal aquaculture shall be carried on within two hundred m etres from High Tide Lines; 
and 
(b) no coastal aquaculture shall be carried on in creeks, rivers and backwaters within the Coastal 
Regulation Zone declared for the time being under the Environment (Protection) Act,                      
1986 (29 of 1986):  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply in the case of a coastal aquaculture farm which is 
in existence on the appointed day and to the non -commercial and experimental coastal aquaculture farms 
operated or proposed to be op erated by any research institute of the Governme nt or funded by the 
Government:  
Provided further that the Authority may, for the purposes of providing exemption under the first 
proviso, review from time to time the existence and activities of the coastal a quaculture farms and the 
provisions of this section shall apply on coastal aquacultur e farms in view of such review.  
Explanation .— For the purposes of this sub -section, “High Tide Line ” means the line on the land up 
to which the highest water line reaches during the spring tide.  
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, any traditional coastal aquaculture farm which 
lies within the Coastal Regulation Zone declared by the notification of the Government of India in the 
Ministry of Environment an d Forest (Department of Environment, Forests and Wildlife) No.S.O.114(E), 
dated the 19th February, 1991 and is not used for coastal aquaculture purposes on the appoi nted day shall 
be register ed under sub -section ( 5) by producing before the Authority, by the person who is the owner of 
such farm, the documentary proof of such ownership failing which such farm shall not be registered under 
sub-section ( 5) and if such person after such registration does not utilise such farm, within one year, for 
coastal aqua culture purposes, the registration shall  be cancelled by the Authority.  
(10) A person, who intends to renew the registration of a farm made under sub -section ( 5) or in 
pursuance of sub -section ( 9), may make an application within two months before the expir y of such 
registration to the Authority in the prescribed form accompanied with the prescribed fees and the 
Authority shall,  after receiving such application, renew the registration and for such purpose make an 
entry with its seal on the registration certi ficate relating to such form issued under sub -section ( 6). 7 
 (11) The Authority may refuse to renew the registration of a farm under sub -section ( 10) if the 
Authority is satisfied that the person to whom such registration is made has failed to utilise such farm for 
coastal aquaculture purposes or without any reasonable cause has violated any provision of this Act or the 
rules or regulations made there under or any direction or order made by the Author ity in pursuance of 
section 11:  
Provided that such refusal  to renew the registration shall not be made without providing such person  
an opportunity of being heard.  
Explanation 1 .—For the purposes of this section, “appointed day ” means the date of establishment of 
the Authority.  
Explanation 2 .—For the removal of d oubts, it is hereby declared that the exp ression “to renew the 
registration ” used in sub -sections ( 10) and ( 11) shall be construed to include furth er renewal of the 
registration.  
14. Punishment for carrying on coastal aquaculture without registration .—If any person carries 
on coastal aquaculture or traditional coastal aquaculture or causes the coastal aquaculture or traditional 
coastal aquaculture to be carried on in contravention of sub -section ( 1) of section 13, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment f or a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend 
to one lakh rupees, or with both.  
15. Cognizance of offence .—No court shall take cognizance of an offence under section 14 without a 
written complaint filed by an officer of the Author ity authorised in this behalf by it.  
CHAPTER  V 
FINANACE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
16. Payment to Authority .—The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament, by law, in this behalf, pay to the Authority in each financial year such sums as m ay be 
considered necessary for the performance of functions o f the Authority under this Act.  
17. Fund of Authority .—(1) The Authority shall have its own fund  and all sums which may, from 
time to time, be paid to it by the Central Government and all the rec eipts of the Authority (including any 
sum which any State Government or any other authority or person may hand over to the Authority) shall 
be credited to the fund and all payments by the Aut hority shall be made therefrom.  
(2) All moneys belonging to the f und shall be deposited in such banks or invested in such manner as 
may, subject to the approval of the Central Governmen t, be decided by the Authority.  
(3) The Authority may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing its functions under this Act, 
and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable ou t of the fund of the Authority.  
18. Budget .—The Authority shall prepare, in such form and at such time each year as may be 
prescribed, a budget, in respect of the financial year next ensuing, showing the estimated receipts and 
expenditure and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Governm ent. 
19. Annual report .—The Authority shall prepare once in every calendar year, in such form and at 
such time as may be prescribed an annual report giving a tru e and full account of its activities during the 
previous year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government and that Government shall 
cause the same to be laid b efore both House s of Parliament.  
20. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Authority sh all cause to be maintained such books of account and 
other books in relation to its accounts in such form and in such manner as may, in consultation with the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India, be prescribed.  
(2) The Authority shall, as soon as may b e, after closing its annual accounts, prepare a statement of 
accounts in such form, and forward the same to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India by such 
date, as the Central Government may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General o f India, 
determine.  
(3) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India at 
such times and i n such manner as he thinks fit.  8 
 (4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report th ereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid be fore both 
Houses of Parliament.  
CHAPTER  VI 
MISCELLANEOUS  
21. Chairperson and other members, officers and other employees of Authority, etc., to be 
public servants .—The Chairperson and other members and the officers and other employees of the 
Authority and the authority appointed by the Authority sha ll be deemed to be public servants within the 
meaning of section 21 of the India Penal Cod e (45 of 1860).  
22. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or the Authority  or the Chairperson and other members of the 
Authority or the authority appointed by the Authority or any person authorised by the Authority or any 
officer authorised by the Chairperson for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be don e in 
pursuance of this act or any rule or regul ation or order made thereunder.  
23. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, ma ke such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedie nt for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years from the date o f 
the comme ncement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid b efore each 
House of Parliament.  
24. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the guidelines under section 3;  
(b) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
members under sub -section ( 5) of section 4;  
(c) the other functions of the Authority under clause ( e) of sub-section ( 1) of section 11;  
(d) the powers of a Dist rict Magistrate to be exercised by the authority under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 11;  
(e) the rules subject to which any person referred to in section 12 may enter upon any coastal 
aquaculture land, pond, pen o r enclosure under that section;  
(f) the other acts or things under clause ( c) of section 12;  
(g) the form of application and the fees to be accompanied therewith under sub -section ( 4) of 
section 13;  
(h) the manner of considering application under  sub-section ( 5) of section 13;  
(i) the form of certificate of registration under  sub-section ( 6) of section 13;  
(j) the form of application and the fees to be accompanied therewith under sub -section ( 10) of 
section 13;  
(k) the form and time of pre paring budget under section 18;  
(l) the form an d time of preparing annual report under section 19;  9 
 (m) the books of account and other books to be maintained in relation to the accounts of the 
Authority and the form and manner of maintaining such books of account and other books under sub -
section ( 1) of section 20;  
(n) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
25. Power of Authority to make regulations .—(1) The Authority may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder to carr y out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such regulations 
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the times and places  of the meetings of the Authority and the rules of procedure to be 
observed in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including quorum thereat) under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 7;  
(b) the terms and conditions of appointment of the officers  and other employees under                     
sub-section (1) section 9;  
(c) the terms and conditions of appointment of adviser or consultant unde r sub -section ( 2) of 
section 9;  
(d) for the construction and operation of coastal aquaculture farms within the coastal areas under 
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 11;  
(e) the form and conditions of registration under clause ( c) of sub -sectio n (3) of section 13;  
(f) generally for better  regulat ion of the coastal aquaculture.  
26. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done  under 
that rule or regulation.  
27. Validation .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( v) of sub -section ( 2) of section 3 
of the Environment (Protectio n) Act, 1986 (29 of 1986) or clause ( d) of sub -rule ( 3) of rule 5 of the 
Environment (Pr otection) Rules, 1986, in the notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests (Department of Environment, Forests and Wildlife) No. S.O.114(E), dated the 
19th February, 1991 (hereafter referred to in this section as the said notification), in paragraph 2, after 
sub-paragraph ( xiii), the following sub -paragraph shall be inserted and shall always be deemed to have 
been inserted with effe ct from the 19th day of February, 1991, namely: — 
“(xiv) nothing contained in this paragraph shall apply to coastal aquaculture. ”. 
(2) The said notification shall have and shall be deemed always to have effect for all purposes as if 
the foregoing provisions  of this section had been in force at all material times and accordingly 
notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other 
authority, no coastal aquaculture carried on or undertaken or purporting to have be en carried on or 
undertaken shall deemed to be in contravention of the said notification and shall be deemed to be and to 
have always been for all purposes in accordance with law, as if the foregoing provisions of this section 
had been in force at all mate rial times and notwithstanding anything as aforesaid and without prejudice to 
the generality of the foregoing provisions, no suit or other proceeding shall be maintained or continued in 
any court for the enforcement of any direction given by any court of a ny decree or order directing the 
removal or closure of any coastal aquaculture farm's activity or demolition of any structure connected 
thereunder which would not have been so required to be removed, closed or demolished if the foregoing 
provisions of this  section had been in force at all material times.  
--------------------------The Control of National Highways (Land and Traffic) Act, 2002--------------------------
1 
 THE CONTROL OF NATIONAL  HIGHWAYS (LAND AND TRAFFIC)  
ACT, 2002  
__________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
HIGHWAY S ADMINISTRATION  AND TRIBUNALS, ETC  
3. Establishment of Highway Administrations.  
4. Powers and functions of Highway Administration.  
5. Establishment of Tribunals.  
6. [Omitted .] 
7. [Omitted .] 
8. [Omitted .] 
9. [Omitted .] 
10. [Omitted .] 
11. [Omitted .] 
12. [Omitted .] 
13. [Omitted .] 
14. Jurisdiction , powers and authority of Tribunal.  
15. Bar of jurisdiction.  
16. Procedure and powers of Tribunal.  
17. Conditions as to making of interim order.  
18. Execution of orders of Tribunal.  
19. Limitation.  
20. Appointment of officers to act on behalf of Highway Administration.  
21. Delegation of powers.  
22. Power to tr ansfer jurisdiction.  
 
CHAPTER III  
PREVENTION OF UNAUTHORISED OCCUPATION OF HIGHWAY LAND AND THEIR REMOVAL  
23. Highway land to be deemed as property of Central Government.  
24. Prevention of occupation of highway land.  
25. Grant of lease or licence of highway land for t emporary use.  
26. Removal of unauthorised occupation.  
27. Recovery of cost of removal of unauthorised occupation and fine imposed.   2 
 CHAPTER IV  
CONTR OL OF ACCESS TO THE NATIONAL HIGHWAYS  
SECTIONS  
28. Right of access.  
29. Procedure for permission to access to Highway.  
30. Regulation or diversion of access, etc.  
 
CHAPTER V  
REGULATION OF DIFFERENT TYPES OF TRAFFIC ON NATIONAL HIGHWAYS  
31. Highway Administration to regulate traffic when Highway deemed unsafe.  
32. Prohibition of use of heavy vehicles on certain Highways.  
33. Temporary clos ure of traffic on Highway.  
34. Permanent closure of Highway.  
35. Power to restrict the use of vehicles.  
36. Prevention and repair of damage to Highway.  
37. Prohibition to leave vehicles or animals in dangerous position.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
REGULATION OF CONSTRUCTION ON HIGHWAY LA ND FOR PUBLIC UTILITIES, DRAINS, ETC.  
38. Construction on highway land.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
OFFENCE AND PENALTY  
39. Offence and penalty.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
40. Right of appellant to take assistance of legal practitioner.  
41. Finality of orders.  
42. Duty of village officials.  
43. Conduct of inquiry.  
44. Officers of Highways Administration to be public servant.  
45. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
46. Offences by companies.  
47. Procedure for service of notices,  etc. 
48. Act to have overriding effect.  
49. Power to remove difficulties.  
50. Power to make rules.  
  3 
 THE CONTROL OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS (LAND AND TRAFFIC) ACT, 2002  
ACT NO. 13 OF 2003  
[14th January , 2003.]  
An Act to provide for control of land within the National Highways, right of way and traffic 
moving on the National Highways and also for removal of u nauthorised occupation thereon.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -third Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Control of National  
Highway s (Land and Traffic) Act, 2002.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different pro visions of this Act.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ”, in relation to a Tribunal, means the date on which such Tribunal is 
established under sub -section ( 1) of section 5;  
(b) “building ” means any work of construction done in any manner by use of any material and 
includes a farm building for agricultural purposes, plinth, doorstep, wall, drain, advertisement board 
and other t hings fixed with such building;  
(c) “construct ”, with its gramma tical variations, in relation to a building, means to construct, 
reconstruct, erect, re -erect, extend or  alter structurally a building;  
(d) “cost of land ” means the market value of the land as determined by the competent authority of 
the State Government o r the Government of the Union territory appointed for such det ermination, as 
the case may be;  
(e) “Highway ” means a National Highway declared as such under section 2 of the National 
Highways Act, 1956 (48 of 1956) and includes any Expressway or Express Hig hway vested in the 
Central Government, whether surfaced or  unsurfaced, and also includes — 
(i) all lands appurtenant to the Highway, whether demarcated or not, acquired for the purpose 
of the Highway or transferred for such purpose by the State Govern ment to the Central 
Government;  
(ii) all bridges, culverts, tunnels, causeways, carriageways and other structures constructed  on 
or across such Highway; and  
(iii) all trees, railings, fences, posts, paths, signs, signals, kilometre stone and other Highway 
acces sories and materials on such Highways;  
(f) “Highway Administration ” means the Highway Administration established under section 3;  
(g) “highway land ” means the land of which the Central Government is, or is deemed to be, the 
owner under sub -section ( 1) of section 23;  
(h) “land” includes benefits arising out of land and things attached to the earth or permanently 
fastened to anything attached to the earth ; 
(i) “means of access ” means any permanent means of access, whether private or public, for 
vehicles of a ny kind ; 
                                                             
1. 27th January, 2005, vide notification No. S.O. 96(E) dated  27th January, 2005, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II  
sec. 3(ii). 
 4 
 (j) “premises ” means any land or building or p art of a building and includes — 
(i) the garden, grounds and outhouses, if any, appertaining to such buil ding or part of a 
building; and  
(ii) any fittings affixed to such building or part of a building for the mor e beneficial 
enjoyment thereof;  
(k) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
1[(l) “Tribunal ” means the Airport Appellate  Tribunal referred to in  sub-section ( 1) of  
section 5. ]  
(m) “unauthorised occupation ” means any occupation of the highway land, without permission 
under this Act fo r such purpose, by a person who — 
 (i) is trespasser on the Highway; or  
(ii) for the time being is paying or is liable to pay to other person rent or any portion of the 
rent of the premises on a Highway; or  
(iii) lives in or otherwise uses any premises on a Highway; or  
(iv) is a rent -free tenant of any premises on a Highway; or   
(v) is a licensee of any premises on a Highway for its possession; or  
(vi) is liable to pay damages to the owner of any premises on a Highway for the use or 
possession of such premises;  
(n) “vehicle ” means a barrow, sledge, plough, drag and any wheeled  or tracked conveyance of 
any description capable of being used on a Highway.  
CHAPTER II  
2[HIGHWAYS  ADMINISTRATION AND TRIBUNALS, ETC .]; 
3. Establishm ent of Highway Administrations .—(1) The Central Government shall, by notific ation 
in the Official Gazette, — 
(a) establish, for the purposes of this Act, a body or authority consisting of one or more officers 
of the Central Government or the State Government to be known as Highway Administration to 
exercise powers and discharge functions conf erred on it under t his Act; and  
(b) define the limits of the Highway within which, or the length of Highway on which, a Highway 
Administration shall have jurisdiction:  
Provided that the Central Government may, in the notification issued under this sub -section or by 
any gene ral or special order, impose any condition or limitation subject to which a Highway 
Administration shall exercise powers and discharge functions conferred on it under this Act.  
(2) The Central Government may establish one or more Highway Administrations for a State or 
Union territory or for a  Highway under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Highway Administration shall exercise powers and 
discharge functions conferred on it under this Act in such manner as may be prescribed.  
4. Powers and funct ions of Highway Administration .—A Highway Administration shall exercise 
powers and discharge functions throughout its jurisdiction specified under this Act subject to such 
conditions or limitations as may be imposed by the notification  issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 
and by any general or special order made in this behalf by the Central Government.  
  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017  s. 167 for clause ( l) (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017)  
2. Subs. by s. 167, ibid.,  for the heading (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  5 
 5. Establishment of Tribunals .—1[(1) The Airport Appellate Tribunal established under section 28 -I 
of the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994  (55 of 1994)  shall, on and from the commencement of Part 
XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , be the Tribunal for the purposes of this Act and 
the said Tribunal shall exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority confer red on it by or under this 
Act.]  
(2) The Central Government 2[shall specify, by notif ication in the Official Gazette] , the limits of the 
Highway within which, or the length of Highway on which, the Tribunal may exercise jurisdiction for 
entertaining and deciding the appeals filed before it.  
3*    *    *   * 
14. Jurisdiction, po wers and authority of Tribunal .—A Tribunal shall exercise, on and from the 
appointed day, the jurisdiction, powers and authority to entertain appeals from the orders passed or 
actio ns (except issuance or serving of notices) taken unde r sections 26, 27, 28, 36, 37 and 38 by the 
Highway Administration or an officer authorised on its behalf, as the case may be.  
15. Bar of jurisdiction .—On and from the appointed day, no court (except the  Supreme Court and a 
High Court exercising jurisdiction under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution) or other authority, 
except the Tribunal sha ll have, or be entitled to exer cise, any jurisdiction, powers or authority in relation 
to the matters specifi ed in section 14.  
16. Pr ocedure and powers of Tribunal .—(1) The Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid 
down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), but shall be guided by the principles of natural 
justice and, subject to the other prov isions of this Act and of any rules, the Tribunal shall have powers to 
regulate its own procedure including the places at wh ich it shall have its sittings.  
(2) The appeal filed before the Tribunal under section 14 shall be dealt with by it as expeditiously  as 
possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the appeal finally within four months from the 
date of the rece ipt of the appeal.  
(3) The Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act, the same 
powers as are  vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while trying a 
suit, in respect of the followin g matters, namely :— 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any pe rson and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discove ry and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses or d ocuments;  
(e) reviewing its decisions;  
(f) dismissing an appeal or application for d efault or deciding it ex parte ; 
(g) setting asid e any order of dismissal of any appeal or application for default or any o rder 
passed by it ex parte ; and  
(h) any other matt er which may be prescribed.  
(4) Any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of  sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196, of the Indian Penal Code  
(45 of 1860) and the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for all the purposes of section 195 and 
Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) . 
17. Conditions  as to making of interim order .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
provision of this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, no interim order (whether by way of 
injunction or stay or in any other manner) shall be made on, or in any proceeding relating to, a n 
application or appeal unless — 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 167 for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
2. Subs. by s.167 , ibid., for “shall also specify, in the notification referred to in sub -section ( 1)” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017) . 
3. Ss. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,12 and 13  omitted by s. 167, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017)  6 
 (a) copies of such application or appeal and of all documents in support of the plea for such 
interim order are furnished to the party against whom such application is made or appeal is           
preferred; and  
(b) opportunity is given to such p arty to be h eard in the matter:  
Provided that the Tribunal may dispense with the requirements of clauses ( a) and ( b) and make an 
interim order as an exceptional measure if it is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded in writing, that it is 
necessary so to do for preven ting any loss bein g caused to the applicant or the appellant, as the case may 
be; which cannot be adequately compensated in money; but any such interim order shall, if it is not 
sooner vacated, cease to have effect on the expiry of a period of fourteen day s from the date o n which it is  
made unless the said requirements have been complied with before the expiry of that period and the 
Tribunal has continued the operation of the interim order.  
18. E xecution of orders of Tribunal .—(1) An order passed by the Tribunal under this Act shall be 
executable by the Tribunal as a decree of a civil court, and for this purpose, the Tribunal shall have all  the 
powers of the civil court.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Tribunal may transmit any order made 
by it to the civil court having local jurisdiction and such civil court shall execute the order as if it were a 
decree made by that court.  
19. Limitation .—Every appeal to the Tribunal under this Act shall be preferred within a period of 
sixty days from the date on which the order appealed against has been made:  
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the said period of sixty days, if the 
appellant satisfies the Tribunal that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the a ppeal within the 
specified period.  
20. Appointment of officers to act on be half of Highway Administration .—(1) The Highway 
Administration may, if it thinks fit after the approval of the Central Government, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint s uch— 
(a) gazetted officer of the Central Government; or  
 (b) gazetted offi cer of the State Government; or  
(c) officer of the National Highways Authority of India constituted under section 3 of the 
National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988 (68 of 1988)  or any other authority constituted under 
any other enactment, equivalent to a gazetted officer of the Central Government or the State 
Government,  
to exercise such powers and discharge such functions of the Highway Administration as may be  specified 
in the  notification.  
(2) The Highway Administration may specify in the notification under sub -section ( 1), the limits of 
the Highway within which or the length of the Highway on which an officer appointed under that  
sub-section shall exercise the powers and discharge the fun ctions.  
21. Delegation of powers .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct that any power exercisable by it (except the powers conferred by section 50) under this Act shall, 
subject to such condit ions, if  any, as may be specifi ed in the notification, be exercisable by a State 
Government or any other authority or an officer of the State Government as may be specified in the 
notification.  
22. Power to transfer jurisdiction .—The Central Government may, at any  time, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, transfer the jurisdiction of a Highway Administration defined under clause ( b) of 
sub-section ( 1) of sect ion 3 to other Highway Administ ration , and on the transfer the Highway 
Administration shall cease to ha ve and such other Highway Administration shall, subject to the 
conditions, if any, specified in the notification, have all the powers and authority exer cisable by the 
Highway Administ ration  before such transfer of jurisdiction.  
  7 
 CHAPTER III  
PREVENTION OF UNAUTHORISED OCCUPATION OF HIGHWAY LAND AND THEIR REMOVAL  
23. Highway land to be deemed as property of Central Government .—(1) All lands forming parts  
of a Highway which vest in the Central Government or which do not already vest in the Central 
Government but have been acquired for the purpose of Highway shal l, for the purposes of this Act, and 
other Central Acts, be deemed to be the property of the Centr al Government as owner thereof.  
(2) The Highway Administration shall cause to be maintained a record in the prescribed manner in 
which the particulars of the lands, relating to the Highway, of which the Central Government is the owner 
shall be entered and the entries of the particulars of such lands in any record maintained for such purpose 
before the commen cement of this Act shall be deemed to be the entry of the particulars of such lands 
made in the first said record and accordingly the Central Governme nt shall be deemed to be the own er of 
the lands regarding which the entries have been made in such records  maintained before the 
commencement of this Act.  
(3) Any person claiming against the ownership of the Central Government referred to in  
sub-section  (2) shall make written complaint to the Highway Administration and prove his claim before it 
and the Highwa y Administration, after considering the evidence produced by such person, may correct 
such records or reject the claim.  
24. Prevention  of occupation of highway land .—(1) No person shall occupy any highway land or 
discharge any material through drain on such land without obtaining prior permission, for such purpose in 
writing, of the Highway Administration or any officer authorised by such Administration in this behalf.  
 (2) The Highway Administration or the officer authorised under sub -section ( 1) may, on an 
application made by a person in this behalf and having regard to the safety and convenience of traffic, 
grant permission to such person — 
 (i) to place a movable struc ture on the Highway in front of any building owned by him or to 
make a movable structure on support of such bu ilding and over the Highway, or  
(ii) to put up a temporary lawning or tent or other similar construction or a temporary stall or  
scaffolding on th e Highway, or  
(iii) to deposit or cause to be depos ited, building materials, goods  for sale or ot her articles on any 
Highway, or  
(iv) to make a temporary excavation for carrying out any repairs or impro vements to adjoining 
buildings,  
and such permission sh all be granted subject to the conditions and on payment of the rent and other 
charges by issuing permit in  the form as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no such permission shall be valid beyond a period of one month at a time from the date 
on which the perm ission has been granted unless it is renewed by the Highway Administration or such 
officer on an application made by such person for the renewal of the p ermission.  
(3) The permission granted under sub -section ( 2) shall specify therein — 
(i) the time up to w hich the permission is granted;  
(ii) the purpose of such permission;  
(iii) the portion of the Highway in respect of which the permission has been granted,  
and shall be accompanied with a plan or ske tch of such portion of Highway.  
(4) The person, to whom t he permit has been issued under sub -section ( 2), shall produce the permit 
for inspection whenever called upon to do so by any officer of the Highway Administration and shall, on 
the expiry of the pe rmission granted under such perm it, restore the portion of  the Highway specified in 
the permit in such condition as it was immediately before the issuing of such permit and deliver the 
possession of such portion to the Highway Administration.  8 
 (5) The Highway Administration or the officer issuing the permit under sub-section ( 2) shall maintain 
a complete record of all such permits issued, and shall also ensure in every case at the expiration of the 
period up to w hich the permission under a perm it is granted under that sub -section that the possession of 
the portion of the Highway in respect of which such permission was granted has been delivered to the 
Highway Administration.  
25. Grant of lease or licence of highway land for temporary use .—The Highway Administration 
or the officer authorised by such Administration in this behalf may, having regard to the safety and 
convenience of traffic and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed and on payment of prescribed 
rent or other charges, g rant lease or licence of highway land  to a person for temporary use:  
Provided that no such lease shall be valid for more than five years at a time from the date on which 
such lease has been granted unless renewed by the Highway Administration or such offic er. 
26. Remo val of unauthorised occupation .—(1) Where the Highway Administration or the officer 
authorised by such Administration in this behalf is of the opinion that it is necessary in the interest of 
traffic safety or conv enience to cancel any permit is sued under sub -section ( 2) of section 24, it may, after 
recording the reasons in writing for doing so, cancel such permit and, thereupon, the person to whom the 
permission was granted shall, within the period specified by an order made by the Highway 
Adm inistration or such officer restore the portion of the Highway specified in the permit in such condition 
as it was immediately before the issuing of such permit and deliver the possession of such portion to the 
Highway Admi nistration and in case such pers on fails to deliver such possession within such period, he 
shall be deemed to be in unauthorised occupation of highway land for the purposes of this section and 
section 27.  
 (2) When, as a result of the periodical inspection of highway land or otherwise, the Highway 
Administration or the officer authorised by such Administration in this behalf is satisfied that any 
unauthorised  occupation has taken place on highway land, the Highway Administration  or the officer so 
authorised shall serve a notice in a prescrib ed form on the person causing or responsible for such 
unauthorised occupation requiring him to remove such unauthorised occupation and to restore such 
highway land in its original condition as before the unauthorised occupation within the period specified in 
the notice.  
(3) The notice under sub -section ( 2) shall specify therein the highway land in respect of which such 
notice is issued, the period within which the unauthorised occupation on such land is required to be 
removed, the place and time of hearing any represent ation, if any, which the person to whom the notice is 
addressed may make within the time specified in the notice and that failure to comply with such notice 
shall render the person specified in the notice liable to penalty, and summary evictio n from the highway 
land in respect of which such notice is iss ued, under sub -section ( 6). 
(4) The service of the notice under sub -section ( 2) shall be made by delivering a copy thereof to the 
person to whom such notice is addressed or to his agent or other  person on his behalf or by registered post 
addressed to the person to whom such notice is addressed and an acknowledgment purporting to be signed 
by such person or his agent or other person on his behalf or an endorsement by a postal employee that 
such pe rson or his agent or such other person on his behalf has refused to take delivery may be deemed to 
be prima facie  proof of service.  
(5) Where the service of the notice is not made in the manner provided under sub -section ( 4), the 
contents of the notice sha ll be advertised in a local newspaper for the knowledge of the person to whom 
the notice is add ressed and such advertisement sh all be deemed to be the service  of such notice on such 
person.  
(6) Where the service of notice under sub -section ( 2) has been made under sub -section ( 4) or  
sub-section ( 5) and the unauthorised occupation on the highway land in respect of which such notice is 
served has not been removed within the time specified in the notice for such purpose and no reasonable 
cause has been show n before the Highway Administration or the officer authorised by such 
Administration in this behalf for not so removing unauthorised occupation, the Highway Administration 
or such officer , as the case may be, shall cause such unauthorised occupation to be removed at the 
expenses of the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, and impose penalty on 9 
 the person to whom the notice is add ressed which shall be five hundr ed rupees per square metre of the 
land so unauthorisedly occupied and w here the penalty so imposed is less than the cost of such land, the 
penalty may be extended equal to such cost.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Highway Administration or the officer 
authorised by such Administration in this beh alf shall have power without issuing any notice under this 
section to remove the unauthorised occupation on the highway land, if such unauthorised occupation is in 
the nature of — 
(a) exposing any goods or article — 
(i) in open air; or 
(ii) through temporary stall, kiosk, booth or any other shop of temporary nature , 
(b) construction or erection, whe ther temporary or permanent , or 
(c) trespass or other unauthorised occupation which can be removed easily without use of any 
machine or other de vice, 
and in removing such occupation, the Highway Administration or such officer may take assistance of the 
police, if necessary, to remove such occupation by use of the reasonable fo rce necessary for such 
removal.  
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained i n this section, if the Highway Administration or the officer 
authorised by such Administration in this behalf is of the opinion that any unauthorised occupation on the 
highway land is  of such a nature that the immed iate removal of which i s necessary in the  interest of — 
(a) the safet y of traffic on the Highway; or  
(b) the safety of any structu re forming part of the Highway,  
and no notice can be served on the person responsible for such unauthorised occupation under this section 
without undue delay owing to his absence or for any other reason, the Highway Administration or the 
officer authorise d by such Administration may mak e such construction including alteration of any 
construction as may be feasible at the prescribed cost necessary for the safety referred  to in clause ( a) or 
clause ( b) or have such unauthorised occupation removed in the manne r specified in sub -section ( 7). 
(9) The Highway Administration or an officer authorised by such Administration in this behalf shall, 
for the purposes of this section o r section 27, have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit, in respect of  the following matters, 
namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any pe rson and examining  him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discove ry and production of documents;  
(c) issuing commissions for th e examination of witnesses; and  
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed,  
and any proceeding before such Administration or officer shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding 
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose of section 196, of the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860) and the Administration or the office r shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of 
section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
27. Recovery of cost of removal of unauthoris ed occupation and fine imposed .—(1) Where a 
Highway Administration or th e officer authorised by such Administration in this behalf has removed any 
unauthorised occupation or mad e any construction including alt eration of construction in respect of any 
unauthorised occupation or repaired any damage under sub -section ( 2) of secti on 36, the expenditure 
incurred in such removal or repair together with fifteen per cent. of additional  charges or any fine 
imposed und er this Act shall be recoverable in the manner herein after provided in this section.  
(2) The Highway Administration or th e officer authorised in this behalf by such Administration shall 
serve a copy of the bill in the prescribed form indicating therein the expenditure, additional charges or 10 
 fine recoverable  under sub -section ( 1) on the pe rson from whom such expenditure, addi tional charges or 
fine is recoverable and the provisions of section 26 relating to the service of notice shall apply for the 
service of copy of the bill under this sub -section as if for the word “notice ” the word “bill” has be en 
substituted in that section.  
(3) A copy of the bill referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall be accompanied with a certificate issued by 
the Highway Administration or the officer authorised by such Administration in this behalf and the 
amount indicated in the bill shall be the co nclusiv e proof that such amount is the expenditure actually 
incurred for all or any of the purposes referred to in sub -sectio n (1) as indicated in the bill.  
(4) Where a Highway Administration or the officer authorised in this behalf by such Administration 
has removed any unauthorised occupation or made any construction including alteration of construction 
in respect of any unauthorised occupation or repaire d any damage under sub -section ( 2) of section 36, the 
material, if any, recovered as a result of such removal, construction, alteration or repair shall be retained 
in possession of the Highway Administration or such officer till the payment of the bill in respect thereof 
served under sub -section ( 2) and on payment of such bill such material shall be return ed to the person 
entitled for the material, but in case of the failure of such payment within the time specified for t he 
payment in the bill, the mate rial may be sold by auction by the Highway Administration or such officer 
and after deduction of the amoun t payable under the bill from the proceeds of the auction, the balance, if 
any, shall be returned t o the person entitled therefor.  
(5) In case where the proceeds of the auction under sub -section ( 4) is less than the amount 
recoverable under the bill referr ed to in that sub -section, the difference between such proceeds and the 
amount so recoverable or w here no such auction has been ma de, the amount recoverable under the bill 
shall, in case of failure of the payment within the time specified in the bill, be r ecoverable as the arrears of 
land revenue.  
CHAPTER IV  
CONTROL OF ACCESS TO THE  NATIONAL  HIGHWAYS  
28. Right of access .—(1) No person shall have right of access to a Highway either through any 
vehicle or on foot by a group of five or more persons except permitted by the Highway Administration 
either generally or specifically in the manner specified in section 29.  
(2) The acce ss to a Highway under sub -section ( 1) shall be subject to the guidelines and instructions 
issued by the Centra l Government from time to time.  
(3) The Highway Administration may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare a Highway or 
any portion ther eof to be limited for access in the manner as specified in such notification and may also 
impose any restriction or control on such access t o, from or across such Highway as specified in that 
notification.  
29. Procedure for p ermission to access to Highway .—(1) The general permission under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 28 shall be given by issuing notification in the Official Gazette for such purpose 
and specific permission under that sub -section shall be give n in the manner specified hereinafter under 
this section.  
(2) Any person desirous of obtaining specific permission referred to in sub -section ( 1) may make an 
application in the prescribed form to the Highway Administration specifying therein the means of access 
to which such permission relates and shall also be accompanied with such fees as may be prescribed and 
the Highway Administration shall, a fter considering the application either give the permission with or 
without the terms and conditions as may be prescribed or reject the application as it may deem fit.  
(3) In case, where the permission has been given in respect of the application made unde r  
sub-section ( 2), the person to whom such permission has been given shall obtain the licence from the 
Highway Administration in the pr escribed form enumerating therei n the terms and conditions, if any, 
subject to which such permission has been given, and  such permission shall be renewed after such period 
and in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  11 
 (4) If any person contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 28 or violates any terms and 
conditions subject to which permission has been given under  sub-section ( 2) including non -renewal of 
licence obtaine d under sub -section ( 3), his acc ess to Highway under the permission under sub -section ( 1) 
or sub -section ( 3), as the case may be, shall be deemed to be unauthorised access and the Highway 
Administrat ion or the officer authorised by such Administration s hall have the power to remove su ch 
access and where necessary, the Highway Administration or such officer may use the necessary force 
with the assistance of the police to remove such access.  
30. Regulat ion or diversion of access, etc .—(1) Notwithstanding any permission given under  
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 29, the Highway Administration shall have the power in the 
interest of the safety and convenience of the traffic to re fuse, regulate or divert any proposed or existing 
access to the Highway.  
(2) Where an existing access is diverted, the alternative access given in lieu thereof shall not be 
unreasonably distant from the existing access.  
CHAPTER V  
REGULATION OF DIFFERENT TY PES OF TRAFFIC ON NATIONAL HIGHWAYS  
31. Highway Administration to regulate traf fic when Highway deemed                             
unsafe .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Highway Administration shall have the 
power to regulate and control the plying of vehicles on the Highway for  the proper management thereof.  
(2) If at any time the Highway Administration is satisfied on the information received by it or 
otherwise that any Highway within its jurisdiction or any part thereof is or ha s become congested or 
unsafe for vehicular or pe destrian traffic by reason of da mage or otherwise, it may, either close the 
Highway or such part thereof to all traffic or to any class of traffic, or regulate the number and speed of 
vehicles to be used on t he Highway or such part thereof, as the case ma y be, in the manner as it may de em 
fit. 
32. Prohibition of use of heav y vehicles on certain Highways .—Where the Highway 
Administration is satisfied that the surface of a Highway or any part thereof, or any bridge, culvert or 
causeway built on or across the Highway is not designed to carry vehi cles of which the laden weight 
exceeds a prescribed limit, it may, subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, prohibit or restrict 
the plying of such vehicles  on or over such Highway or part thereof or such bridge,  culvert or causeway, 
as the cas e may be.  
33. Temporary  closure of traffic on Highway .—Where, in exercise of the powers under section 31 
or section 32, the Highway Administration considers it proper f or the purposes of that section to 
temporarily close a Highway or part thereof or to restrict or regulate traffic on such Highway or part 
thereof, it may do so in the manner as it may deem fit.  
34. Permanent closure of Highway .—(1) Where, in exercise of the powers under section 31, the 
Highway Administration deems it necessary in the interest of the safety of the Highway to close a 
Highway or part thereof, it may, by notification in the Officia l Gazette, give notice of its intention to the 
public to do so  specifying therein the time within which the objections and suggestions received shall be 
considered under sub -section ( 3) and in addition to such notice, it shall also notify the contents of such 
notice in at least two newspapers, one of which shall be i n the local language of the area through which 
such Highway passes and another shall be the newspaper  being circulated in such area.  
(2) The notice under sub -section ( 1) shall indicate the alternative route proposed to be provided in 
lieu of the Highway or  part thereof intended to be closed specifying therein as to whether such alternative 
route shall be an already existing Highway o r shall be newly constructed and shall also invite objections 
and suggestions from the persons affected on such proposal withi n the time and to be addressed to the 
offic er as specified in such notice.  
(3) The Highway Administration shall, after considering the objections and suggestions, if any, 
received within the time specified in such notice, take decision on the proposal for closure under the 
notice and shall act in accordance with such decision.  12 
 35. Power t o restrict the use of vehicles .—If the Highway Administration is satisfied that it is 
necessary in the interest of public safety or convenience, or because of the nature of  any road or bridge so 
to do, it may, by  notification in the Official Ga zette, prohibit or restrict, subject to such exceptions or 
conditions as may be specified in the notification, the use of any Highway or part thereof by a class or 
classes of traffic e ither generally or on specified occasion or time as specified in the n otification and when 
such prohibition or restriction is imposed, the Highway Administration shall cause such traffic signs to be 
placed or erected at suitable places for the convenience of the traffic as may be prescribed:  
Provided that where any prohibition or restriction under this section is to be remained for a period of 
one month or less, such prohibition or restriction may be imposed without issuing notifi cation in the 
Official Gaze tte: 
Provided further that the prohibition or restriction imposed under the first proviso shall be published 
widely for the knowledge of the users by other possible means.  
36. Prevention a nd repair of damage to Highway .—(1) No person who is in charge of, o r in 
possession of, any vehicle or animal shall, wilfully or negligently, cause, or allow such vehicle or animal 
to ca use, any damage to any Highway.  
(2) Where, in contravention of sub -section ( 1), any damage has been caused to any Highway, the 
Highway Administration shall have such damage repaired at its own expenses and such expenses together 
with fifteen per cent. thereof as additional charges shal l, without prejudice to any other action which may 
be taken against the person who has so contravened sub -section ( 1), be recovered from him in accordance 
with the provisions contained in section 27 as if such expenses and a dditional charges were the expen ses 
and additional charges recoverable under that section.  
37. Prohibition to leave vehicles or animals i n dangerous positi on.—(1) No person in charge of, or 
in possession of, any vehicle or animal shall allow such vehicle or animal to stand or proceed on a 
Highway unless the same is under such safet y control as may be prescribed.  
(2) Where, in contravention of sub -section ( 1), any obstruction on the Highway is caused, the vehicle 
or animal causing such obstruction shall be caused to be towed away by the Highway Administration to 
remove such obstruct ion on the Highway and the vehic le or animal so towed away sh all be taken into 
possession by the Highway Administration and shall be handed over to the owner thereof in the manner, 
by payment to the Highway Administration, the expenses incurred in such removal, as may be prescribed.  
(3) In case where the expenses in respect of the vehicle or animal taken into possession under  
sub-section ( 2) have not been paid in the manner prescribed under that sub -section, the Highway 
Administration shall sell such vehicle or animal by auction and th e proceeds of the auction shall be the 
property of  the Central Government.  
(4) Any person who has unauthorised occupation on a highway land shall be summarily evicted by 
the Highway Administration in the manner specified in section 26 for removal of unauth orised occupation 
and shall be liable to fine impo sed by the Highway Admi nistration which shall not be less than five 
hundred rupees per square metre of the unauthorisedly occupied land by him but which may be extended 
to the cost of such land.  
CHAPTER VI  
REGULATION OF CONSTRUCTION ON HIGHWAY LAND FOR PUBLIC UTILITIES, DRAINS, ETC.  
38. Construction on highway land .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for 
the time being in force, no person other than a Highway Administration or a person authorised by such 
Administration in this behalf sh all construct, install, sh ift, repair, alter or carry any poles, pillars, 
advertisement towers, transformers, cable wire, pipe, drain, sewer, canal, railway line, tramway, 
telephone boxes, repeater station , street, path or passage of any kind on highway la nd or across, under or 
over any Highway except with the prior permission in writing of the Highway A dministration for such 
purpose.  
(2) Any person who intends to obtain the permission under sub -section ( 1) shall make an application 
in the prescribed form to the Highway Administration containing therein the purpose and period of 13 
 occupancy of Highway, location and part of the Highway t o be occupied, method of execution of work, 
period of construction and meth od of restorati on of such part of the Highway.  
(3) The Highway Administration shall consider the application made under sub -section ( 1) and if it is 
satisfied that there is no alternative other than the Highway in respect of which the permission is sought 
under the appl ication where the land can be fo und to locate the public utility, it may give permission in 
writin g as sought in the application:  
Provided that while giving such permission, the Highway Administration may impose such 
conditions  as it may deem fit to protect — 
(i) the Highway from damage; and  
(ii) the traffic on the Highway from obstruction,  
and may also impose such fees and other charges as may be prescribed on the person to whom such 
permission is given in respect of any land forming part of the Highway, occupied or applied to the 
proposed work or construction under permission and also impose on such person the expenditure, if any, 
incurred by the Highway Administration for repairing any damage caused to the Highway by laying or 
shifting of any structure, article or equipment under the permission.  
(4) If any person, in contravention of sub -section ( 1), makes any construction or carries out any other 
work, the Highway Administration may, at its own expenses, cause such construct ion or other work to be 
removed from the Highway and restore the Highwa y in the condition as it was immediately before giving 
permission for such construction or other work under sub -section ( 3) and such expenses together with 
fifteen per cent. thereof as additional charges and fine imposed b y the Highway Administration tak ing 
into account the nature of the damages caused by such construction or other work, which shall not be less 
than five hundred rupees per square metre of land used for such construction or other work, but shall not 
exceed the cost of such land, shall be recovered from such person in accordance with the provisions 
contained in section 27 as if such expenses, additional charges and fine were the expenses, additional 
charges and fine recover able under that section.  
CHAPTER VII  
OFFENCE AND PENALTY  
39. Offence and penalty .—(1) If any person, who has been evicted from any unauthorised 
occupation on a highway land under this Act, again occupies any highway land without permission for 
such occupation under this Act, he shall be punishable with impriso nment for a term which may ex tend to 
one year, or with fine which shall not be less than one thousand rupees per square metre of so occupied 
highway land but which shall not exceed two times the cost of su ch highway land, or with both.  
(2) Any court, convicting a person under sub -section ( 1), may make an order for evicting that person 
from such occupied highway land summarily and he shall be liable to such eviction without prejudice to 
any other action  that may be taken against him.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of  Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the 
offence punishable under sub -section ( 1) shall be cognizable.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
40. Right of appellant to take as sistance of legal practitioner .—A person preferring an appeal to 
the Tribunal under this Act may either appear in person or take the assistance of a legal practitioner of his 
choice to present his case before the Tribunal . 
41. Finality of orders .—Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, every order made or any 
action taken by the High way Administration or the officer authorised in this behalf by such 
Administration or every order passed or decision made on appeal under this Act by the Tribunal shall be 
final and shall not be called in question in any original suit, application or execu tion proceeding and no 
injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken i n 
pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act to the Highway Administration or Tribunal.  14 
 42. Duty of village officials .—Wherever any village headman, village accountant, village watchman 
or other village official, by whatever name called, becomes aware of any offence involving unauthorised 
occupation, damage or destruction of the highway lan d, he shall forthwith inform the nearest police 
station or the nearest Highway Administration or any officer authorised in this behalf by such 
Administration, the commission of such offence and shall also be duty bound to assist the Highway 
Administratio n and its officers in pr osecuting the offender of the offence.  
43. Conduct of inquiry .—The Highway Administration or the officer authorised in this behalf by 
such Administration shall, if he desires to make any inquiry for the purposes of this Act, make a summary 
inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed.  
1[44. Officers of Highways Administration to be public servant .—The officer or officers 
constituting the Highways Administration and any other officer authorised by such Administration under 
this Act, shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this 
Act, to be public servants within the meaning of secti on 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) .] 
45. Protection  of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Central Government or 2[any other officer of the Central Government ] or the officer or 
officers constituting the Highway Administration or any other officer authorised by such Administration 
under this Act or any other person, for anything which is in good faith done or intended to  be done under 
this Act or the rules  made thereunder.  
46. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence punishable under this Act has been committed 
by a company, every person who, at the time th e offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for t he conduct of the business of th e company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to pre vent the commission of su ch offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence punishable under this 
Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to , any negle ct on the part of any director, manager, secretary 
or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to 
be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished acc ordingly.  
 Explanation .—For the purposes of this se ction, — 
(a) “company ” means any  body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
47. Procedu re for service of  notices, etc .—Save as otherwise provided in this Act, every notice or 
bill issued or prepared under this Act may be served or presented in such manner as may be prescribed.  
48. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.  
49. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving eff ect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedie nt for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from the 
commencement of this Act. 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 201 7, s. 167  for section 44 (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
2. Subs by, s.167, ibid for certain words (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  15 
 (2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
50. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, after previous publication, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carryin g out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powe r, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of exercising powers and discharge functions unde r sub -section ( 3) of section 3;  
1*    *    *   * 
 (f) the additional matters in respect of which the Tribunal may exercise the powers of a civil 
court under clause ( h) of sub-section ( 3) of section 16;  
(g) the manner for maintaining the records of the Highway Administration in which the lands are 
shown and the manner of proving claim for correction of such records und er sub -section ( 2) of 
section 23;  
(h) the conditions subject to which, the rent and other charges on payment of which and the form 
in which permit may be issued for grant of permission under  sub-section ( 2) of section 24;  
(i) the conditions, payment of ren t and other charges for grant of lease or licence of  highway land 
under section 25;  
(j) the form of notice under sub -section ( 2) of section 26;  
(k) the feasible cost for making construction including alteration of any construction under   
sub-section ( 8) of section 26;  
(l) the additional matter in respect of which the Highway Administration or an officer authorised 
by such Administration in this behalf may exercise the powers of a civil court under clause ( d) of  
sub-section ( 9) of section 26;  
(m) the form of the bill under  sub-section ( 2) of section 27;  
(n) the form of application, the fees to be accompanied therewith and the terms and conditions for 
permission under  sub-section ( 2) of section 29;  
(o) the form of licence, the period and the manner of renewal of such licence under   
sub-section ( 3) of section 29;  
(p) the limit of laden weight and the provisions subject to which the plying of vehicles may be 
prohibited or restricted under section 32;  
(q) the traffic signs to be plac ed or erected under sec tion 35;  
(r) the safety and control for allowing any vehicle or animal to stand or proceed on a Highway 
under sub -section ( 1) of sect ion 37;  
(s) the manner of handing over the vehicle or animal to the owner and payment of expenses 
incurred in the removal o f such vehicle or animal under  sub-section ( 2) of section 37;  
(t) the form of application under  sub-section ( 2) of section 38;  
(u) the fees and other charges to be imposed under  sub-section ( 3) of section 38;  
(v) the manner of su mmary inquiry under section  43; 
(w) the manner of service or presentation of notic e or bill under section 47; and  
(x) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made or every notification issued by the Central Government under this Act shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
                                                             
1. Cls. (b), (c), (d) and ( e) omitted by Act 7 of 2017, s.167 (w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  16 
 for a total period of thirty days which may be com prised in one session or in two or more successive  
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or notification or bo th 
Houses agree that the rule or notification should not be made or issued, the rule or notification shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shal l be w ithout prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule or notification.  
--------------------------The Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005--------------------------
1 
 THE CREDIT INFORMATI ON COMPANIES (REGULA TION) ACT, 2005  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
 
CHAPTER II  
REGISTRATION OF CREDIT INFORMATION COMPANIES  
3. Prohibition to commence or carry on business of credit information . 
4. Application for registration . 
5. Grant of certificate of registration . 
6. Power of Reserve Bank to cancel certificate of registration . 
7. Appeal against order of Reserve Bank . 
8. Requirement as to minimum capital . 
 
CHAPTER III  
MANAGEMENT OF CREDIT  INFORMATION COMPANIES  
9. Management of credit information company . 
10. Power of Reserve Bank to determine policy . 
11. Power of Reserve Bank to give directions . 
12. Inspection of credit information company, credit institution and specified user . 
 
CHAPTER IV  
AUDITORS  
13. Powers and duties of auditors . 
 
CHAPTER V  
FUNCTIONS OF CREDIT  INFORMATION COMPANIES  
14. Functions of a credit information company . 
15. Credit institution to be member of a credit information company . 
16. Failure to become a member of a credit information company . 
17. Collection and furnishing of credit information . 
18. Settlement of dispute . 
 
CHAPTER VI  
INFORMATION PRIVACY PRINCIPLES  AND FURNISHING OF CREDIT  INFORMATION  
19. Accuracy and security of credit information . 
20. Privacy principles . 
21. Altera tion of credit information files and credit reports . 2 
 SECTIONS  
22. Unauthorised access to credit information . 
 
CHAPTER VII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
23. Offences and penalties . 
24. Cognizance of offences . 
25. Power of Reserve Bank to impose penalty . 
26. Application of fines . 
 
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
27. Power of Reserve Bank to specify maximum amount of fees . 
28. Disclosure of information before any court or tribunal or authority . 
29. Obligations as to fidelity and secrecy . 
30. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
31. Bar of jurisdiction . 
32. Power of Reserve Bank to exempt in certain cases . 
33. Application of other laws not barred . 
34. Amendment of certain enactments . 
35. Removal of difficulties . 
36. Power to make rules . 
37. Power of Reserve Bank to make regulations  
THE SCHEDULE . 
  3 
 THE CREDIT INFORMATI ON COMPANIE S (REGULATION) ACT, 2005  
ACT NO. 30 OF 2005  
[23rd June, 2005 .] 
An Act to provide for regulation of credit information companies and to facilitate efficient 
distribution of credit and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Credit Information 
Companies  (Regulation) Act, 2005.  
(2) It extends to the  whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette,  appoint : 
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act, and any reference 
in any such  provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming 
into force of that  provision.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “board” means the Board of directors of a credit information company;  
(b) “borrower” means any person who has been granted loan or any other credit facility by a 
credit  institution and includes a client of a credit institution;  
(c) “client” includes — 
(i) a guarantor or a person who proposes to give guarantee or secu rity for a borrower of a 
credit  institution; or  
(ii) a person — 
(A) who has obtained or seeks to obtain financial assistance from a credit institution, by 
way of  loans, advances, hire purchase, leasing facility, letter of credit, guarantee facility, 
venture  capital assistance or by way of credit cards or in any other form or manner;  
(B) who has raised or seeks to raise money by issue of security as defined in clause ( h) of 
section  2 of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956), or by issue  of 
commercial  paper, depository receipt or any other instrument;  
(C) whose financial standing has been assessed or is proposed to be assessed by a credit  
institution or any other person or institution as may, by notification, be directed by the  
Reserve Ba nk; 
(d) “credit information” means any information relating to — 
(i) the amounts and the nature of loans or advances, amounts outstanding under credit cards 
and other  credit facilities granted or to be granted, by a credit institution to any borrower;  
(ii) the nature of security taken or proposed to be taken by a credit institution from any 
borrower for  credit facilities granted or proposed to be granted to him;  
(iii) the  guarantee furnished or any other non -fund based facility granted or proposed to be 
granted by a  credit institution for any of its borrowers;  
(iv) the credit  worthiness of any borrower of a credit institution;  
                                                           
1. 14th December, 2006, vide notification No. S.O. 2098(E), dated 14th December, 2006, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 4 
 (v) any  other matter which the Reserve Bank may, consider necessary for inclusion in the 
credit  information to be collected and maintained by credit information companies, and, specify, 
by notification, in this behalf;  
(e) “credit information company” means a com pany formed and registered under the Companies 
Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) and which has been granted a certificate of registration under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 5;  
(f) “credit institution” means a banking company and includes — 
(i) a corresponding new bank, t he State Bank of India, a subsidiary bank, a co -operative bank, 
the National Bank and regional rural bank;  
(ii) a non -banking financial company as defined under clause ( f) of section 45 -I of the 
Reserve Bank  of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
(iii) a public f inancial insti tution referred to in section 4 A of the Companies Act,                      
1956 (1 of 1956);  
(iv) the financial corporation established by a State under section 3 of the State Financial 
Corporation  Act, 1951 (63 of 1951);  
(v) the housing finance institution referred to in clause ( d) of section 2 of the National 
Housing Bank  Act, 1987 (53 of 1987);  
(vi) the companies engaged in the business of credit cards and other similar cards and 
companies  dealing with distribution of credit in any othe r manner;  
(vii) any other institution which the Reserve Bank may specify, from time to time, for the 
purposes of  this clause;  
(g) “credit scoring” means a system which enables a credit institution to assess the credit  
worthiness and  capacity of a borrower to repay his loan and advances and discharge his other 
obligations in respect of  credit facility availed or to be availed by him;  
(h) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette of India;  
(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules  made under this Act;  
(j) “regulations” means regulations made by the Reserve Bank under this Act;  
(k) “Reserve Bank” means the Reserve B ank of India constituted under s ection 3 of the Reserve 
Bank of  India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
(l) “specified user” means  any credit institution, credit information company being a member 
under sub -section  (3) of section 15, and includes such other person or institution as may be specified 
by regulations  made, from time to time, by the Reserve Bank for the purpose of obtaining credit 
information from a  credit information company;  
(m) words and expressions used herein and not defined in this Act but defined in the Reserve 
Bank of India  Act, 1934 (2 of 1934) or the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) or the 
Compani es Act, 1956 (1  of 1956) shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in those 
Acts.  
CHAPTER II  
REGISTRATION OF CREDIT INFORMATION COMPANIES  
3. Prohibition to commence or carry on business of credit information .—Save as otherwise 
provided in this  Act, no company shall commence or carry on the business of credit information without 
obtaining a certificate of  registration from the Reserve Bank under this Act.  
4. Application for registration .—(1) Every company which intends to commence the business of  
credit  information shall make an application for registration to the Reserve Bank in such form and manner 
as may be  specified by regulations.  5 
 (2) Every credit information company, in existence on the commencement of this Act, before the 
expiry of six  months from such commencement, shall apply in writing to the Reserve Bank for obtaining 
a certificate of registration  under this Act : 
Provided that in the case of a credit information company in existence on the commencement of this 
Act, nothing in section  3 shall be deemed to prohibit such credit information company from carrying on 
the business of a  credit information company, until it is granted a certificate of registration or is by notice 
in writing informed by the  Reserve Bank that a certificate of re gistration cannot be granted to it.  
5. Grant of certificate of registration .—(1) The Reserve Bank may, for the purpose of considering 
the application of a company for grant of a certificate of registration to commence or carry on the 
business of credit  information, require to be satisfied, by an inspection of records or books of such 
company or otherwise that the  following conditions are fulfilled, namely: — 
(a) that the applicant company has minimum capital structure referred to in section 8;  
(b) that the g eneral character of the management or the proposed management of the applicant 
company  shall not be prejudicial to the interest of its specified users, clients or borrowers, or other 
credit  information companies;  
(c) that any other condition, the fulfilmen t of which in the opinion of the Reserve Bank, shall be 
necessary  to ensure that the commencement or carrying on of the business of credit information by 
the applicant  company shall not be detrimental or prejudicial to the public interest or banking policy  
or credit system  or its specified users or clients or borrowers or other credit information companies or 
others who would  provide credit information to the credit information companies.  
(2) The Reserve Bank may, after being satisfied that the conditions a s referred to in sub -section ( 1) 
are fulfilled,  grant a certificate of registration to the applicant company to commence or carry on the 
business of credit information,  subject to such conditions which it may consider fit to impose and if the 
company fails to fulfil any of such conditions  or any of the provisions of this Act, the application of  the 
company shall be rejected:  
Provided that no application shall be rejected unless the applicant has been given an opportunity of 
being heard.  
(3) The Reserve Bank may, having regard to the available business of credit information, the potential 
and scope  for expansion of existing credit information companies and other relevant fa ctors, determine 
the total number of the  credit information companies which may be granted the certificates of registration 
for carrying on the business of  credit information : 
Provided that the total number of such credit information companies so determine d may, on being 
satisfied by  the Reserve Bank, that there is change in available business of credit information, potential 
and scope for expansion  of existing credit information companies and other relevant factors relating 
thereto, be reviewed by the Rese rve Bank.  
6. Power of Reserve Bank to cancel certificate of registration .—(1) The Reserve Bank may cancel 
a certificate of registration granted to a credit information company under sub -section ( 2) of section 5 if 
such company, — 
(i) ceases to carry on the business of credit information; or  
(ii) has failed to comply with any of the conditions subject to which the certificate of registration 
has been  granted to it; or  
(iii) at any time fails to fulfil any of the conditions referred to in sub -clauses ( a) to ( c) of                  
sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) of section 5; or  
(iv) fails — 
(a) to comply with the provisions of any law for the time being in force or any direction 
issued by the  Reserve Bank under the provisions of this Act; or  
(b) to submit or  offer for inspection its books of account and other relevant documents when 
so demanded by the officers, persons or agency referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 12.  6 
 (2) Before cancelling the certificate of registration granted to a credit information company under this 
section on  the ground that the company has failed to comply with the conditions specified in clauses ( a) to 
(c) of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 5 or the provisions of any other law for the time being 
in force or directio ns issued under  this Act, the Reserve Bank, shall grant time to such company on such 
terms as the Reserve Bank may deem  appropriate for taking necessary steps to comply with such 
directions or provisions or fulfilment of such conditions,  within such time : 
Provided that if the Reserve Bank is of the opinion that the delay in cancelling the certificate of 
registration of  such company shall be prejudicial or detrimental to the public interest or banking policy or 
credit system or borrowers  or other credit info rmation companies, the Reserve Bank may cancel the 
certificate of registration without granting  time as provided in sub -section ( 2). 
(3) No order of cancellation of certificate of registration, granted to a credit information company, 
shall be made  by the Reserve Bank unless such company has been given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard.  
7. Appeal against order of Reserve Bank .—(1) A credit information company aggrieved by the 
order of  rejection of an application for grant of certificate of registratio n under section 5 or cancellation of 
certificate of  registration under section 6, may prefer an appeal to the Central Government or any other 
authority or tribunal which  may be designated by rules made by the Central Government, within a period 
of thirty d ays from the date on which  such order of rejection or cancellation, as the case may be, is 
communicated to the credit information company.  
(2) The decision of the Central Government or the authority or tribunal referred to in sub -section ( 1) 
where an  appea l has been preferred to it under sub -section ( 1), or of these Reserve Bank where no such 
appeal has been  preferred, shall be final : 
Provided that before making any order of rejection of an appeal, the applicant company or the credit 
information  company, as  the case may be, shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
8. Requirement as to minimum capital .—(1) The authorised capital of every credit information 
company shall  be a minimum of thirty crores : 
Provided that the Reserve Bank may, by notif ication, increase the minimum amount of authorised 
capital to any  amount not exceeding fifty crores.  
(2) The issued capital of every credit information company shall  not be less than twenty crores : 
Provided that the Reserve Bank may, by notification, increase the issued capital to any amount not 
exceeding the  minimum amount of authorised capital as referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) The minimum paid up capital of every credit information company at any time shall not be less 
than seventy -five per cent . of the issued capital.  
CHAPTER III  
MANAGEMENT OF CREDIT INFORMATION COMPANIES  
9. Management of credit information company .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any 
law for the  time being in force, or in any contract to the contrary, every credit inf ormation company in 
existence on the  commencement of this Act, or which comes into existence thereafter, shall have one of 
its directors, who may be  appointed on whole -time or on a part -time basis as chairperson of its board, and 
where he is appointed on w hole-time basis as chairperson of its board, he shall be entrusted with the 
management of the whole of the affairs of the credit  information company:  
Provided that the chairperson of the board of the credit information company shall exercise his 
powers sub ject to  the superintendence, control and directions of the board.  
(2) Where a chairperson is appointed on a part -time basis, the management of whole of the affairs of 
the credit  information company shall be entrusted to a managing director or, a whole -time director by 
whatever name called,  who shall exercise his powers subject to the superintendence, control and 
directions of the board.  
(3) In addition to the chairperson or managing director or whole -time director, by whatever name 
called, the  board of directors shall consist of not less than fifty per cent . directors who shall be persons 7 
 having special knowledge  in, or practical experience of, the matters relating to public administration, law, 
banking, finance, accountancy,  management or information te chnology.  
(4) In discharging its functions, the board shall act on business principles and shall have due regard to 
the interest of its specified users, credit institutions or the clients or borrowers of credit institutions.  
(5) Where the Reserve Bank is s atisfied that it is in the public interest or in the interest of banking 
policy or  credit system of the country, or for preventing the affairs of any credit information company 
being managed in a  manner detrimental to the interest of banking policy or cred it institutions or borrowers 
or clients or for securing the  proper management of any credit information company, it is necessary so to 
do, the Reserve Bank may, for reasons to  be recorded in writing, by order published in the Official 
Gazette, supersede th e board of such company, for such  period not exceeding six months, as may be 
specified in the order and which may be extended from time to time, so,  however, that the total period 
shall n ot exceed twelve months : 
Provided that before making any such order, the Reserve Bank shall give a reasonable opportunity to 
the board  of such credit information company to make representation against the proposed supersession 
and shall consider the  representation, if any, of the board.  
(6) The Reserve Bank may, on superses sion of the board of a credit information company under sub -
section ( 5), appoint an Administrator for such period and on such salary and other terms and conditions as 
it may determine.  
(7) The Reserve Bank may issue such directions to the Administrator as it may deem appropriate and 
the Administrator shall be bound to follow such directions.  
(8) Upon making of the order under sub -section ( 5), superseding the board of a credit information 
company — 
(a) the chairperson, managing director and other directors of  such credit information company 
shall, as from  the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of the Companies 
Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) or this Act or any other law for the time being in force, be exercised or 
discharged, by or on  behalf of the board of such credit information company, or by a resolution 
passed in general meeting of  that company, shall, until the reconstitution of its board under                    
sub-section ( 10), be exercised and  discharged by the Administrator appointed by the Res erve Bank 
under sub -section ( 6): 
Provided that the powers exercised by the Administrator shall be valid notwithstanding that such 
powers are  exercisable by a resolution passed  in the general meeting of such credit information company.  
(9) The salary and allowances payable to the Administrator and staff assisting the Administrator shall 
be borne  by the credit information company.  
(10) On and before the expiration of two months b efore expiry of the period of supersession 
mentioned in the  order of the Reserve Bank issued under sub -section ( 5), the Administrator of the credit 
information company, shall  call a general meeting of the credit information company to elect new 
directors a nd reconstitute its board and any  person who had vacated his office under clause ( a) of        
sub-section ( 8), shall not be deemed to be disqualified for re -appointment.  
(11) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force or in any contract or 
the memorandum or articles of association, of the credit information company, on the removal of a person 
from office  under this section, that person shall not be entitled to claim any compensation for the loss or 
termination of office.  
10. Power of Reserve Bank to determine policy .—Where the Reserve Bank is satisfied that it is 
necessary or  expedient in the public interest or in the interest of specified users or in the interest of credit 
information companies or  credit institutions or clien ts or borrowers so to do, it may determine the policy 
in relation to functioning of credit  information companies or credit institutions or specified users 
generally or in particular and when the policy has been  so determined all credit information companie s, 
credit institutions and specified users, as the case may be, shall be  bound to follow the policy as so 
determined.  8 
 11. Power of Reserve Bank to give directions .—(1) Where the Reserve Bank is satisfied that, — 
(a) in the public interest; or  
(b) in the int erest of credit institutions; or  
(c) in the interest of specified users; or  
(d) in the interest of banking policy; or  
(e) to prevent the affairs of any credit information company being conducted in a manner 
detrimental to the  interests of its specified users or in a manner prejudicial to the interests of credit 
institutions or  borrowers or clients; or  
(f) to secure the proper management of credit information companies generally,  
it is necessary to issue directions to credit information companies or credi t institutions or specified users 
generally or  to any credit information company or credit institution or specified user in particular, it may, 
from time to time, issue  such directions as it deems fit, and such credit information companies, credit 
institutions and specified users or credit  information company, credit institution, and specified user, as the 
case may be, shall be bound to comply with such  directions.  
(2) The Reserve Bank may, on representation made to it or on its own motion, modify o r cancel any 
direction  issued under sub -section ( 1), and the Reserve Bank, in so modifying or cancelling any direction, 
may impose such  conditions as it thinks fit, subject to which the modification or cancellation shall have 
effect.  
(3) The Reserve Bank m ay, at any time, if it is satisfied that in the public interest or in the interest of a 
credit  information company or its members, it is necessary so to do, by order in writing and on such terms 
and conditions as  may be specified therein, — 
(a) require such  credit information company to call a meeting of its directors for the purpose of 
considering  any matter relating to or arising out of the affairs of the credit information company;  
(b) depute one or more of its officers to watch the proceedings at any mee ting of the board of the 
credit  information company or of any committee or of any other body constituted by it and require the 
credit  information company to give an opportunity to the officers so deputed to be heard at such 
meetings and  also require such o fficers to send a report of such proceedings to the Reserve Bank;  
(c) require the board of the credit information company or of any committee or any other body 
constituted  by it to give in writing to any officer deputed by the Reserve Bank in this behalf a t his 
usual address all  notices of, and other communications relating to, any meeting of the board, 
committee or other body  constituted by it;  
(d) appoint one or more of its officers to observe the manner in which the affairs of the credit 
information  comp any or of its offices or branches are being conducted and make a report thereon;  
(e) require the credit information company to make, within such time as may be specified in the 
order, such  changes in the management as the Reserve Bank may consider necessar y. 
(4) The Reserve Bank may, at any time, direct any credit information company to furnish it within 
such time as  may be specified by the Reserve Bank, such statements and information relating to the 
business or affairs of the credit  information company as  the Reserve Bank may consider necessary or 
expedient to obtain for the purpose of this Act.  
12.  Inspection   of  credit   information   company,  credit  institution  and  specified                  
user.—(1) Notwithstanding  anything to the contrary contain ed in section 235 of the Companies Act,                  
1956 (1 of 1956), the Reserve Bank, at any  time, may and on being directed so to do by the Central 
Government shall, cause an inspection to be made, by one or  more of its officers or through such other 
persons or agency as the Reserve Bank may determine, of any credit  information company or credit 
institution or specified user and their books and accounts; and the Reserve Bank shall  supply to the credit 
information company or credit institution or specified user, as the case may be, a copy of its report  on 
such inspection.  
(2) It shall be the duty of every director or other officer or employee of the credit information 
company, credit  institution and specified user to produce to any officer or perso n or agency,   as the case  9 
 may be, making an inspection  under sub -section ( 1) all such books, accounts and other documents in his 
custody or power and to furnish him with  any statement and information relating to the affairs of such 
credit information com pany, credit institution and  specified user, as the said officer or person or agency 
may require of him within such time as the said officer or  person or agency may specify.  
(3) Any officer of the Reserve Bank or person or an agency making an inspection un der                 
sub-section  (1) may  examine on oath any director or other officer or employee of the credit information 
company, credit institution and  specified user, in relation to their business, and may administer an oath 
accordingly.  
(4) The expen ses of, or incidental to, the inspection under sub -section ( 1) by any person or an agency 
referred to  in sub -section ( 1) shall be borne by the concerned credit information company or credit 
institution or specified user,  as the case may be.  
CHAPTER IV  
AUDITORS  
13. Powers and duties of auditors .—(1) It shall be the duty of an auditor of a credit information 
company to  inquire whether or not the credit information company has furnished to the Reserve Bank 
such statements,  information or particulars relatin g to its business as are required to be furnished under 
this Act and the auditor shall,  except where he is satisfied on such inquiry that the credit information 
company has furnished such a statement ,  information or particulars, make a report to the Reser ve Bank in 
this regard.  
(2) The Reserve Bank may, on being satisfied that it is necessary so to do, in the public interest or in 
the interest  of credit system, issue directions in particular or in general with respect to audit of the credit 
information company  and submission of the report to the Reserve Bank.  
(3) Where the Reserve Bank is of the opinion that it is necessary so to do in the public interest or in 
the interest  of the credit information company or its members, or in the interest of credit sy stem or credit 
institution or its  borrower or client so to do, it may, at any time, by an order, direct that a special audit of 
the accounts of the credit  information company in relation to any such transaction or class of transactions 
or for such period o r periods, as may  be mentioned in the order, shall be conducted and the Reserve Bank 
may by such order or by a separate order either  appoint an auditor or auditors or direct the auditor of the 
credit information company himself to conduct such special  audit and the auditor shall comply with such 
directions and make a report of such audit to the Reserve Bank and  forward a copy thereof to the credit 
information company.  
(4) The remuneration of the auditors as may be fixed by the Reserve Bank, having regard to  the 
nature and  volume of work involved in the audit and the expenses of, or incidental to, the audit, shall be 
borne by the credit  information company so audited.  
CHAPTER V  
FUNCTIONS OF CREDIT INFORMATION COMPANIES  
14. Functions of a credit information co mpany .—(1) A credit information company may engage in 
any one or  more of the following forms of business, namely: — 
(a) to collect, process and collate information on trade, credit and financial standing of the 
borrowers of the  credit institution which is a  member of the credit information company;  
(b) to provide credit information to its specified users or to the specified users of any other credit  
information company or to any other credit information company being its member;  
(c) to provide credit scoring  to its specified users or specified users of any other credit 
information company  or to other credit information companies being its members;  
(d) to undertake research project;  
(e) to undertake any other form of business which the Reserve Bank may, specif y by regulations 
as a form  of business in which it is lawful for a credit information company to engage.  
(2) No credit information company shall engage in any form of business other than those referred to 
in sub -section  (1). 10 
 (3) Any credit information comp any for the purposes of carrying on the business of credit information 
may— 
(a) register credit institutions and other credit information companies, at their option as its 
member, subject  to such terms and conditions as may be pre -determined and disclosed by such credit 
information  company;  
(b) charge such reasonable amount of fees, as it may deem appropriate not exceeding the 
maximum fee, as  may be specified under section 27, for furnishing credit information to a specified 
user;  
(c) generally  to do all such other acts and perform such other functions as are necessary to 
facilitate proper  conduct of its affairs, business and functions in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act. 
15. Credit Institution to be member of a credit information comp any.—(1) Every credit 
institution in  existence on the commencement of this Act, before the expiry of three months from such 
commencement or within  such extended period, as the Reserve Bank may allow on its application and 
subject to being satisfied about t he reason  for extension, shall become member of at least one credit 
information company.  
(2) Every credit institution which comes into existence after the commencement of this Act, before 
the expiry of  three months from its coming into existence, or within  such extended period, as the Reserve 
Bank may allow on its  application and subject to being satisfied about the reason for extension, shall 
become member of at least one credit  information company.  
(3) A credit information company may, at its option, beco me member of another credit information 
company.  
(4) No credit information company shall refuse to register a credit institution or another credit 
information  company as its member without providing reasonable opportunity of being heard to such 
credit inst itution or credit  information company, whose application it proposes to reject and recording 
reasons for such rejection and a copy of  such order of rejection shall be forwarded to the Reserve Bank.  
(5) A credit institution or credit information company agg rieved by the order of rejection of its 
application for its  registration as a member of a credit information company under sub -section ( 4) may 
prefer an appeal to the Reserve  Bank, within a period of thirty days from the date on which such order of 
rejection was communicate d to it : 
Provided that the Reserve Bank may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient 
cause from  filing the appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further period not 
exceeding thirty days.  
(6) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 5), the Reserve Bank, after giving the appellant and 
other  concerned parties, an opportunity of being heard, pass such order as it deems fit.  
(7) The decision of the Reserve Bank where an appeal has been  preferred to it under sub -section ( 5) 
shall be  final and the order of the credit information company under sub -section ( 4) shall be final after the 
expiry of the said  period of thirty days where no appeal has been preferred under that sub -section to the 
Reserve Bank.  
(8) Every specified user shall be entitled to obtain credit information for its use from the credit 
information  company of which such specified user is a member.  
16. Failure to become a member of a credit information company .—(1) Where a credi t 
institution — 
(a) abstains from becoming a member of at least one credit information company; or  
(b) at any time is not a member of any credit information company,  
the Reserve Bank suo moto  or on a complaint from a credit information company may, direct such credit 
institution to  take necessary steps within such time, as it may specify to become a member of a credit 
information company.  11 
 (2) In case a credit institution fails to comply with t he directions of the Reserve Bank under           
sub-section ( 1), to become member of at least one credit information company, the Reserve Bank may, 
without prejudice to the  provisions of this Act, intimate such failure to any other authority for taking s uch 
action as it may deem fit.  
17. Collection and furnishing of credit information .—(1) A credit information company or any 
person  authorised in that behalf by the company may, by notice in writing, in such form, as may be 
specified by regulations  made by the Reserve Bank or as near thereto, require its members being credit 
institution or credit information  company, to furnish such credit information as it may deem necessary in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every credit institution which i s member of the credit information company and every credit 
information  company which is a member of other credit information company shall, on receipt of notice 
under sub -section ( 1), provide credit information to the credit information company of which i t is a 
member, within such period as may be  specified in the notice.  
(3) Every credit information company shall provide for such purpose, as may be specified by 
regulations, the  credit information received under sub -section ( 2), to its specified user on receipt of 
request from him in accordance  with the provisions of this Act and directions issued thereunder by the 
Reserve Bank from time to time in this behalf.  
(4) No credit information received under this Act, — 
(a) by the credit information company, shal l be disclosed to any person other than its specified 
user; or  
(b) by the specified user, shall be disclosed to any other person;  
(c) by the credit information company or specified user, shall be disclosed for any other purpose 
than as  permitted or require d by any other law for the time being in force.  
18. Settlement of dispute .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in 
force, if  any dispute arises amongst, credit information companies, credit institutions, borrowers and 
client s on matters relating  to business of credit information and for which no remedy has been provided 
under this Act, such disputes shall be  settled by conciliation or arbitration as provided in the Arbitration 
and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996), as if th e parties to the dispute have consented in writing for 
determination of such dispute by conciliation or arbitration and  provisions of that Act shall apply 
accordingly.  
(2) Where a dispute has been referred to arbitration under sub -section ( 1), the same sha ll be settled or  
decided, — 
(a) by the arbitrator to be appointed by the Reserve Bank;  
(b) within three months of making a referenc e by the parties to the dispute : 
Provided that the arbitrator may, after recording the reasons therefor, extend the said period up to a 
maximum  period of six months : 
Provided further that, in an appropriate case or cases, the Reserve Bank may, if it considers necessary 
to do so  (reasons to be recorded in writing), direct the parties to the dispute to appoint an arbitrator in  
accordance with the  provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996), for settlement 
of their dispute in accordance  with the provisions of that Act.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided under this Act, the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996 (26  of 1996) shall apply to all arbitration under this Act as if the proceedings for arbitration were 
referred for settlement  or decision under the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.  
CHAPTER VI  
INFORMATION PRIV ACY PRINCIPLES AND  FURNISHING OF CREDIT INFORMATION  
19. Accuracy and security of credit information .—A credit information company or credit 
institution or  specified user, as the case may be, in possession or control of credit information, shall take 
such s teps (including  security safeguards) as may be prescribed, to ensure that the data relating to the 12 
 credit information maintained by them  is accurate, complete, duly protected against any loss or 
unauthorised access or use or unauthorised disclosure thereof.  
20. Privacy principles .—Every credit information company, credit institution and specified user, 
shall adopt the  following privacy principles in relation to collection, processing, collating, recording, 
preservation, secrecy, sharing  and usage of credit information, namely: — 
(a) the principles — 
(i) which may be followed by every credit institution for collection of information from its 
borrowers  and clients and by every credit information company, for collection of information 
from its  member credi t institutions or credit information companies, for processing, recording, 
protecting  the data relating to credit information furnished by, or obtained from, their member 
credit  institutions or credit information companies, as the case may be, and sharing of such data 
with specified users;  
(ii) which may be adopted by every specified user for processing, recording, preserving and 
protecting  the data relating to credit information furnished, or received, as the case may be, by it;  
(iii) which may be adopted by every credit information company for allowing access to 
records  containing credit information of borrowers and clients and alteration of such records in 
case of  need to do so;  
(b) the purpose for which the credit information may be used, restriction on such use and 
disclosure thereof;  
(c) the extent of obligation to check accuracy of credit information before furnishing of such 
information to  credit information companies or credit institutions or specified users, as the case may 
be; 
(d) preservation of c redit information maintained by every credit information company, credit 
institution,  and specified user as the case may be (including the period for which such information 
may be  maintained, manner of deletion of such information and maintenance of record s of credit 
information);  
(e) networking of credit information companies, credit institutions and specified users through 
electronic  mode;  
(f) any other principles and procedures relating to credit information which the Reserve Bank may 
consider  necessary and appropriate and may be specified by regulations.  
21. Alteration of credit information files and credit reports .—(1) Any person, who applies for 
grant or  sanction of credit facility, from any credit institution, may request to such institution to furnis h 
him a copy of the  credit information obtained by such institution from the credit information company.  
(2) Every credit institution shall, on receipt of request under sub -section ( 1), furnish to the person 
referred to in  that sub -section a copy of the cr edit information subject to payment of such charges, as may 
be specified by  regulations, by the Reserve Bank in this regard.  
(3) If a credit information company or specified user or credit institution in possession or control of 
the credit  information, has  not updated the information maintained by it, a borrower or client may request 
all or any of them to  update the information; whether by making an appropriate correction, or addition or 
otherwise, and on such request  the credit information company or the s pecified user or the credit 
institution, as the case may be, shall take appropriate  steps to update the credit information within thirty 
days after being requested to do so : 
Provided that the credit information company and the specified user shall make the  correction, 
deletion or  addition in the credit information only after such correction, deletion or addition has been 
certified as correct by the  concerned credit institution : 
Provided further that no such correction, deletion or addition shall be made in the credit information if 
any dispute relating to such correction, deletion or addition is pending before any arbitrator or tribunal or 
court and in  cases where such dispute is pending, the entries in the books of the concerned credit 
institution shall be taken into  account for the purpose of credit information.  13 
 22. Unauthorised access to credit information .—(1) No person shall have access to credit 
information in the  possession or control of a credit information company or a credit institution or a 
specified user unless the access is  authorised by this Act or any other law for the time being in force or 
directed to do so by any court or tribunal and any  such access to credit information without such 
authorisation or direction shall be considered as a n unauthorised access  to credit information.  
(2) Any person who obtains unauthorised access to credit information as referred to in sub -section ( 1) 
shall be  punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees in respect of each offence and if he 
conti nues to have such  unauthorised access, with further fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees 
for every day on which the default  continues and such unauthorised credit information shall not be taken 
into account for any purpose.  
CHAPTER VII  
OFFENCES AND  PENALTIES  
23. Offences and penalties .—(1) Whoever, in any return or other document or in any information 
required or  furnished by, or under, or for the purposes of, any provision of this Act, wilfully makes a 
statement which is false in  any material parti cular, knowing it to be false, or wilfully omits to make a 
material statement, shall be punishable with  imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and 
shall also be liable to fine.  
(2) Every credit information company or a credit institution or a ny specified user, wilfully, 
performing any act or  engaging in any practice, in breach of any of  the principles referred to in s ection 20, 
shall be punishable with fine not  exceeding one crore rupees.  
(3) Any credit information company or credit institution or specified user wilfully providing to any 
other credit  information company or credit institution or specified user or borrower or client, as the case 
may be, credit  information which is false in any material particular, knowing it to be false , or wilfully 
omits to make a material  statement, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one crore rupees.  
(4) Any person who contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder, or 
obstructs  the lawful exercise of any power conferred by or under this Act, or makes default in complying 
with any requirement  of this Act or of any rule or order made or direction issued thereunder, shall, if no 
specific provision is made under  this Act for punishment of such contravention, o bstruction or default, be 
punishable with fine which may extend to  one lakh rupees and where a contravention or default is a 
continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to five  thousand rupees for every day during which 
the contravention or defaul t continues.  
(5) Where a contravention or default has been committed by a credit information company or credit 
institution  or specified user, as the case may be, every person who, at the time the contravention or default 
was committed, was  in charge of, an d was responsible to the credit information company or credit 
institution or specified user for the  conduct of its business, shall be deemed to be guilty of the 
contravention or default and shall be liable to be proceeded  against and punished accordingly : 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment  provided in this Act if he proves that the contravention or default was committed without his 
knowledge or that he  exercised all due diligence to prev ent the contravention or default.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (5), where a contravention or default has been 
committed  by a credit information company or credit institution or specified user, as the case may be, and 
it is proved t hat the  same was committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any gross 
negligence on the part of its  chairperson, managing director, any other director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the credit information  company or the cre dit institution, such chairperson, managing 
director, any other director, manager, secretary or other  officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that 
contravention or default and shall be liable to be proceeded against  and punished accordingly.  
Explanati on.—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individual, 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  14 
 24. Cognizance of offences .—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence committed by a 
member of a  credit information company and punishable under section 23 except upon a complaint in 
writing made by an officer  of the credit information company generally or specially authorised in writing 
in thi s behalf by the credit information  company or if so directed by the Reserve Bank so to do and no 
court other than that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a  Judicial Magistrate of the first class or any court 
superior thereto shall try any such offence.  
Explan ation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, “member of a credit information company” shall 
mean a  member referred to in section 15.  
(2) No court shall take cog nizance of any offence committed by a credit information company 
punishable under  section 23 exc ept upon a complaint in writing made by an officer of the Reserve Bank 
generally or specially  authorised in writing in this behalf by the Reserve Bank and no court other than that 
of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a  Judicial Magistrate of the first class or any court superior thereto shall 
try any such offence.  
25. Power of Reserve Bank to impose penalty .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 
23, if a  contravention or default of the nature referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 22 or sub-section ( 2) 
or sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of section 23, as the case may be, is made by a credit information 
company or a credit institution  then, the Reserve Bank may impose on such credit information company 
or credit institution — 
(i) where t he contravention is of the nature referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 22, a penalty 
not exceeding one lakh rupees;  
(ii) where the contravention is of the nature referred to in sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) of 
section 23, a  penalty not exceeding one crore rupees;  
(iii) where the contravention is of the nature referred to in sub -section ( 4) of section 23, a penalty 
not exceeding one lakh rupees and where such contravention or default is continuing one, a further 
penalty  which may extend to five tho usand rupees for every day, after the first, during which the 
contravention  or default continues.  
(2) For the purpose of adjudging the penalty under sub -section ( 1), the Reserve Bank shall serve 
notice on credit  information company or credit institution or  specified user, as the case may be, requiring 
it to show cause as to why  the amount mentioned in the notice should not be imposed as penalty and a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard  shall also be given to such credit information company or credit 
institution or specified user, as the case may be.  
(3) No complaint shall be filed against credit information company or credit institution or specified 
user, as the  case may be, in any court of law in respect of any contravention or default in respect of which  
any penalty has been  imposed by the Reserve Bank under this section.  
(4) Any penalty imposed by the Reserve Bank under this Act shall be payable within a period of 
fourteen days  from the date on which notice issued by the Reserve Bank demanding payment of  the sum 
is served on the credit  information company or credit institution or specified user, as the case may be, and 
in the event of failure of such  credit information company or credit institution or specified user to pay the 
sum within such period, may be levied on  a direction made by the principal civil court having jurisdiction 
in the area where the registered office of the credit  information company or credit institution or specified 
user, being a company, is situated and in case of credit  institution  incorporated outside India, where its 
principal place o f business in India is situated : 
Provided that such direction under this sub -section shall be made only upon an application made in 
this behalf  to the court by the Reserve Bank.  
(5) The court which ma kes a direction under sub -section ( 4) shall issue a certificate mentioning 
therein the sum  payable by a credit information company or credit institution or specified user, as the case 
may be, and every such  certificate shall be enforceable in the same mann er as if it were a decree made by 
the court in a civil suit.  
(6) Where any complaint has been filed against credit information company or credit institution or 
specified  user, as the case may be, in any court in respect of the contravention or default of t he nature 
referred to in sub -section  (2) of section 22 or sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of 15 
 section 23, then, no proceedings for the  imposition of any penalty on the credit information company or 
credit institution or specified user shall be taken under  this section.  
26. Application of fines .—A court imposing any fine under this Act may direct that the whole or any 
part thereof shall be applied in or towards payment of the costs of the proceedings, or for such purposes as 
may be direc ted by the court.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
27. Power of Reserve Bank to specify maximum amount of fees .—The Reserve Bank may, 
specify, by  regulations the maximum amount of fees leviable under sub -section ( 3) of section 14 for 
providing information to the  specified users and for admissions of credit institutions or credit information 
companies as a member of a credit  information company.  
28. Disclosure of information before any court or tribunal or authority .—No chairperson, 
director, member,  auditor, advi ser, officer or other employee or agent employed in the business of a credit 
information company or in  the business of a specified user shall, except for the purposes of this Act or 
when required to do so by any other law in  force or court or tribunal or a uthority, disclose any 
information to any person.  
29. Obligations as to fidelity and secrecy .—(1) Every credit information company shall observe, 
except as  otherwise required by law, the practices and usages customary among credit information 
companies and  it shall not  divulge any information relating to, or to the affairs of, its members or 
specified users.  
(2) Every chairperson, director, member, auditor, adviser, officer or other employee of a credit 
information  company shall, before entering upon his du ties, make a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in 
the form, as may be  prescribed in this regard.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section and section 30, the terms “practices and usages 
customary”  means such practices and usages which, are generally  followed by credit information 
companies or may develop in  due course in relation to their functions, in pursuance of the provisions of 
this Act, rules and regulations made and  directions issued thereunder from time to time in pursuance 
thereof.  
30. Prote ction of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit or other legal proceedings or prosecution 
shall lie  against the Reserve Bank or the Central Government or credit information company or credit 
institution, or their  chairperson, director, member, auditor, ad viser, officer or other employee, or agent or 
any person authorised by the  Reserve Bank or the Central Government or credit information company or 
credit institution to discharge any function  under this Act, for any loss or damage caused or as is likely to  
be caused by anything which is in good faith done or  intended to be done, in pursuance of this Act or any 
other law for the time being in force.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall affect the right of any person to claim damages against 
a credi t information company, a credit institution or their chairperson, director, member, auditor, adviser, 
officer or other  employee or agents, as the case may be, in respect of loss caused to him on account of any 
such disclosure made by  anyone of them and whi ch is unauthorised or fraudulent or contrary to provisions 
of this Act, or practices or usages  customary among them.  
31. Bar of jurisdiction .—No court or authority shall have, or be entitled to exercise, any jurisdiction, 
powers or  authority, except the Su preme Court and a High Court exercising jurisdiction under articles 32, 
226 and 227 of the  Constitution, in relation to the matters referred to in sections 4, 5, 6, 7 and 18.  
32. Power of Reserve Bank to exempt in certain cases .—(1) The Central Government may, on the  
recommendation of the Reserve Bank, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that any or all of the 
provisions of  this Act shall not apply to any credit information company or a credit institution, as the case 
may be, either generally  or for such period and subject to such exceptions or modifications, as may be 
mentioned in that notification.  
(2) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub -section ( 1), shall be laid in draft 
before each  House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 16 
 comprised in one session or  in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the  successive session s aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
disapproving the issue of the notification or both Houses agree in  making any modification in the 
notification, the notification shall not be issued or, as the case may be, shall be issued  only in such 
modified form as may  be agreed upon by both the Houses.  
33. Application of other laws not barred .—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not, save as  provided under this Act, in derogation of, the provisions of the Companies Act,                    
1956 (1 of  1956) or any other law for  the time being in force.  
34. Amendment of certain enactments .—The enactments mentioned in the Schedule to this Act 
shall be  amended in the manner specified therein.  
35. Removal of difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in gi ving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the  provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedi ent for removing the 
difficult y: 
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of two years from 
the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of  Parliame nt. 
36. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Reserve 
Bank, by  notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality o f the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for all  or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the authority or tribunal which may be designated under sub -section ( 1) of section 7;  
(b) the steps to be taken by every credit information company or credit institution and specified 
user for  ensuring accuracy, completeness of data and protection of data from any loss or unauthorised 
access or  use or disclosure under section 19;  
(c) the form in which a declaration of fidelity and secrecy shall be made u nder sub -section ( 2) of 
section 29;  
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made,  before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in  one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the  session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses ag ree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses  agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no  effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the  validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
37. Power of Reserve Bank to make regulations .—(1) The Reserve Bank may make regulations 
consistent  with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of this 
Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such regulations 
may provide  for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the  persons or institutions which may be specified as specified users under clause ( l) of 
section 2;  
(b) the form in which application may be made under sub -section ( 1) of section 4 and the manner 
of filing  such application under that sub -section;  
(c) any oth er form of business in which a credit information company may engage under              
clause ( e) of sub -section  (1) of section 14;  17 
 (d) the form of notice for collection and furnishing of information procedure relating thereto and 
purposes  for which credit information may be provided under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 17;  
(e) the principles and procedures relating to credit information which may be specified under 
clause ( f) of section 20;  
(f) the amount which may be required to be paid for obt aining copy of credit information under 
sub-section  (2) of section 21;  
(g) the maximum amount of charges payable under section 27.  
(3) Every regulation, as soon as may be after it is made by the Reserve Bank, shall be forwarded to 
the Central  Government an d that Government shall cause a copy of the same to be laid before each House 
of Parliament, while it  is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive  sessions, and if, before the expiry of  the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions  aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the regulation, or both Houses agree that the regulation  should not be made, the regulation shall, 
thereafter, have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the  case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of  anything previously done 
under that regulation.  
  18 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 34)  
AMENDMENTS  TO CERTAIN ENACTMENTS  
PART I  
THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934  
(2 OF 1934)  
Section 45E, sub -section ( 2), after clause ( c), insert — 
“(d) the disclosures of any credit information under the Credit Information Companies 
(Regulation) Act, 2005.”.  
 
PART II  
THE BANKING REGULATION ACT, 1949  
(10 OF 1949)  
1. Section 19, after sub -section ( 3), insert — 
“(4) Save as provided in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1), a banking company may form a subsidiary 
company to carry on the  business of credit information in accordance with the Credit Information 
Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005.”.  
2. Section 28, for “publish any information obtained by them under this Act in such consolidated 
form as they think fit”, substitute — 
“publish — 
(a) any  information obtained by them under this Act in such consolidated form as they think 
fit; 
(b) in such manner as they may consider proper, any credit information disclosed under the 
Credit Information  Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005.”.  
 
PART III  
THE STATE FINANCIAL CORPORATION ACT, 1951  
(63 OF 1951)  
Section 40, after sub -section ( 3), insert — 
“(4) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit information disclosed under the 
Credit Information Companies  (Regulation) Act, 2005.”.  
 
PART IV  
THE STATE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1955  
(23 OF 1955)  
Section 44, after sub -section ( 2), insert — 
“(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit information disclosed under the 
Credit Information Companies  (Regulation) Act, 2005.”.  
 
  19 
 PART V  
THE STATE BANK OF INDIA (SUBSIDIARY BANKS ) ACT, 1959  
(38 OF 1959)  
Section 52, after sub -section ( 2), insert — 
“(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit information disclosed under the 
Credit Information Companies  (Regulation) Act, 2005.”.  
 
PART VI  
THE DEPOSIT INSURANCE AND CREDIT GUARANTEE CORPORATION ACT, 1961  
(47 OF 1961)  
Section 39, after sub -section ( 2), insert — 
“(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit information disclosed under the 
Credit Information Companies  (Regulation) Act, 2005.”.  
 
PART VII  
THE STATE AGRICULTURAL CREDIT CORPORATIONS ACT, 1968  
(60 OF 1968)  
Section 40, insert — 
“Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit information disclosed 
under the Credit Information  Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005.”.  
 
PART VIII  
THE BANKING COMPANIES (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER  OF UNDERTAKINGS ) ACT, 1970  
(5 OF 1970)  
Section 13, after sub -section ( 3), insert — 
“(4) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit information disclosed under the 
Credit Information Companies  (Regulation) Act, 2005.”.  
 
PART IX  
THE BANKING COMP ANIES (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS ) ACT, 1980  
(40 OF 1980)  
Section 13, after sub -section ( 3), insert — 
“(4) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit information disclosed under the 
Credit Information Companies  (Regulation) Act, 2005.”.  
PART X  
THE EXPORT -IMPORT BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1981  
(28 OF 1981)  
Section 30, after sub -section ( 3), insert — 
“(4) Nothing contained in this section  shall apply to the credit information disclosed under the 
Credit Information Companies  (Regulation) Act, 2005.”.  20 
 PART XI  
THE NATIONAL BANK FOR AGRICULTURE AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT ACT, 1981  
(61 OF 1981)  
Section 51, after sub -section ( 2), insert — 
“(3) Nothing  contained in this section shall apply to the credit information disclosed under the 
Credit Information Companies  (Regulation) Act, 2005.”.  
 
PART XII  
THE PUBLIC FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS (OBLIGATION AS  TO FIDELITY AND SECRECY ) ACT, 1983  
(48 OF 1983)  
Section 3, after sub -section ( 2), insert — 
“(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit information disclosed under the 
Credit Information Companies  (Regulation) Act, 2005.”.  
 
PART XIII  
THE NATIONAL HOUSING BANK ACT, 1987  
(53 OF 1987)  
Section 44, after sub -section ( 2), insert — 
“(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit information disclosed under the Credit 
Information Companies  (Regulation) Act, 2005.”.  
 
PART XIV  
THE REGIONAL RURAL BANKS ACT, 1976  
(21 OF 1976)  
Section 25,  after sub -section ( 2), insert — 
“(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit information disclosed under the 
Credit Information Companies  (Regulation) Act, 2005.”.  
 
——— ——  
 
--------------------------The Disaster Management Act, 2005--------------------------
1 
 THE DISASTER MANAGEMENT ACT, 2005  
____________  
ARRAGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________ ___ 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
THE NATIONAL  DISASTER  MANAGEMENT  AUTHORITY  
3. Establishment of National Disaster Management Authority.  
4. Meetings of National Authority.  
5. Appointment of officers and other employees of the National Authority.  
6. Powers and functions of National Authority.  
7. Constitution of advisory committee by National Authority.  
8. Constitution of National Executive Committee.  
9. Constitution of sub -committee s. 
10. Powers and functions of National Executive Committee.  
11. National plan.  
12. Guidelines for minimum standards of relief.  
13. Relief in loan repayment, etc.  
 
CHAPTER III  
STATE  DISASTER MANAGEMENT  AUTHORITY  
14. Establishment of State Disaster Management Authority.  
15. Meetings of the State Authority.  
16. Appointment of officers and other employees of State Authority.  
17. Constitution of advisory committee by the State Authority.  
18. Powers and functions of State Authority.  
19. Guide lines for minimum standard of relief by State Authority.  
20. Constitution of State Executive Committee.  
21. Constitution of sub -committee s by State Executive Committee.  
22. Functions of the State Executive Committee.  
23. State Plan.  
24. Powers and functions of State Executive  Committee in the event of threatening disaster situation.  
 
CHAPTER I V 
DISTRICT  DISASTER MANAGEMEN T A UTHORITY  
 
25. Constitution of D istrict Disaster Management Authority.  
26. Powers of Chairperson of District Authority.  
 
 
 
 2 
 SECTIONS  
27. Meetings.  
28. Constitution of advisory committees and other committees.  
29. Appointment of officers and other employees of District Authority.  
30. Powers and functions of District Authority.  
31. District Plan.  
32. Plans by different authorities at district level and their implement ation. 
33. Requisition by the District Authority.  
34. Powers and functions of District Authority in the event of any threatening disaster situation or 
disaster.  
CHAPTER V  
MEASURES BY THE GOV ERNMENT FOR DISASTER MANAGEMENT  
35. Central Government to take measure s. 
36. Responsibilities of Ministries  or Departments of Government of India.  
37. Disas ter management plans of Ministries  or Departments of Government of India.  
38. State Government to take measures.  
39. Responsibilities of departments of the State Government.  
40. Disaster management plan of departm ents of State.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
LOCAL AUTHORITIES  
41. Functions of the local authority.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
NATIONAL  INSTITUTEOF  DISASTER  MANAGEMENT  
42. National Institute of Disaster Management.  
43. Officers and other employees of the National Institute.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
NATIONAL  DISASTER  RESPONSE  FORCE  
44. National Disaster Response Force.  
45. Control, direction, etc.  
 
CHAPTER IX  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
46. National Disaster Response Fund.  
47. National Disaster Mitigation Fund.  
48. Establishm ent of funds by State Government . 
49. Allocation of funds by  Ministries  and Departments.  
50. Emergency procurement and accounting.  
  3 
 CHAPTER X  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
SECTIONS  
51. Punishment for obstruction , etc. 
52. Punishment for false claim.  
53. Punishment for misappropriation of money or materials, etc.  
54. Punishment for false warning.  
55. Offences by Departments of the Government.  
56. Failure of officer in duty or his connivance at the contravention of the provisions of this Act.  
57. Penalty for contravention of any order regarding requisitioning.  
58. Offence by companies.  
59. Previous sanction fo r prosecution.  
60. Cognizance of offences.  
CHAPTER XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
61. Prohibition against discrimination.  
62. Power to issue di rection by Central Government . 
63. Powers to be made available for rescue operations.  
64. Making or amending rules, etc., in certain circumstances.  
65. Power of requisition of resources, provisions, vehicles, etc., for rescue operations, etc.  
66. Payment of compensation.  
67. Direction to media for communication of warnings, etc.  
68. Authentication of orders of decisions.  
69. Delegation of powers.  
70. Annual report.  
71. Bar of j urisdiction of court.  
72. Act to have overriding effect.  
73. Action taken in good faith.  
74. Immunity from legal process.  
75. Powe r of Central Government to make  rules.  
76. Power to make regulations.  
77. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
78. Power of State Government to make rules.  
79. Power to remove difficulties.  
 
 
 
 
 
  4 
 THE DISASTER MANAGEMENT ACT, 2005  
ACT NO. 53 OF 2005  
[23rd December , 2005 .]  
An Act to provide for the effective management of disasters and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -sixth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the  Disaster Management 
Act, 2005.  
(2) It extends to the whole of Indi a. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette appoint; and different dates * may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and 
for different States, and any reference to commencement in any provision of this Act in relation  to any 
State shall be construed as a reference to the commencement of that provision in that State.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “affected area ” means an area or part of the country affected by a disaster;  
(b) “capacity -building” includes— 
(i) identification of existing resources and resources to be acquired or created;  
(ii) acquiring or creating resources identified under sub -clause ( i);  
(iii) organis ation and training of personnel and coordination of such training for effective 
management of disasters;  
(c) “Central Government ” means the Ministry or Department of the Government of India having 
administrative control of disaster management;  
(d) “disaster” means a catastrophe, mishap, calamity or grave occurrence in any area, arising from 
natural or man made causes, or by accident or negligence which results in substantial loss of life or 
human suffering or damage to, an d destruction of, property, or damage to, or degradation of, 
environment, and is of such a nature or magnitude as to be beyond the coping capacity of the 
community of the affected area;  
(e) “disaster management ” means a continuous and integrated process of planning, organising, 
coordinating and implementing measures which are necessary or expedient for — 
(i) prevention of danger or threat of any disaster;  
(ii) mitigation or reduction of risk of any disaster or it s severity or consequences;  
(iii) capacity -building;  
(iv) preparedness to deal with any disaster;  
(v) prompt response to any threatening disaster situation or disaster;  
(vi) assessing the severity or magnitude of effects of any disaster;  
                                                           
1. 28th July, 2006 (ss. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 75, 77, 79), vide notification No. S.O. 1216(E), dated 28th July, 2006;  
*1st August, 2007 [ss. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34,  38,  39, 40, 41, 48,  
51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68,  69, sub -sec. (2) of s. 70, 71, 72,  73, 74, 78, 79], vide 
notification N o. S.O. 722(E), dated 7th May , 2007;  
*17th March, 2008 (ss. 44, 45), vide notification No. 517(E), dated 17th March, 2008;  
*18th October, 2011 (s. 46), vide notification No. S.O. 239 7(E), dated 18th October, 2011, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 5 
 (vii) evacuation, rescue and relief;  
(viii) rehabilitation and reconstruction;  
(f) “District Authority ” means the District Disaster Management Authority constituted under sub -
section ( 1) of section 25;  
(g) “District Plan ” means the plan for disaster management  for the district prepared under section 
31;  
(h) “local authority ” includes panchayati raj institutions, municipalities, a district board, 
cantonment board, town planning authority or Zila Parishad or any other body or authority, by 
whatever name called, for the time being invested by law, for rendering essential services or, with the 
control and management of civic services, within a specified local area;  
(i) “mitigation” means measures aimed at reducing the risk, impact or effects of a disaster or 
threatening disaster situation;  
(j) “National Authority ” means the National Disaster Management Authority established under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 3;  
(k) “National Executi ve Committee ” means the Executive Committee of the National Authority 
constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 8;  
(l) “National Plan ” means the plan for disaster management for the whole of the country prepared 
under section 11;  
(m) “preparedness ” means the state of readiness to deal with a threatening disaster situation or 
disaster and the effects thereof;  
(n) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(o) “reconstruction ” means construction or restoration of any property after a d isaster;  
(p) “resources” includes manpower, services, materials and provisions;  
(q) “State Authority ” means the State Disaster Management Authority established under sub -
section ( 1) of section 14 and includes the Disaster Management Authority for the Union territory 
constituted under that section;  
(r) “State Executive Committee ” means the Executive Committee of a State Authority constituted 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 20;  
(s) “State Government ” means the Department of Government of the State having administrative 
control of disaster management and includes Administrator of the Union territory appointed by the 
President under article 239 of the Constitution;  
(t) “State Plan ” means the plan for disaster management for the whole of the State prepared under 
section 23.  
CHAPTER II  
THE NATIONAL  DISASTER  MANAGEMENT  AUTHORITY  
3. Establishment of Nationa l Disaster Management Authority. —(1) With effect from such date as 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette appoint in this behalf, there shall be 
established for the purposes of this Act, an authority to be known as the National Disaster Management 
Authority.  
(2) The National Authority shall consist of the Chairperson and such number of other members, not 
exceeding nine, as may be prescribed by the Central Government and, unless the rules otherwise provide, 
the National Authority s hall consist of the following: — 
(a) the Prime Minister of India, who shall be the Chairperson of the National Authority,                       
ex officio ;  
 6 
 (b) other members, not exceeding nine, to be nominated by the Chairperson of the National 
Authority.  
(3) The Chairperson of the Na tional Authority may designate one of the members nominated under 
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) to be the Vice -Chairperson of the National Authority.  
(4) The term of office and conditions of service of members of the National Authority shall  be such as 
may be prescribed.  
4. Meetings of National Authority .—(1) The National Authority shall meet as and when necessary 
and at such time and place as the Chairperson of the National Authority may think fit.  
(2) The Chairperson of the National Autho rity shall preside over the meetings of the National 
Authority.  
(3) If for any reason the Chairperson of the National Authority is unable to attend any meeting of the 
National Authority, the Vice -Chairperson of the National Authority shall preside over th e meeting.  
5. Appointment of officers and other employees of the National Authority .—The Central 
Government shall provide the National Authority with such officers, consultants and employees, as it 
considers necessary for carrying out the functions of the  National Authority.  
6. Powers and functions of National Authority. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the 
National Authority shall have the responsibility for laying down the policies, plans and guidelines for 
disaster management for ensuring tim ely and effective response to disaster.  
(2) Without prejudice to generality of the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the National 
Authority may — 
(a) lay down policies on disaster management;  
(b) approve the National Plan;  
(c) approve plans prepared by the Ministries or Departments of the Government of India in 
accordance with the National Plan;  
(d) lay down guidelines to be followed by the State Authorities in drawing up the State Plan;  
(e) lay down guidelines to be followed b y the different Ministries or Departments of the 
Government of India for the purpose of integrating the measures for prevention of disaster or the 
mitigation of its effects in their development plans and projects;  
(f) coordinate the enforcement and implem entation of the policy and plan for disaster 
management;  
(g) recommend provision of funds for the purpose of mitigation;  
(h) provide such support to other countries affected by major disasters as may be determined by 
the Central  Government;  
(i) take such other measures for the prevention of disaster, or the mitigation, or preparedness and 
capacity building for dealing with the threatening disaster situation or disaster as it may consider 
necessary;  
(j) lay down broad policies and guidelines for t he functioning of the National Institute of Disaster 
Management.  
(3) The Chairperson of the National Authority shall, in the case of emergency, have power to exercise 
all or any of the powers of the National Authority but exercise of such powers shall be subject to ex post 
facto  ratification by the National Authority.  
7. Constitution of advisory committee by National Authority. —(1) The National Authority may 
constitute an advisory committee consisting of experts in the field of disaster management and having 
practical experience of disaster management at the national, State or district level to make 
recommendations on different asp ects of disaster management.  7 
 (2) The members of the advisory committee shall be paid such allowances as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government in consultation with the National Authority.  
8. Constitution of National Executive Committee. —(1) The Cent ral Government shall, 
immediately after issue of notification under sub -section ( 1) of section 3, constitute a National Executive 
Committee to assist the National Authority in the performance of its functions under this Act.  
(2) The National Executive Com mittee shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry or Department of the 
Central Government having administrative control of the disaster management, who shall be 
Chairperson, ex of ficio;  
(b) the Secretaries to the Government of India in the Ministries or Departments having 
administrative control of the agriculture, atomic energy, defence, drinking water supply, environment 
and forests, finance (expenditure), health, power, rural de velopment, science and technology, space, 
telecommunication, urban development, water resources and the Chief of the Integrated Defence Staff 
of the Chiefs of Staff Committee, ex officio .  
(3) The Chairperson of the National Executive Committee may invite any other officer of the Central 
Government or a State Government for taking part in any meeting of the National Executive Committee 
and shall exercise such powers and perform such functions as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government in consultation wi th the National Authority.  
(4) The procedure to be followed by the National Executive Committee in exercise of its powers and 
discharge of its functions shall be such as may be prescrib ed by the Central Government.  
9. Constitution of sub -committees. —(1) The National Executive Committee may, as and when it 
considers necessary, constitute one or more sub -committees, for the efficient discharge of its functions.  
(2) The National Executive Committee shall, from amongst its members, appoint the Chairperson of 
the sub -committee referred to in sub -section ( 1).  
(3) Any person associated as an expert with any sub -committee may be paid such allowances as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government.  
10. Powers and functions of National Executive Committee .—(1) The National Executive 
Committee shall assist the National Authority in the discharge of its functions and have the responsibility 
for implementing the policies and plans of the National Authority and ensure the compliance of directions 
issued by the Cen tral Government for the purpose of disaster management in the country.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the Nat ional 
Executive Committee may — 
(a) act as the coordinating and monitoring body for disast er management;  
(b) prepare the National Plan to be approved by the National Authority;  
(c) coordinate and monitor the implementation of the National Policy;  
(d) lay down guidelines for preparing disaster management plans by different Ministries or 
Departments of the Government of India and the State Authorities;  
(e) provide necessary technical assistance to the State Governments and the State Authorities for 
prepa ring their disaster management plans in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the 
National Authority;  
(f) monitor the implementation of the National Plan and the plans prepared by the Ministries or 
Departments of the Government of India;  
(g) monito r the implementation of the guidelines laid down by the National Authority for 
integrating of measures for prevention of disasters and mitigation by the Ministries or Departments in 
their development plans and projects;  
 8 
 (h) monitor, coordinate and give d irections regarding the mitigation and preparedness measures to 
be taken by different Ministries or Departments and agencies of the Government;  
(i) evaluate the preparedness at all governmental levels for the purpose of responding to any 
threatening disas ter situation or disaster and give directions, where necessary, for  enhancing such 
preparedness;  
(j) plan and coordinate specialis ed training programme for disaster management for different 
levels of officers, employees and voluntary rescue workers;  
(k) coordinate response in the event of any threatening disaster situation or disaster;  
(l) lay down guidelines for, or give directions to, the concerned Ministries or Departments of the 
Government of India, the State Governments and the State Authorities rega rding measures to be taken 
by them in response to any threatening disaster situation or disaster;  
(m) require any department or agency of the Government to make available to the National 
Authority or State Authorities such men or material resources as are  available with it for the purposes 
of emergency response, rescue and relief;  
(n) advise, assist and coordinate the activities of the Ministries or Departments of the Government 
of India, State Authorities, statutory bodies, other governmental or non -gove rnmental organisation s 
and others engaged in disaster management;  
(o) provide necessary technical assistance or give advice to the State Authorities and District 
Authorities for carrying out their functions under this Act;  
(p) promote general education a nd awareness in relation to disaster management; and  
(q) perform such other functions as the National Authority may require it to perform.  
11. National Plan. —(1) There shall be drawn up a plan for disaster management for the whole of the 
country to be ca lled the National Plan.  
(2) The National Plan shall be prepared by the National Executive Committee having regard to the 
National Policy and in consultation with the State Governments and expert bodies or organisation s in the 
field of disaster management to be approved by the National Authority.  
(3) The National Plan shall include — 
(a) measures to be taken for the prevention of disasters, or the mitigation of their effects;  
(b) measures to be taken for the integration of mitigation measures in the develo pment plans;  
(c) measures to be taken for preparedness and capacity building to effectively respond to any 
threatening disaster situations or disaster;  
(d) roles and responsibilities of different Ministries or Departments of the Government of India in 
respect of measures specified in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c). 
(4) The National Plan shall be reviewed and updated annually.  
(5) Appropriate provisions shall be made by the Central Government for financing the measures to be 
carried out under the National Plan.  
(6) Copies of the National Plan referred to in sub -sections ( 2) and ( 4) shall be made available to the 
Ministries or Dep artments of the Government of India and such Ministries or Departments shall draw up 
their own plans in accordance with the National Plan.  
12. Guidelines for minimum standards of relief .—The National Authority shall recommend 
guidelines for the minimum st andards of relief to be provided to persons affected by  disaster, which shall 
include,— 
(i) the minimum requirements to be provided in the relief camps in relation to shelter, food, 
drinking water, medical cover and sanitation;  
(ii) the special provisions  to be made for widows and orphans;  9 
 (iii) ex gratia  assistance on account of loss of life as also assistance on account of damage to 
houses and for restoration of means of livelihood;  
(iv) such other relief as may be necessary.  
13. Relief in loan repayment, etc. —The National Authority may, in cases of disasters of severe 
magnitude, recommend relief in repayment of loans or for grant of fresh loans to the persons affected by 
disaster on such concessional terms as may be appropriate.  
CHAPTER III  
STATE DISASTER  MANAGEMENT  AUTHORITIES  
14. Establishment of State Disaster Management Authority. —(1) Every State Government shall, 
as soon as may be after the issue of the notification under sub -section ( 1) of section 3, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, establish a State Disaster Management Authority for the State with such name as 
may be specified in the notification of the State Government.  
(2) A State Authority shall consist of the Chairperson a nd such number of other members, not 
exceeding nine, as may be prescribed by the State Government and, unless the rules otherwise provide, 
the State Authority shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Chief Minister of the State, who shall be Chairperson, ex officio ;  
(b) other members, not exceeding eight, to be nominated by the Chairp erson of the State 
Authority;  
(c) the Chairperson of the State Executive Committee, ex officio .  
(3) The Chairperso n of the State Authority may designate one of the members nominated under 
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) to be the Vice -Chairperson of the State Authority.  
(4) The Chairperson of the State Executive Committee shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the 
State Authority, ex officio :  
Provided that in the case of a Union territory having Legislative Assembly, except the Union territory 
of Delhi, the Chief Minister shall be the Chairperson of the Authority established under this section and in 
case of other Uni on territories, the Lieutenant Governor or the Administrator shall be the Chairperson of 
that Authority:  
Provided further that the Lieutenant Governor of the Union territory of Delhi shall be the Chairperson 
and the Chief Minister thereof shall be the Vic e-Chairperson of the State Authority.  
(5) The term of office and conditions of service of members of the State Authority shall be such as 
may be prescribed.  
15. Meetings of the State Authority .—(1) The State Authority shall meet as and when necessary 
and at such time and place as the Chairperson of the State Authority may think fit.  
(2) The Chairperson of the State Authority shall preside over the meetings of the State Authority.  
(3) If for any r eason, the Chairperson of the State Authority is unable to attend the meeting of the 
State Authority, the Vice -Chairperson of the State Authority shall preside at the meeting.  
16. Appointment of officers and oth er employees of State Authority. —The State G overnment 
shall provide the State Authority with such officers, consultants and employees, as it considers necessary, 
for carrying out the functions of the State Authority.  
17. Constitution of advisory c ommittee by the State Authority. —(1) A State Authori ty may, as 
and when it considers necessary, constitute an advisory committee, consisting of experts in the field of 
disaster management and having practical experience of disaster management to make recommendations 
on different aspects of disaster manageme nt.  
(2) The members of the advisory committee shall be paid such allowances as may be prescribed by 
the State Government.  10 
 18. Powers and functions of State Authority. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a State 
Authority shall have the responsibil ity for laying down policies and plans for disas ter management in the 
State.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of provisions contained in sub -section (1), the State Authority 
may— 
(a) lay down the State disaster management policy;  
(b) approve the State Plan in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the National Authority;  
(c) approve the disaster management plans prepared by the departments of the Government of the 
State;  
(d) lay down guidelines to be followed by the departments o f the Government of the State for the 
purposes of integration of measures for prevention of disasters and mitigation in their development 
plans and projects and provide necessary technical assistance therefor;  
(e) coordinate the implementation of the State Plan;  
(f) recommend provision of funds for mitigation and preparedness measures;  
(g) review the development plans of the different departments of the State and ensure that 
prevention and mitigation measures are i ntegrated therein;  
(h) review the measures being taken for mitigation, capacity building and preparedness by the 
departments of the Government of the State and issue such guidelines as may be necessary.  
(3) The Chairperson of the State Authority shall, i n the case of emergency, have power to exercise all 
or any of the powers of the State Authority but the exercise of such powers shall be subject to                   
ex post facto  ratification of the State Authority.  
19. Guidelines for minimum standard of  relief by State Authority .—The State Authority shall lay 
down detailed guidelines for providing standards of relief to persons affected by disaster in the State:  
Provided that such standards shall in no case be less than the minimum standards in the guid elines 
laid down by the National Authority in this regard.  
20. Constitution of State Executive Committee. —(1) The State Government shall, immediately 
after issue of notification under sub -section ( 1) of section 14, constitute a State Executive Committee to 
assist the State Authority in the performance of its functions and to coordinate action in accordance with 
the guidelines laid down by the State Authority and ensure the compliance of directions is sued by the 
State Government under this Act.  
(2) The State Executive Committee shall consist of the following memb ers, namely: — 
(a) the Chief Secretary to the State Government, who shall  be Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(b) four Secretaries to the Government o f the State of such departments as the State Government 
may think fit, ex officio .  
(3) The Chairperson of the State Executive Committee shall exercise such powers and perform such 
functions as may be prescribed by the State Government and such other power s and functions as may be 
delegated to him by the State Authority.  
(4) The procedure to be followed by the State Executive Committee in exercise of its powers and 
discharge of its functions shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
21. Constitution of sub -committees by State Executive Committee. —(1) The State Executive 
Committee may, as and when it considers necessary, constitute one or more sub -committees, for efficient 
discharge of its functions.  
(2) The State Executive Committee shal l, from amongst its members, appoint the Chairperson of the 
sub-committee referred to in sub -section ( 1).  11 
 (3) Any person associated as an expert with any sub -committee may be paid such allowances as may 
be prescribed by the State Government.  
22. Functions of the State Executive Committee .—(1) The State Executive Committee shall have 
the responsibility for implementing the National Plan and State Plan and act as the coordinating and 
monitoring body for management of disaster in the State.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the State Executive 
Committee may — 
(a) coordinate and monitor the implementation of the National Policy, the National Plan and the 
State Plan;  
(b) examine the vulnerability of diffe rent parts of the State to different forms of disasters and 
specify measures to be taken for their prevention or mitigation;  
(c) lay down guidelines for preparation of disaster management plans by the departments of the 
Government of the State and the Dis trict Authorities;  
(d) monitor the implementation of disaster management plans prepared by the departments of the 
Government of the State and District Authorities;  
(e) monitor the implementation of the guidelines laid down by the State Authority for inte grating 
of measures for prevention of disasters and mitigation by the departments in their dev elopment plans 
and projects;  
(f) evaluate preparedness at all governmental or non -governmental levels to respond to any 
threatening disaster situation or disaster  and give directions, where necessary, for enhancing such 
preparedness;  
(g) coordinate response in the event of any threatening disaster situation or disaster;  
(h) give directions to any Department of the Government of the State or any other authority or  
body in the State regarding actions to be taken in response to any threatening disaster situation or 
disaster;  
(i) promote general education, awareness and community training in regard to the forms of 
disasters to which different parts of the State are v ulnerable and the measures that may be taken by 
such community to prevent the disaster, mitigate and respond to such disaster;  
(j) advise, assist and coordinate the activities of the Departments of the Government of the State, 
District Authorities, statut ory bodies and other governmental and non -governmental organisation s 
engaged in disaster management;  
(k) provide necessary technical assistance or give advice to District Authorities and local 
authorities for carrying out their functions effectively;  
(l) advise the State Government regarding all financial matters in relation to disaster 
management;  
(m) examine the construction, in any local area in the State and, if it is of the opinion that the 
standards laid for such construction for the prevention of disaster is not being or has not been 
followed, may direct the District Authority or the local authority, as the case may be, to take such 
action as may be necessary to secure compliance of such standards;  
(n) provide information to the National Authority  relating to different aspects of disaster 
management;  
(o) lay down, review and update State level response plans and guidelines and ensure that the 
district level plans are prepared, reviewed and updated;  
(p) ensure that communication systems are in ord er and the disaster management drills are carried 
out periodically;  
(q) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the State Authority or as it may 
consider necessary.  12 
 23. State Plan. —(1) There shall be a plan for disaster management for ev ery State to be called the 
State Disaster Management Plan.  
(2) The State Plan shall be prepared by the State Executive Committee having regard to the guidelines 
laid down by the National Authority and after such consultation with local  authorities, distr ict authorities 
and the people's representatives as the State Executive Committee may deem fit.  
(3) The State Plan prepared by the State Executive Committee under sub -section ( 2) shall be 
approved by the State Authority.  
(4) The State Plan shall include, — 
(a) the vulnerability of different parts of the State to different forms of disasters;  
(b) the measures to be adopted for prevention and mitigation of disasters;  
(c) the manner in which the mitigation measures shall be integrated with the development plans 
and projects;  
(d) the capacity -building and preparedness measures to be taken;  
(e) the roles and responsibilities of each Department of the Government of the State in relation to 
the measures specified in clauses ( b), (c) and ( d) above;  
(f) the roles and responsibilities of different Departments of the Government of the State in 
responding to any threatening disaster situation or disaster.  
(5) The State Plan shall be reviewed and updated annually.  
(6) Appropriate provisions shall be made by the State Government for financing for the measures to 
be carried out under the State Plan.  
(7) Copies of the State Plan referred to in sub -sections ( 2) and ( 5) shall be made available to the 
Departments of the Government of the State and such Departments shall draw up their own plans in 
accordance with the State Plan.  
24. Powers and functions of State Executive Committee in the event of threatening disas ter 
situation.—For the purpose of, assisting and protecting the community affected by disaster or providing 
relief to such community or, preventing or combating disruption or dealing with the effects of any 
threatening disaster situation, the  State Executi ve Committee may — 
(a) control and restrict, vehicular traffic to, from or within, the vulnerable or affected area;  
(b) control and restrict the entry of any person into, his movement within and departure from, a 
vulnerable or affected area;  
(c) remove de bris, conduct search and carry out rescue operations;  
(d) provide shelter, food, drinking water, essential provisions, healthcare and services in 
accordance with the standards laid down by the National Au thority and State Authority;  
(e) give direction to the concerned Department of the Government of the State, any District 
Authority or other authority, within the local limits of the State to take such measure or steps for 
rescue, evacuation or providing immediate relief saving lives or property, as may be necessary in its 
opinion;  
(f) require any department of the Government of the State or any other body or authority or 
person in charge of any relevant resources to make available the resources for the purposes of 
emergency response, rescue and relief;  
(g) require experts and consultants in the field of disasters to provide advice and assistance for 
rescue and relief;  
(h) procure exclusive or preferential use of amenities from any authority or person as and when 
required;  
 13 
 (i) construct temporary bridges  or other necessary structures and demolish unsafe structures 
which may be hazardous to public;  
(j) ensure that non -governmental organisation s carry out their activities in an equitable  and non -
discriminatory manner;  
(k) disseminate information to public to deal with any threatening disaster situation or disaster;  
(l) take such steps as the Central Government or the State Government may direct in this regard 
or take such other steps as are required or warranted by the form of any threatening disaster situation 
or disaster.  
CHAPTER IV  
DISTRICT  DISASTER  MANAGEMENT  AUTHORI TY 
25. Constitution of District Disaster Management Authority .—(1) Every State Government shall, 
as soon as may be after issue of notification under sub -section ( 1) of section 14, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, establish a District Disaster Management Authority for every district in the State with 
such name as may be specified in that notification.  
(2) The District Authority shall consist of the Chairpers on and such number of other members, not 
exceeding seven, as may be prescribed by the State Government, and unless the rules otherwise provide, 
it shall con sist of the following, namely: — 
(a) the Collector or District Magistrate or Deputy Commissioner, as the case may be, of the 
district who shal l be Chairperson, ex officio ;  
(b) the elected representative of the local authority who shall be the co -Chairperson, ex officio :  
Provided that in the Tribal Areas, as referred to in the Sixth Schedule to the Const itution, the 
Chief Executive Member of the district council of autonomous district, shall be the co -Chairperson, 
ex officio ;  
(c) the Chief Executive Officer of the District Authority, ex officio ;  
(d) the Superintendent of Police, ex officio ;  
(e) the Chief Medical Officer of the district, ex officio ;  
(f) not exceeding two other district level officers, to be appointed by the State Government.  
(3) In any district where zila parishad exists, the Chairperson thereof shall be the co -Chairperson of 
the District Authority.  
(4) The State Government shall appoint an officer not below the rank of Additional Collector or 
Additional District Magistrate or Additional Deputy Commissioner, as the case may be, of the district to 
be the Chief Executive Officer of  the District Authority to exercise such powers and perform such 
functions as may be prescribed by the State Government and such other powers and functions as may be 
delegated to him by the District Authority.  
26. Powers of Ch airperson of District Authori ty.—(1) The Chairperson of the District Authority 
shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of the District Authority, exercise and discharge such 
powers and functions of the District Authority as the District Authority may delegate to him.  
(2) The Chairperson of the District Authority shall, in the case of an emergency, have power to 
exercise all or any of the powers of the District Authority but the exercise of such powers shall be subject 
to ex post facto  ratification of the District Authority.  
(3) The District Authority or the Chairperson of the District Authority may, by general or special 
order, in writing, delegate such of its or his powers and functions, under sub -section ( 1) or ( 2), as the case 
may be, to the Chief Executive Officer of the  District Authority, subject to such conditions and 
limitations, if any, as it or he deems fit.  
27. Meetings .—The District Authority shall meet as and when necessary and at such time and place 
as the Chairperson may think fit.  14 
 28. Constitution of advisory committees and other committees. —(1) The District Authority may, 
as and when it considers necessary, constitute one or more advisory committees and other committees for 
the efficien t discharge of its functions.  
(2) The District Authority shall, from amongst its members, appoint the Chairperson of the 
Committee referred to in sub -section ( 1).  
(3) Any person associated as an expert with any committee or sub -committee constituted under              
sub-section ( 1) may be paid such allowances as may  be prescribed by the State Government.  
29. Appointment of officers and other employees of District Authority .—The State Government 
shall provide the District Authority with such officers, consultants and other employees as it considers 
necessary for carr ying out the functions of District Authority.  
30. Powers and functions of District Authority. —(1) The District Authority shall act as the district 
planning, coordinating and implementing body for disaster management and take all measures for the 
purposes of disaster management in the district in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the 
National Aut hority and the State Authority.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the District Authority 
may— 
(i) prepare a di saster management plan including district response plan for the district;  
(ii) coordinate and monitor the implementation of the National Policy, State Policy, National 
Plan, State Plan and District Plan;  
(iii) ensure that the areas in the district vulner able to disasters are identified and measures for the 
prevention of disasters and the mitigation of its effects are undertaken by the departments of the 
Government at the district level as well as by the local authorities;  
(iv) ensure that the guidelines for prevention of disasters, mitigation of its effects, preparedness 
and response measures as laid down by the National Authority and the State Authority are followed 
by all departments of the Government at the district level and the local authorities in t he district;  
(v) give directions to different authorities at the district level and local authorities to take such 
other measures for the prevention or mitigation of disasters as may be necessary;  
(vi) lay down guidelines for prevention of disaster manag ement plans by the department of the 
Government at the districts level and local authorities in the district;  
(vii) monitor the implementation of disaster management plans prepared by the Departments of 
the Government at the district level;  
(viii) lay do wn guidelines to be followed by the Departments of the Government at the district 
level for purposes of integration of measures for prevention of disasters and mitigation in their 
development plans and projects and provide necessary te chnical assistance th erefor;  
(ix) monitor the implementation of measures referred to in clause ( viii);  
(x) review the state of capabilities for responding to any disaster or threatening disaster situation 
in the district and give directions to the relevant departments or auth orities at the district level for 
their up gradation as may be necessary;  
(xi) review the preparedness measures and give directions to the concerned departments at the 
district level or other concerned authorities where necessary for bringing the prepared ness measures 
to the levels required for responding effectively to any disaster or threatening disaster situation;  
(xii) organise  and coordinate specialis ed training programmes for different levels of officers, 
employees and voluntary rescue workers in the district;  
(xiii) facilitate community training and awareness programmes for prevention of disaster or 
mitigation with the support of local authorities, governmental and non -governmental organisation s;  
 15 
 (xiv) set up, maintain, review and upgrade the mechanism for early warnings and dissemination of 
proper information to public;  
(xv) prepare, review and update district level response plan and guidelines;  
(xvi) coordinate response to any threatening disaster situation or disaster;  
(xvii) ensure that the Departments of the Government at the district level and the local authorities 
prepare their response plans in accordance with the district response plan;  
(xviii) lay down guidelines for, or give direction to, the concerned Department of the Government 
at the district level or any other authorities within the local limits of the district to take measures to 
respond effectively to any threatening disaster si tuation or disaster;  
(xix) advise, assist and coordinate the activities of the Departments of the Government at the 
district level, statutory bodies and other governmental and non -governmental organisation s in the 
district engaged in the disaster management;  
(xx) coordinate with, and give guidelines to, local authorities in the district to ensure that 
measures for the prevention or mitigation of threatening disaster situation or disaster in the district ar e 
carried out promptly and effectively;  
(xxi) provide necessary technical assistance or give advise to the local authorities in the district 
for carrying out their functions;  
(xxii) review development plans prepared by the Departments of the Government a t the district 
level, statutory authorities or local authorities with a view to make necessary provisions therein for 
preventio n of disaster or mitigation;  
(xxiii) examine the construction in any area in the district and, if it is of the opinion that the 
standards for the prevention of disaster or mitigation laid down for such construction is not being or 
has not been followed, may direct the concerned authority to take such action as may be necessary to 
secure compliance of such standards;  
(xxiv) identify  buildings and places which could, in the event of any threatening disaster situation 
or disaster, be used as relief centers or camps and make arrangements for water supply and sanitation 
in such buildings or places;  
(xxv) establish stockpiles of relief a nd rescue materials or ensure preparedness to make such 
materials available at a short notice;  
(xxvi) provide information to the State Authority relating to different aspects of disaster 
management;  
(xxvii ) encourage the involvement  of non -governmental organisation s and voluntary social -
welfare institutions working at the grassroots level in the district for disaster management;  
(xxviii ) ensure communication systems are in order, and disaster management drills are carried 
out periodically;  
(xxix) perform such other functions as the State Government or State Authority may assign to it or 
as it deems necessary for disaster management in the District.  
31. District Plan .—(1) There shall be a plan for disaster management for every district of the State.   
(2) The District Plan shall be prepared by the District Authority, after consultation with the local 
authorities and having regard to the National Plan and the State Plan, to be approved by the State 
Authority.  
(3) The District Plan shall include — 
(a) the areas in the district vulnerable to different forms of disasters;  
(b) the measures to be taken, for prevention and mitigation of disaster, by the Departments of the 
Government at the district level and local authorities in the district;  16 
 (c) the capaci ty-building and preparedness measures required to be taken by the Departments of 
the Government at the district level and the local authorities in the district to respond to any 
threatening disaster situation or disaster;  
(d) the response plans and proced ures, in the eve nt of a disaster, providing for — 
(i) allocation of responsibilities to the Departments of the Government at the district level and 
the local authorities in the district;  
(ii) prompt response to disaster and relief thereof;  
(iii) procuremen t of essential resources;  
(iv) establishment of communication link s; and  
(v) the dissemination of information to the public;  
(e) such other matters as may be required by the State Authority.  
(4) The District Plan shall be reviewed and updated annually.  
(5) The copies of the District Plan referred to in sub -sections ( 2) and ( 4) shall be made available to the 
Departments of the Government in the district.  
(6) The District Authority shall send a copy of the District Plan to the State Authority which shall 
forward it to the State Government.  
(7) The District Authority shall, review from time to time, the implementation of the Plan and issue 
such instructions to different departments of the Governm ent in the district as it may deem necessary for 
the implementation thereof.  
32. Plans by different authorities at district level and their implementation. —Every office of the 
Government of India and of the State Government at the district level and the l ocal authorities shall, 
subject to the supervisi on of the District Authority, — 
(a) prepare a disaster management plan set ting out the following, namely: — 
(i) provisions for prevention and mitigation measures as provided for in the District Plan and 
as is a ssigned to the department or agency concerned;  
(ii) provisions for taking measures relating to capacity -building and preparedness as laid 
down in the District Plan;  
(iii) the response plans and procedures, in the event of, any threatening disaster situat ion or 
disaster;  
(b) coordinate the preparation and the implementation of its plan with those of the other 
organisation s at the district level including local authority, communities and other stakeholders;  
(c) regularly review and update the plan; and  
(d) submit a copy of its disaster management plan, and of any amendment theret o, to the District 
Authority.  
33. Requisition by the District Authority .—The District Authority may by order require any officer 
or any Department at the district level or any local authority to take such measures for the prevention or 
mitigation of disaster, or to effectively respond to it, as may be necessary, and such office r or department 
shall be bound to carry out such order.  
34. Powers and functions of District Authority in the event of any threatening disaster situation 
or disaster. —For the purpose of assisting, protecting or providing relief to the community, in respon se to 
any threatening disaster situation or disast er, the District Authority may — 
(a) give directions for the release and use of resources available with any Department of the 
Government and the local authority in the district;  
(b) control and restrict vehicular traffic to, from and within, the vulnerable or affected area;  17 
 (c) control and restrict the entry of any person into, his movement within and departure from, a 
vulnerable or affected area;  
(d) remove debris, conduct search an d carry out rescue operations;  
(e) provide shelter, food, drinking water and essential provisions, healthcare and services;  
(f) establish emergency communication systems in the affected area;  
(g) make arrangements for the disposal of the unclaimed dead bodies;  
(h) recommend to any Department of the Government of the State or any authority or body under 
that Government at the district level to take such measures as are necessary in its opinion;  
(i) require experts and consultants in the relevant fields to advise and assist as it may deem 
necessary;  
(j) procure exclusive or preferential use of amenities from any authority or person;  
(k) construct temporary bridges or other necessary structures and demolish structures which may 
be hazardous to public or aggravate the effects of the disaster;  
(l) ensure that the non -governmental organisation s carry out their activities in an equitable and 
non-discriminatory manner;  
(m) take such other steps  as may be required or warranted  to be taken in such a situation.  
CHAPTER V  
MEASURES BY THE GOVERNMENT FOR DISASTER MANAGEMENT  
35. Cent ral Government to take measures. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government shall take all such measures as it deems necessary or expedient for the purpose of disaster 
management.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section (1), the 
measures which the Central Government may take under that sub -section include measures with respect 
to all or any of the following matters, namely :— 
(a) coordination of actions of the Ministries or Departments of the Government of India, State 
Governments, National Authority, State Authorities, governmental and non -governmental 
organisation s in relation to disaster management;  
(b) ensure the integration of measures for prevention of disasters and mitigation by Ministries or 
Departments of the G overnment of India into their development plans and projects;  
(c) ensure appropriate allocation of funds for prevention of disaster, mitigation, capacity -building 
and preparedness by the Ministries or Departments of the Government of India;  
(d) ensure th at the Ministries or Departments of the Government of India take necessary measures 
for preparedness to promptly and effectively respond to any threatening disaster situation or disaster;  
(e) cooperation and assistance to State Governments, as requested b y them or otherwise deemed 
appropriate by it;  
(f) deployment of naval, military and air forces, other armed forces of the Union or any other 
civilian personnel as may be required for the purposes of this Act;  
(g) coordination with the United Nations agencies, international organisation s and governments 
of foreign countries for the purposes of this Act;  
(h) establish institutions for research, training, and developmental programmes in the field of 
disaster managemen t;  
(i) such other matters as it deems necessary or expedient for the purpose of securing effective 
implementation of the provisions of this Act.  18 
 (3) The Central Government may extend such support to other countries affected by major disaster as 
it may de em appropriate.  
36. Responsibilities of Ministries or Dep artments of Government of India. —It shall be the 
responsibility of every Ministry or Department of  the Government of India  to— 
(a) take measures necessary for prevention of disasters, mitigation, preparedness and capacity -
building in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the National Authority;  
(b) integrate into its development plans and projects, the measures for prevention or  mitigation of 
disasters in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the National Authority;  
(c) respond effectively and promptly to any threatening disaster situation or disaster in 
accordance with the guidelines of the National Authority or the direc tions of the National Executive 
Committee in this behalf;  
(d) review the enactments administered by it, its policies, rules and regulations, with a view to 
incorporate therein the provisions necessary for prevention of disasters, mitigation or preparednes s;  
(e) allocate funds for measures for prevention of disaster, mitigation, capacity -building and 
preparedness;  
(f) provide assistance to the National Autho rity and State Governments for — 
(i) drawing up mitigation, preparedness and response plans, capacit y-building, data collection 
and identification and training of personnel in relation to disaster management;  
(ii) carrying out rescue and relief operations in the affected area;  
(iii) assessing the damage from any disaster;  
(iv) carrying out rehabilitat ion and reconstruction;  
(g) make available its resources to the National Executive Committee or a State Executive 
Committee for the purposes of responding promptly and effectively to any threatening disaster 
situation or di saster, including measures for — 
(i) providing emergency communication in a vulnerable or affected area ;  
(ii) transporting personnel and relief goods to and from the affected area;  
(iii) providing evacuation, rescue, temporary shelter or other immediate relief;  
(iv) setting up temporary bridges, jetties and landing places;  
(v) providing, drinking water, essential provisions, healthcare, and services in an affected 
area;  
(h) take such other actions as it may consider necessary for disaster management.  
37. Disaster management plans of Ministries or Depar tments of Government of India. —(1) 
Every Ministry or Department of  the Government of India shall — 
(a) prepare a disaster management plan specifying the following particulars, n amely:— 
(i) the measures to be taken by it for prevention and mitigation of disasters in accordance 
with the National Plan;  
(ii) the specifications regarding integration of mitigation measures in its development plans in 
accordance with the guidelines of the National Authority and the National Executive Committee;  
(iii) its roles and responsibilities in relation to preparedness and capacity -building to deal with 
any threatening disaster situation or disaster;  
(iv) its roles and responsibilities in regard to promptly and effectively responding to any 
threatening disaster situation or disaster;  19 
 (v) the present status of its preparedness to perform the roles and responsibilities specified in 
sub-clauses ( iii) and ( iv);  
(vi) the measures required to be taken in order to  enable it to perform its responsibilities 
specified in sub -clauses ( iii) and ( iv);  
(b) review and update annually the plan referred to in clause ( a);  
(c) forward a copy of the plan referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b), as the case may be, to the 
Cent ral Government which Government shall forward a copy thereof to the National Authority for its 
approval.  
(2) Every Ministry or Department of  the Government of India shall — 
(a) make, while preparing disaster management plan under clause ( a) of sub -section (1), 
provisions for financing the activities specified therein;  
(b) furnish a status report regarding the implementation of the plan referred to in clause ( a) of 
sub-section ( 1) to the National Authority, as and when required by it.  
38. State Government to take measures .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, each State 
Government shall take all measures specified in the guidelines laid down by the National Authority and 
such further measures as it deems necessary or expedient, for the purpose of disaster management.  
(2) The measures which the State Government may take under sub -section ( 1) include measures with 
respect to all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) coordination of actions of different departments of the Government of the State, the State 
Authority, District Authorities, local authority and other non -governmental organisation s;  
(b) cooperation and assistance in the disaster management to the National Authority and National 
Executive Committee, the State Authority and the State Executive Committee, and the District 
Authorities;  
(c) cooperation with, and assistance to, the Ministries or Departments of the Government of India 
in disaster management, as r equested by them or otherwise deemed appropriate by it;  
(d) allocation of funds for measures for prevention of disaster, mitigation, capacity -building and 
preparedness by the departments of the Government of the State in accordance with the provisions of 
the State Plan and the District Plans;  
(e) ensure that the integration of measures for prevention of disaster or mitigation by the 
departments of the Government of the State in their development plans and projects;  
(f) integrate in the State development plan, measures to reduce or mitigate the vulnerability of 
different parts of the State to different disasters;  
(g) ensure the preparation of disaster management plans by different departments of the State in 
accordance with the guidelines laid down by the  National Authority and the State Authority;  
(h) establishment of adequate warning systems up to the level of vulnerable communities;  
(i) ensure that different departments of the Government of the State and the District Authorities 
take appropriate prepa redness measures;  
(j) ensure that in a threatening disaster situation or disaster, the resources of different departments 
of the Government of the State are made available to the National Executive Committee or the State 
Executive Committee or the Distric t Authorities, as the case may be, for the purposes of effective 
response, rescue and relief in any threatening disaster situation or disaster;  
(k) provide rehabilitation and reconstruction assistance to the victims of any disaster; and  
(l) such other ma tters as it deems necessary or expedient for the purpose of securing effective 
implementation of provisions of this Act.  
 20 
 39. Responsibilities of departments of the State Government .—It shall be the responsibility of 
every department o f the Government of a State to— 
(a) take measures necessary for prevention of disasters, mitigation, preparedness and capacity -
building in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the National Autho rity and the State 
Authority;  
(b) integrate into its development plans and projects, the measures for prevention of disaster and 
mitigation;  
(c) allocate funds for prevention of disaster, mitigation, capacity -building and preparedness;  
(d) respond effectively and promptly to any threatening disaster situation or disaster in 
accordance with the State Plan, and in accordance with the guidelines or directions of the National 
Executive Committee and the State Executive Committee;  
(e) review the enactments administered by it, its policies, rules and regulations with a view to 
incorp orate therein the provisions necessary for prevention of disasters, mitigation or preparedness;  
(f) provide assistance, as required, by the National Executive Committee, the State Executive 
Committe e and District Authorities, for — 
(i) drawing up mitigation, preparedness and response plans, capacity -building, data collection 
and identification and training of personnel in relation to disaster management;  
(ii) assessing the damage from any disaster;  
(iii) carrying out rehabilitation and reconstruction;  
(g) make provision for resources in consultation with the State Authority for the implementation 
of the District Plan by its authorities at the district level;  
(h) make available its resources to the Nationa l Executive Committee or the State Executive 
Committee or the District Authorities for the purposes of responding promptly and effectively to any 
disaster in the  State, including measures for — 
(i) providing emergency communication with a vulnerable or affe cted area;  
(ii) transporting personnel and relief goods to and from the affected area;  
(iii) providing evacuation, rescue, temporary shelter or other immediate relief;  
(iv)  carrying out evacuation of persons or live -stock from an area of any threatenin g disaster 
situation or disaster;  
(v) setting up temporary bridges, jetties and landing places;  
(vi)providing drinking water, essential provisions, healthcare and services in an affected area;  
(i) such other actions as may be necessary for disaster mana gement.  
40. Disaster management plan of departments of State .—(1) Every department of the State 
Government, in conformity with the guidelines laid down  by the State Authority, shall — 
(a) prepare a disaster management plan which shall lay down the following : — 
(i) the types of disasters to which different parts of the State are vulnerable;  
(ii) integration of strategies for the prevention of disaster or the mitigation of its effects or 
both with the development plans and programmes by the department;  
(iii) the roles and responsibilities of the department of the State in the event of any 
threateni ng disaster situation or disaster and emergency support function it is required to perform;  
(iv) present status of its preparedness to perform such roles or responsibilities or emergency 
support function under sub -clause ( iii);  21 
 (v) the capacity -building and preparedness measures proposed to be put into effect in order to 
enable the Ministries or Departments of the Government of India to discharge their 
responsibilities under section 37;  
(b) annually review and update the plan referred to in clause ( a); and  
(c) furnish a copy of the plan referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b), as the case may be, to the 
State Authority.  
(2) Every department of the State Government, while preparing the plan under sub -section ( 1), shall 
make provisions for financing the a ctivities specified therein.  
(3) Every department of the State Government shall furnish an implementation status report to the 
State Executive Committee regarding the implementation of the disaster management plan referred to in 
sub-section ( 1).  
CHAPTER VI 
LOCAL AUTHORITIES  
41. Functions of the local authority. —(1) Subject to the directions of the District Auth ority, a local 
authority shall — 
(a) ensure that its officers and employees are trained for disaster management;  
(b) ensure that resources relating  to disaster management are so maintained as to be readily 
available for use in the event of any threatening dis aster situation or disaster;  
(c) ensure all construction projects under it or within its jurisdiction conform to the standards and 
specifications laid down for prevention of disasters and mitigation by the National Authority, State 
Authority and the District Authority;  
(d) carry out relie f, rehabilitation and reconstruction activities in the affected area in accordance 
with the State Plan and the District Plan.  
(2) The local authority may take such other measures as may be necessary for the disaster 
management.  
CHAPTER VII  
NATIONAL  INSTITUTEOF  DISASTER  MANAGEMENT  
42. National Institute of Disaster Management. —(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette appoint in this behalf, there shall be constituted 
an institute to be called  the National Institute of Disaster Management.  
(2) The National Institute of Disaster Management shall consist of such number of members as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(3) The term of office of, and vacancies among, members of the Natio nal Institute of Disaster 
Management and manner of filling such vacancies shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(4) There shall be a governing body of the National Institute of Disaster Management which shall be 
constituted by the Central Government from am ongst the members of the National Institute of Disaster 
Management in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(5) The governing body of the National Institute of Disaster Management shall exercise such powers 
and discharge such functions as may be prescribed by  regulations.  
(6) The procedure to be followed in exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions by the 
governing body, and the term of office of, and the manner of filling vacancies among the members of the 
governing body, shall be such as may be prescribed by regulations.  
(7) Until the regulations are made under this section, the Central Government may make such 
regulations; and any regulation so made may be altered or rescinded by the National Institute of Disaster 
Management in exercise of its powers.  22 
 (8) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the National Institute of Disaster Management shall function 
within the broad policies and guidelines laid down by the National Authority and be responsible for 
planning and promoting training and rese arch in the area of disaster management, documentation and 
development of national level information base relating to disaster management policies, prevention 
mechanisms and mitigation measures.  
(9) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub -section ( 8), the National 
Institute, for the di scharge of its functions, may — 
(a) develop training modules, undertake research and documentation in disaster management and 
organise  training programmes;  
(b) formulate and implement a compre hensive human resource development plan covering all 
aspects of disaster management;  
(c) provide assistance in national level policy formulation;  
(d) provide required assistance to the training and research institutes for development of training 
and rese arch programmes for stakeholders including Government functionaries and undertake 
training of faculty members of the State level training institutes;  
(e) provide assistance to the State Governments and State training institutes in the formulation of 
State  level policies, strategies, disaster management framework and any other assistance as may be 
required by the State Governments or State training institutes for capacity -building of stakeholders, 
Government including its functionaries, civil society member s, corporate sector and people's elected 
representatives;  
(f) develop educational materials for disaster management including academic and professional 
courses;  
(g) promote awareness among stakeholders including college or school teachers and students, 
technical personnel and others associated with multi -hazard mitigation, preparedness and response 
measures;  
(h) undertake, Organise  and facilitate study courses, conferences, lectures, seminars within and 
outside the country to promote the aforesaid object s;  
(i) undertake and provide for publication of journals, research papers and books and establish and 
maintain libraries in furtherance of the aforesaid objects;  
(j) do all such other lawful things as are conducive or incidental to the attainment of the above 
objects; and  
(k) undertake any other function as may be assigned to it by the Central Government.  
43. Officers and other employees of the National Institute .—The Central Government shall 
provide the National Institute of Disaster Management with such officers, consultants and other 
employees, as it considers necessary, for  carrying out its functions.  
CHAPTER VIII  
NATIONAL  DISASTER  RESPONSE  FORCE  
44. National Disaster Response Force .—(1) There shall be constituted a National Disaster 
Response Forc e for the purpose of specialist response to a threatening disaster situation or disaster.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Force shall be constituted in such manner and, the 
conditions of service of the members of the Force, including discip linary provisions therefore, be such as 
may be prescribed.  
45. Control, direction, etc .—The general superintendence, direction and control of the Force shall 
be vested and exercised by the National Authority and the command and supervision of the Force sh all 
vest in an officer to be appointed by the Central Government as the Director General of the National 
Disaster Response Force.  23 
 CHAPTER IX  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
46. National Disaster Response Fund .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, constitute a fund to be called the National Disaster Response Fund for meeting any 
threatening disaster situation or disaster and there shall be credited thereto — 
(a) an amount which th e Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf provide;  
(b) any grants that may be made by any person or institution for the purpose of disaster 
management.  
(2) The National Disaster Response Fund shall be made  available to the National Executive 
Committee to be applied towards meeting the expenses for emergency response, relief and rehabilitation 
in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the Central Government in consultation with the National 
Authority.  
47. National Disaster Mitigation Fund .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, constitute a Fund to be called the National Disaster Mitigation Fund for projects 
exclusively for the purpose of mitigation and there shall be c redited thereto such amount which the 
Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, provide.  
(2) The National Disaster Mitigation Fund shall be applie d by the National Authority.  
48. Establishment of funds by S tate Government .—(1) The State Government shall, immediately 
after notifications issued for constituting the State Authority and the District Authorities, establish for the 
purposes of this Ac t the following funds, namely: — 
(a) the fund to be called the State Disaster Response Fund;  
(b) the fund to be called the District Disaster Response Fund;  
(c) the fund to be called the State Disaster Mitigation Fund;  
(d) the fund to be called the District Disaster Mitigation Fund.  
(2) The  State Government shall ens ure that the funds established — 
(i) under clause ( a) of sub -section (1) is available to the State Executive Committee;  
(ii) under sub -clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) is available to the State Authority;  
(iii) under clauses ( b) and ( d) of sub -section ( 1) are available to the District Authority.  
49. Allocation of funds by Ministries and Departments. —(1) Every Ministry or Department of the 
Government of India shall make provisions, in its annual budget, for funds for the purposes of carrying 
out the activities and programmes set out in its disaster management plan.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall, mutatis mutandis , apply to departments of the Government 
of the State.  
50. Emergency procurement and accounting. —Where by reason of any threatening disaster 
situation or disaster, the National Authority or the State Authority or the District Authority is satisfied that 
immediate procurement of provisions or materials or the immediate application of resources are n ecessary 
for rescue or relief ,— 
(a) it may authoris e the concerned department or authority to make the emergency procurement 
and in such case, the standard procedure requiring inviting of tenders shall be deemed to be waived;  
(b) a certificate about utilis ation of pr ovisions or materials by the controlling officer authorised  by 
the National Authority, State Authority or District Authority, as the case may be, shall be deemed to 
be a valid document or voucher for the purpose of accounting of emergency, procurement of s uch 
provisions or materials.  24 
 CHAPTER X  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
51. P unishment for obstruction, etc. —Whoever, without reasonable cause — 
(a) obstructs any officer or employee of the Central Government or the State Government, or a 
person authorised  by the National Authority or State Authority or District Authority in the discharge 
of his functions under this Act; or  
(b) refuses to comply with any direction given by or on behalf of the Central Government or the 
State Government or the National Execu tive Committee or the State Executive Committee or the 
District Authority under this Act,  
shall on conviction be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with 
fine, or with both, and if such obstruction or refusal to comply with directions results in loss of lives or 
imminent danger thereof, shall on conviction be  punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years.  
52. Punishment for false claim .—Whoever knowingly makes a claim which he knows or has reason 
to believe to be false for obtaining any relief, assistance, repair, reconstruction or oth er benefits 
consequent to disaster from any officer of the Central Government, the State Government, the National 
Authority, the State Authority or the District Authority, shall, on conviction be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, and also with fine.  
53. Punishment for misappropriation of money or materials, etc .—Whoever, being entrusted with 
any money or materials, or otherwise being, in custody of, or dominion over, any money or goods, meant 
for providing relief in any  threatening disaster situation or disaster, misappropriates or appropriates for his 
own use or disposes of such money or mater ials or any part thereof or wil fully compels any other person 
so to do, shall on conviction be punishable with imprisonment for a  term which may extend to two years, 
and also with fine.  
54. Punishment for false warning .—Whoever makes or circulates a false alarm or warning as to 
disaster or its severity or magnitude, leading to panic, shall on conviction, be punishable with 
imprison ment which may extend to one year or with fine.  
55. Offences by Departments of the Government. —(1) Where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by any Department of the Government, the head of the Department shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offen ce and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly unless he 
proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to 
prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a Department of the Government and it is proved that the offence has been committed with 
the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any o fficer, other than the 
head of the Depar tment, such officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
56. Failure of officer in duty or his connivance at the contravention of the pro visions of this 
Act.—Any officer, on whom any duty has been imposed by or under this Act and who ceases or refuses 
to perform or withdraws himself from the duties of his office shall, unless he has obtained the express 
written permission of his official su perior or has other lawful excuse for so doing, be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine.  
57. Penalty for contravention of any order regarding requisitioning .—If any person contravenes 
any order made under section 65, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to one year or with fine or with both.  
58. Offence by companies. —(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a co mpany 
or body corporate, every person who at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company, for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, 25 
 shall be deemed to be guilty of the contraventio n and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any punishment 
provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge  or that he 
exercised due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company, and it is proved that the offence was committed with  the consent or connivance 
of or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the 
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also, be deemed to be guilty of that 
offence and shall  be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of this section — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and  
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
59. Previous sanction for prosecution .—No prosecution for offences punishable under sections 55 
and 56 shall be instituted except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be, or of any officer authorised  in this behalf, by general or special order, by 
such Government.  
60. Cognizance of offences .—No court shall take cognizance of an offence under this Act ex cept on 
a complaint made by — 
(a) the National Authority, the State Authority, the Central Government, the State Government, 
the District Authority or any other authority or officer authorised  in this behalf by that Authority or 
Government, as the case may be; or  
(b) any person who has giv en notice of not less than thirty days in the manner prescribed, of the 
alleged offence and his intention to make a complaint to the National Authority, the State Authority, 
the Central Government, the State Government, the District Authority or any other authority or 
officer authorised  as aforesaid.  
CHAPTER XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
61. Prohibition against discrimination .—While providing compensation and relief to the victims of 
disaster, there shall be no discrimination on the ground of sex, caste, community, descent or religion.  
62. Power to issue direction by Central Government. —Notwithstanding anything contained in any  
other law for the time being in force, it shall be lawful for the Central Government to issue direction in 
writing to the Ministries or Departments of the Government of India, or the National Executive 
Committee or the State Government, State Authority, S tate Executive Committee, statutory bodies or any 
of its officers or employees, as the case may be, to facilitate or assist in the disaster management and such 
Ministry or Department or Government or Authority, Executive Committee, statutory body, officer or 
employee shall be bound to comply with such direction.  
63. Powers to be made available for rescue operations .—Any officer or authority of the Union or a 
State, when requested by the National Executive Committee, any State Executive Committee or Distric t 
Authority or any person authorised  by such Committee or Authority in this behalf, shall make available to 
that Committee or authority or person, such officers and employees as requested for, to perform any of 
the functions in connection with the preventi on of disaster or mitigation or rescue or relief work.  
64. Making or amending rules, etc.,  in certain circumstances. —Subject to the provisions of this 
Act, if it appears to the National Executive Committee, State Executive Committee or the District 
Author ity, as the case may be, that provisions of any rule, regulation, notification, guideline, instruction, 
order, scheme or bye -laws, as the case may be, are required to be made or amended for the purposes of 
prevention of disasters or the mitigation thereof,  it may require the amendment of such rules, regulation,  26 
 notification, guidelines, instruction, order, scheme or bye -laws, as the case may be, for that purpose, and 
the appropriate department or authority shall take necessary action to comply with the req uirements.  
65. Power of requisition of resources, provisions, vehicles, etc., for rescue operations, etc. —(1) If 
it appears to the National Executive Committee, State Executive Committee or District Authority or any 
officer as may be authorised  by it in t his behalf that — 
(a) any resources with any authority or person are needed for the purpose of prompt response;  
(b) any premises are needed or likely to be needed for the purpose of rescue operations; or  
(c) any vehicle is needed or is likely to be needed for the purposes of transport of' resources from 
disaster affected areas or transport of resources to the affected area or transport in connection with 
rescue, rehabilitation or reconstruction,  
such authority  may, by order in writing, requisition such resources or premises or such vehicle, as the case 
may be, and may make such further orders as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient in connection 
with the requisitioning.  
(2) Whenever any resource, prem ises or vehicle is requisitioned under sub -section ( 1), the period of 
such requisition shall not extend beyond the period for which such resource, premises or vehicle is 
required for any of the purposes mentioned in that sub-section.  
(3) In this section ,— 
(a) “resources” includes men and material resources;  
(b) “services” includes facilities;  
(c) “premises” means any land, building or part of a building and includes a hut, shed or other 
structure or any part thereof;  
(d) “vehicle” means any vehicle used or capable of being used for the purpose of transport, 
whether propelled by mechanical power or otherwise.  
66. Payment of compensation. — (1) Whenever any Committee, Authority or officer referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) of section 65,  in pursuance of that section requisitions any premises, there shall be paid to 
the persons interested compensation the amount of which shall be determined by taking into consid eration 
the following, namely: — 
(i) the rent payable in respect of the premises , or if no rent is so payable, the rent payable for 
similar premises in the locality;  
(ii) if as consequence of the requisition of the premises the person interested is compelled to 
change his residence or place of business, the reasonable expenses (if an y) incidental to such change:  
Provided that where any person interested being aggrieved by the amount of compensation so 
determined makes an application within the thirty days to the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be, for refe rring the matter to an arbitrator, the amount of compensation to 
be paid shall be such as the arbitrator appointed in this behalf by the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be, may determine:  
Provided further that where there is an y dispute as to the title to receive the compensation or as to the 
apportionment of the amount of compensation, it shall be referred by the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be, to an arbitrator appointed in this behalf by the Cen tral Government or 
the State Government, as the case may be, for determination, and shall be determined in accordance with 
the decision of such arbitrator.  
Explanatio n.—In this sub -section, the expression “person interested ” means the person who was in 
actual possession of the premises requisitioned under section 65 immediately before the requisition, or 
where no person was in such actual possession, the owner of such premises.  
(2) Whenever any Committee, Authority or officer, referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 65 in 
pursuance of that section requisitions any vehicle, there shall be paid to  the owner thereof compensation 
the mount of which shall be determined by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case 
may be, on the basis of the fares or rates prevailing in the locality for the hire of such vehicle:  27 
 Provided that where the owner of such vehicle being aggrieved by the amount of compensation so 
determined makes an application within the prescribed time to the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be, for referring the matter to an arbitrator, the amount of compensation to 
be paid shall be such as the arbitrator appointed in this behalf by the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be, may d etermine:  
Provided further that where immediately before the requisitioning the vehicle or vessel was by virtue 
of a hire purchase agreement in the possession of a person other than the owner, the amount determined 
under this sub -section as the total comp ensation payable in respect of the requisition shall be apportioned 
between that person and the owner in such manner as they may agree upon, and in default of agreement, 
in such manner as an arbitrator appointed by the Central Government or the State Gover nment, as the case 
may be, in this behalf may decide.  
67. Direction to media  for communication of warnings, etc. —The National Authority, the State 
Authority, or a District Authority may recommend to the Government to give direction to any authority or 
person in control of any audio or audio -visual media or such other means of communication as may be 
available to carry any warning or advisories regarding any threatening disaster situation or disaster, and 
the said means of communication and media as designa ted shall comply with such direction.  
68. Authentication of orders or decisions .—Every order or decision of the National Authority or 
the National Executive Committee, the State Authority, or the State Executive Committee or the District 
Authority, shall be authenticated by such officers  of the National Authority or the National Executive 
Committee or, the State Executive Committee, or the District Authority, as may be authorised  by it in this 
behalf.  
69. Delegation of powers .—The National Executive Commi ttee, State Executive Committee, as the 
case may be, by general or special order in writing, may delegate to the Chairperson or any other member 
or to any officer, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, such 
of its powers and functions under this Act as it may deem necessary.  
70. Annual report. —(1) The National Authority shall prepare once every year, in such form and at 
such time as may be prescribed, an annual report giving a true and full account of its act ivities during the 
previous year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government and that Government shall 
cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament within one month of its receipt.  
(2) The State Authority shall prepare on ce in every year, in such form and at such time as may be 
prescribed, an annual report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year and 
copies thereof shall be forwarded to the State Government and that Government shall cause t he same to 
be laid before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such 
Legislature consists of one House, before that House.  
71. Bar of jurisdiction of court .—No court (except the Supreme Court or a High Court) shall have 
jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in respect of anything done, action taken, orders made, 
direction, instruction or guidelines issued by the Central Government, National Authority, State 
Government, State Authority or District Authority  in pursuance of any power conferred by, or in relation 
to its functions, by this Act.  
72. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act, shall have effect, notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the tim e being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.  
73. Action taken in good faith. —No suit or prosecution or other proceeding shall lie in any court 
against the Central Government or the National Authority or the State Government or the State Authority 
or the District Authority or local authority or any officer or employee of the Central  Government or the 
National Authority or the State Government or the State Authority or the District Authority or local 
authority or any person working for on behalf of such Government or authority in respect of any work 
done or purported to have been done  or intended to be done in good faith by such authority or 
Government or such officer or employee or such person under the provisions of this Act or the rules or 
regulations made thereunder.  28 
 74. Immunity from legal process .—Officers and employees of the C entral Government, National 
Authority, National Executive Committee, State Government, State Authority, State Executive 
Committee or District Authority shall be immune from legal process in regard to any warning in respect 
of any impending disaster communi cated or disseminated by them in their official capacity or any action 
taken or direction issued by them in pursuance of such communication or dissemination.  
75. Power of Central Government to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in  the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely :— 
(a) the composition an d number of the members of the National Authority under sub -section ( 2), 
and the term of office and conditions of service of members of the National Authority under                  
sub-section ( 4), of section 3;  
(b) the allowances to be paid to the membe rs of the advisory committee under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 7;  
(c) the powers and functions of the Chairperson of the National Executive Committee under               
sub-section ( 3) of section 8 and the procedure to be followed by the National Executiv e Committee in 
exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions under sub -section ( 4) of section 8;  
(d) allowances to be paid to the persons associated with the sub -committee constituted by the 
National Executive Committee under sub -section ( 3) of section 9;  
(e) the number of members of the National Institute of Disaster Management under sub -section 
(2), the term of the office and vacancies among members and the manner of filling such vacancies 
under sub -section ( 3) and the manner of constitut ing the Governing Body of the National Institute of 
Disaster Management under sub -section ( 4) of section 42;  
(f) the manner of constitution of the Force, the conditions of service of the members of the Force, 
including disciplinary provisions under sub -section ( 2) of section 44;  
(g) the manner in which notice of the offence and of the intention to make a complaint to the 
National Authority, the State Authority, the Central Government, the State Government or the other 
authority or officer under clause ( b) of section 60;  
(h) the form in which and the time within which annual report is to be prepared under section 70;  
(i) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to be 
made by rules.  
76. Power to make regu lations .—(1) The National Institute of Disaster Management, with the 
previous approval of the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry o ut the purposes  of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) powers and functions to be exercised and discharged by the governing body;  
(b) procedure to be followed by the governing body in exercise of the powers and discharge of its 
functions;  
(c) any other matter for which under this Act provision may be made by the regulations.  
77. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament. —Every rule made by the Central 
Government and every regulation made by the National Institute of Disaster Management under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a total peri od of thirty days which may be comprised of one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses 
agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only 29 
 in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or 
regulation.  
78. Power of St ate Government to make rules. —(1) The State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the p rovisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the composition and number of the members of the State Authority under s ub-section ( 2), and 
the term of office and conditions of service of the members of the State Authority under sub -section 
(5), of section 14;  
(b) the allowances to be paid to the members of the advisory committee under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 17;  
(c) the powers and functions of the Chairperson of the State Executive Committee under                  
sub-section ( 3), and the procedure to be followed by the State Executive Committee in exercise of its 
powers and discharge of its functions under sub -section  (4) of section 20;  
(d) allowances to be paid to the persons associated with the sub -committee constituted by the 
State Executive Committee under sub -section ( 3) of section 21;  
(e) the composition and the number of members of the District Authority under  sub-section ( 2), 
and the powers and functions to be exercised and discharged by the Chief Executive Officer of the 
District Authority under s ub-section ( 3) of section 25;  
(f) allowances payable to the persons associated with any committee constituted by the District 
Authority as experts under sub -section ( 3) of section 28;  
(g) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to 
be made by rules.  
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall b e laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such 
Legislature consists of one House before that House.  
79. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in gi ving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make order not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be 
necessary or exped ient for the removal of the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of two years from the commencement 
of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament or the Legislature, as the case may be.  
--------------------------The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005--------------------------
1 
 THE MAHATMA GANDHI NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT  
GUARANTEE ACT, 2005  
__________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
GUARANTEE OF EMPLOYMENT IN RURAL AREAS  
3. Guarantee of rural employment to households.  
 
CHAPTER III  
EMOPLOYMENT  GUARANTEE  SCHEMES AND UNEMPLOYMENT ALLOWANCE  
4. Employment Guarantee Schemes for rural areas.  
5. Conditions for providing guaranteed employment.  
6. Wage rate.  
7. Payment of unemployment allowance.  
8. Non-disbursement of unemployment allowance in certain circumstances.  
9. Disentitlement to receive unemployment allowance in certain circumstances.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
IMPLEMENTING AND  MONITORING  AUTHORITIES  
10. Central Employment Guarantee Council.  
11. Functions a nd duties of Central Council.  
12. State Employment Guarantee Council.  
13. Principal authorities for planning and implementation of Schemes.  
14. District Programme Coordinator.  
15. Programme Officer.  
16. Responsibilities of the Gram Panchayats.  
17. Social audit of work by Gram Sab ha. 
18. Responsibilities of State Government in implementing Scheme.  
19. Grievance redressal mechanism.   2 
 CHAPTER V  
ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL  AND STATE  EMPLOYMENT  GUARANTEE  FUNDS  AND AUDIT  
SECTIONS  
20. National Employment Guarantee Fund.  
21. State Employment Guarantee Fund.  
22. Funding pattern.  
23. Transparency and accountability.  
24. Audit of accounts.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Penalty for non -compliance.  
26. Power to delegate.  
27. Power of Central Government to give directions.  
28. Act to have overriding effect.  
29. Power to amend Schedules.  
30. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
31. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
32. Power of State Government to make rules.  
33. Laying of rules and Schemes.  
34. Power to remove difficulties.  
SCHEDULE I . 
SCHEDULE II . 
  
  3 
 1[THE MAHATMA GANDHI NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE ACT ], 
2005  
ACT NO. 42 OF 2005  
[5th September , 2005.]  
An Act to provide for the enhancement of livelihood security of the households in rural areas of 
the country by providing at least one hundred days of guaranteed wage employment in every 
financial year to every household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual 
work and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -sixth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called 1[the Mahatma Gandhi  
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act ], 2005.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different States or for different areas in 
a State and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this A ct shall be construed as a 
reference to the coming into force of that provision in such State or, as the case may be, in such area:  
Provided that this Act shall be applicable to the whole of the territory to which it extends within a 
period of five years f rom the date of enactment of this Act.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) "adult" means a person who has completed his eighteenth years of age;  
(b) "applicant" means the head of a household or any of its other adult members who has applied 
for employment under the Scheme;  
(c) "Block" means a community development area within a district comprising a group of Gram 
Panchayats;  
(d) "Central Council" means the Central Employment Guarantee Council constituted under sub -
section (1) of section 10;  
(e) "District Programme Coordinator" means an officer of the State Government designated as 
such under sub -section ( 1) of section 14 for implementation of the Scheme in a district;  
(f) "household" means the members of a family relate d to each other by blood, marriage or 
adoption and normally residing together and sharing meals or holding a common ration card;  
(g) "implementing agency" includes any department of the Central Government or a State 
Government, a Zila Parishad, Panchayat a t intermediate level, Gram Panchayat or any local authority 
or Government undertaking or non -governmental organisation authorised by the Central Government 
or the State Government to undertake the implementation of any work taken up under a Scheme;  
(h) "mi nimum wage", in relation to any area, means the minimum wage fixed by the State 
Government under section 3 of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (11 of 1948) for agricultural labourers 
as appl icable in that area;  
(i) "National Fund" means the National Employment Guarantee Fund established under sub -
section ( 1) of section 20;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 46  of 2009, s. 2, for “t he National Rural Employment Guarantee Act” (w .e.f. 2-10-2009).  
2. 2nd February, 2006, vide notification No. S.O. 87(E) , dated 24th Jan uary, 2006, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II 
sec.3  (ii). 4 
 (j) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(k) "preferred work" means any work which is taken up for implementation on a priority basis 
under a Scheme;  
(l) "pre scribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(m) "Programme Officer" means an officer appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 15 for 
implementing the Scheme;  
(n) "project" means any work taken up under a Scheme for the purpose of providing em ployment 
to the applicants;  
(o) "rural area" means any area in a State except those areas covered by any urban local body or a 
Cantonment Board established or constituted under any law for the time being in force;  
(p) "Scheme" means a Scheme notified by th e State Government under sub -section ( 1) of  
section  4; 
(q) "State Council" means the State Employment Guarantee Council constituted under sub -
section ( 1) of section 12;  
(r) "unskilled manual work" means any physical work which any adult person is capable of doing 
without any skill or special training;  
(s) "wage rate" means the wage rate referred to in section 6.  
CHAPTER II  
GUARANTEE OF EMPLOYMENT IN RURAL AREAS  
3. Guarantee of rural employment to  households .—(1) Save as otherwise provided, the State 
Government shall, in such rural area in the State as may be notified by the Central Government, provide 
to every household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work not less than one 
hundred days of such work in a financial year in accordan ce with the Scheme made under this Act.  
(2) Every person who has done the work given to him under the Scheme shall be entitled to receive 
wages at the wage rate for each day of work.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the disbursement of daily wages shall be made on a 
weekly basis or in any case not later than a fortnight after the date on which such work was done.  
(4) The Central Government or the State Government may, within the limits of its economic capacity 
and development, make provisions for securing work to every adult member of a household under a 
Scheme for any period beyond the period guaranteed under sub -section ( 1), as may be expedient.  
CHAPTER III  
EMPLOYMENT  GUARANTEE  SCHEMES  AND UNEMPLOYMENT ALLOWANCE  
4. Employment Gua rantee Scheme s for rural areas .—(1) For the purposes of giving effect to the 
provisions of section 3, every State Government shall, within six months from the date of commencement 
of this Act, by notification, make a Scheme, for providing not less than one hundred days  of guaranteed 
employment in a financial year to every household in the rural areas covered under the Scheme and 
whose adult members, by application, volunteer to do unskilled manual work subject to the conditions 
laid down by or under this Act and in the Scheme:  
Provided that until any such Scheme is notified by the State Government, the Annual Action Plan or 
Perspective Plan for the Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana  (SGRY) or the National Food for Work 
Programme (NFFWP) whichever is in force in the concerne d area immediately before such notification 
shall be deemed to be the action plan for the Scheme for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The State Government shall publish a summary of the Scheme made by it in at least two local 
newspapers, one of which shall be  in a vernacular language circulating in the area or areas to which such 
Scheme shall apply.  5 
 (3) The Scheme made under sub -section ( 1) shall provide for the minimum features specified in 
Schedule I.  
5. Conditions for p roviding guaranteed employment .—(1) The State Government may, without 
prejudice to the conditions specified in Schedule II, specify in the Scheme the conditions for providing 
guaran teed employment under this Act.  
(2) The persons employed under any Scheme made under this Act shall be entitled t o such facilities 
not less than the minimum facilities specified in Schedule II.  
6. Wage rate .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (11 of 
1948), the Central Government may, by notification, specify the wage rate for the purposes of this Act:  
Provided that different rates of wages may be specified for different areas:  
Provided further that the wage rate specified from time to time under any such notification shall not 
be at a rate less than sixty rupees per day.  
(2) Until such time as a wage rate is fixed by the Central Government in respect of any area in a State, 
the minimum wage fixed by the State Government under section 3 of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (11 
of 1948) for agricultural labourers, shall be considered as the  wage rate applicable to that area.  
7. Pay ment of unemployment allowance .—(1) If an applicant for employment under the Scheme is 
not provided such employment within fifteen days of receipt of his application seeking employment or 
from the date on which the  employment has been sought in the case of an advance application, whichever 
is later, he shall be entitled to a daily unemployment allowance in accordance with this section.  
(2) Subject to such terms and conditions of eligibility as may be prescribed by t he State Government 
and subject to the provisions of this Act and the Schemes and the economic capacity of the State 
Government, the unemployment allowance payable under sub -section ( 1) shall be paid to the applicants 
of a household subject to the entitlem ent of the household at such rate as may be specified by the State 
Government, by notification, in consultation with the State Council:  
Provided that no such rate shall be less than one -fourth of the wage rate for the first thirty days during 
the financial  year and not less than one -half of the wage rate for the remaining period of the financial 
year.  
(3) The liability of the State Government to pay unemployment allowance to a household during any 
financial year sha ll cease as soon as — 
(a) the applicant is directed by the Gram Panchayat or the Programme Officer to report for work 
either by himself or depute at least one adult member of his household; or  
(b) the period for which employment is sought comes to an end and no member of the household 
of the applic ant had turned up for employment; or  
(c) the adult members of the household of the applicant have received in total at least one hundred 
days of wor k within the financial year; or  
(d) the household of the applicant has earned as much from the wages and une mployment 
allowance taken together which is equal to the wages for one hundred days of work during the 
financial year.  
(4) The unemployment allowance payable to the household of an applicant jointly shall be sanctioned 
and disbursed by the Programme Office r or such local authority (including the Panchayats at the district, 
intermediate or village level) as the State Government may, by notification, authorise in this behalf.  
(5) Every payment of unemployment allowance under sub -section ( 1) shall be made or o ffered not 
later than fifteen days from the date on which it became due for payment.  
(6) The State Government may prescribe the procedure for payment of unemployment allowance 
under this Act.  6 
 8. Non -disbursement of unemployment allo wance in certain circums tances .—(1) If the 
Programme Officer is not in a position to disburse the unemployment allowance in time or at all for any 
reason beyond his control, he shall report the matter to the District Programme Coordinator and announce 
such reasons in a notice to be displayed on his notice board and the notice board of the Gram Panchayat 
and such other conspicuous places as he may deem necessary.  
(2) Every case of non -payment or delayed payment of unemployment allowance shall be reported in 
the annual report submit ted by the District Programme Coordinator to the State Government along with 
the reasons for such non -payment or delayed payment.  
(3) The State Government shall take all measures to make the payment of unemployment allowance 
reported under sub -section ( 1) to the concerned household as expeditiously as possible.  
9. Disentitlement to receive unemployment allo wance in certain circumstances .—An applicant 
who— 
(a) does not accept the employment provided to his household under a Scheme; or  
(b) does not report for  work within fifteen days of being notified by the Programme Officer or the 
implementing agency to report for the work; or  
(c) continuously remains absent from work, without obtaining a permission from the concerned 
implementing agency for a period of more  than one week or remains absent for a total period of more 
than one week in any month,  shall not be eligible to claim the unemployment allowance payable 
under this Act for a period of three months but shall be eligible to seek employment under the 
Scheme at any time.  
CHAPTER IV  
IMPLEMENTING AND  MONITORING  AUTHORITIES  
10. Centra l Employment Guarantee Council .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification specify, there shall be constituted a Council to be called the Central 
Employment Guarantee Council to discharge the functions, and perform the duties, assigned to it by or 
under this Act.  
(2) The headquarters of the Cent ral Council shall be at Delhi.  
(3) The Central Council shall consist of the following members to be appoin ted by the Central 
Government, namely: — 
(a) a Chairperson;  
(b) not more than such number of representatives of the Central Ministries including the Planning 
Commission not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India as may be determined 
by the Central Government;  
(c) not more than such number of representatives of the State Governments as may be determined 
by the Central Government;  
(d) not more than fifteen non -official members representing Panchayati Raj Institutions, 
organisations of workers and disadvantaged groups:  
Provided that such non -official members shall include two chairpersons of District Panchayats 
nominated by the Central Government by rotation for a period of one year at a time:  
Provided further that not less than one -third of the non -official members nominated under this 
clause shall be women:  
Provided also that not less than one -third of the non -official members shall be belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, the Other Backward Classes and Minorities;  
(e) such number of representatives of the States as the Central Government may, by rules, 
determine in this behalf;  7 
 (f) a Member -Secretary not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India.  
(4) The terms and conditions subject to which the Cha irperson and other members of the Central 
Council may be appointed and the time, place and procedure of the meetings (including the quorum at 
such meetings) of the Central Council shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
11. Functions  and duties of Central Council .—(1) The Central Council shall perform and discharge 
the followin g functions and duties, namely: — 
(a) establish a central evaluation and monitoring system;  
(b) advise the Central Government on all matters concerning the implementation of this Act;  
(c) review the monitoring and redressal mechanism from time to time and recommend 
improvements required;  
(d) promote the widest possible dissemination of information about the Schemes made under this 
Act; 
(e) monitoring the impl ementation of this Act;  
(f) preparation of annual reports to be laid before Parliament by the Central Government on the 
implementation of this Act;  
(g) any other duty or function as may be assigned to it by the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Council s hall have the power to undertake evaluation of the various Schemes made 
under this Act and for that purpose collect or cause to be collected statistics pertaining to the rural 
economy and the implementation of the Schemes.  
12. State Employment Guaran tee Co uncil .—(1) For the purposes of regular monitoring and 
reviewing the implementation of this Act at the State level, every State Government shall constitute a 
State Council to be known as the ......(name of the State) State Employment Guarantee Council with a 
Chairperson and such number of official members as may be determined by the State Government and not 
more than fifteen non -official members nominated by the State Government from Panchayati Raj 
institutions, organisations of workers and disadvantaged gro ups: 
Provided that not less than one -third of the non -official members nominated under this clause shall be 
women:  
Provided further that not less than one third of the non -official members shall be belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, t he Other Backward Classes and Minorities.  
(2) The terms and conditions subject to which the Chairperson and members of the State Council may 
be appointed and the time, place and procedure of the meetings (including the quorum at such meetings) 
of the State  Council shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
(3) The duties and functions of the State Council shall include — 
(a) advising the State Government on all matters concerning the Scheme and its implementation 
in the State;  
(b) determinin g the preferred works;  
(c) reviewing the monitoring and redressal mechanisms from time to time and recommending 
improvements;  
(d) promoting the widest possible dissemination of information about this Act and the Schemes 
under it;  
(e) monitoring the impleme ntation of this Act and the Schemes in the State and coordinating such 
implementation with the Central Council;  
(f) preparing the annual report to be laid before the State Legislature by the State Government;  8 
 (g) any other duty or function as may be assigned to it by the Central Council or the State 
Government.  
(3) The State Council shall have the power to undertake an evaluation of the Schemes operating in the 
State and for that purpose to collect or cause to be collected statistics pertaining to the  rural economy and 
the implementation of the Schemes and Programmes in the State.  
13. Principal authorities for planning  and implementation of Schemes .—(1) The Panchayats at 
district, intermediate and village levels shall be the principal authorities for planning and implementation 
of the Schemes made under this Act.  
(2) The functions of the Panchayats  at the district level shall be — 
(a) to finalise and approve blockwise shelf of projects to be taken up under a programme under 
the Scheme;  
(b) to supervise and monitor the projects taken up at the Block level and district level; and  
(c) to carry out such other functions as may be assigned to it by the State Council, from time to 
time.  
(3) The functions of the Panchayat  at intermediate level shall be — 
(a) to a pprove the Block level Plan for forwarding it to the district Panchayat at the district level 
for final approval;  
(b) to supervise and monitor the projects taken up at the Gram Panchayat and Block level; and  
(c) to carry out such other functions as may be assigned to it by the State Council, from time to 
time.  
(4) The District Programme Coordinator shall assist the Panchayat at the district level in discharging 
its functions under this Act and any Scheme made thereunder.  
14. District Programme Coordinator .—(1) The Chief Executive Officer of the District Panchayat 
or the Collector of the district or any other district level officer of appropriate rank as the State 
Government may decide shall be designated as the District Programme Coordinator for the 
implemen tation of the Scheme in the district.  
(2) The District Programme Coordinator shall be responsible for the implementation of the Scheme in 
the district in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.  
(3) The functions of the Dis trict Programme Coordi nator shall be — 
(a) to assist the district Panchayat in discharging its functions under this Act and any scheme 
made thereunder;  
(b) to consolidate the plans prepared by the Blocks and project proposals received from other 
implementin g agencies for inclusion in the shelf of projects to be approved by the Panchayat at 
district level;  
(c) to accord necessary sanction and administrative clearance, wherever necessary;  
(d) to coordinate with the Programme Officers functioning within his jurisdiction and the 
implementing agencies to ensure that the applicants are provided employment as per their 
entitlements under this Act;  
(e) to review, monitor and supervise the perform ance of the Programme Officers;  
(f) to conduct periodic inspection of  the works in progress; and  
(g) to redress the grievances of the applicants.  
(4) The State Government shall delegate such administrative and financial powers to the District 
Programme Coordinator as may be required to enable him to carry out his functions under this Act.  9 
 (5) The Programme Officer appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 15 and all other officers of the 
State Government and local authorities and bodies functioning within the district shall be responsible to 
assist the District Programme Coordinator in carrying out his functions under this Act and the Schemes 
made thereunder.  
(6) The District Programme Coordinator shall prepare in the month of December every year a labour 
budget for the next financial year containing the details of anticip ated demand for unskilled manual work 
in the district and the plan for engagement of labourers in the works covered under the Scheme and 
submit it to the district panchayat.  
15. Programme Officer .—(1) At every Panchayat at intermediate level, the State Gov ernment shall 
appoint a person who is not below the rank of Block Development Officer with such qualifications and 
experience as may be determined by the State Government as Programme Officer at the Panchayat at 
intermediate level.  
(2) The Programme Office r shall assist the Panchayat at intermediate level in discharging its 
functions under this Act and any Scheme made thereunder.  
(3) The Programme Officer shall be responsible for matching the demand for employment with the 
employment opportunities arising f rom projects in the area under his jurisdiction.  
(4) The Programme Officer shall prepare a plan for the Block under his jurisdiction by consolidating 
the project proposals prepared by the Gram Panchayats and the proposals received from intermediate 
panchay ats. 
(5) The functions of the Programme  Officer shall include — 
(a) monitoring of projects taken up by the Gram Panchayats and other implementing agencies 
within the Block;  
(b) sanctioning and ensuring payment of unemployment allowance to the eligible house holds;  
(c) ensuring prompt and fair payment of wages to all labourers employed under a programme of 
the Scheme within the Block;  
(d) ensuring that regular social audits of all works within the jurisdiction of the Gram Panchayat 
are carried out by the Gram Sabha and that prompt action is taken on the objections raised in the 
social audit;  
(e) dealing promptly with all complaints that may arise in connection with the implementation of 
the Scheme within the Block; and  
(f) any other work as may be assigned to h im by the District Programme Coordinator or the State 
Government.  
(6) The Programme Officers shall function under the direction, control and superintendence of the 
District Programme Coordinator.  
(7) The State Government may, by order, direct that all or any of the functions of a Programme 
Officer shall be discharged by the Gram Panchayat or a local authority.  
16. Responsib ilities of the Gram Panchayats .—(1) The Gram Panchayat shall be responsible for 
identification of the projects in the Gram Panchayat ar ea to be taken up under a Scheme as per the 
recommendations of the Gram Sabha and the Ward Sabhas and for executing and supervising such works.  
(2) A Gram Panchayat may take up any project under a Scheme within the area of the Gram 
Panchayat as may be sanc tioned by the Programme Officer.  
(3) Every Gram Panchayat shall, after considering the recommendations of the Gram Sabha and the 
Ward Sabhas, prepare a development plan and maintain a shelf of possible works to be taken up under the 
Scheme as and when dema nd for work arises.  10 
 (4) The Gram Panchayat shall forward its proposals for the development projects including the order 
of priority between different works to the Programme Officer for scrutiny and preliminary approval prior 
to the commencement of the year  in which it is proposed to be executed.  
(5) The Programme Officer shall allot at least fifty per cent. of the works in terms of its cost under a 
Scheme to be implemented through the Gram Panchayats.  
(6) The Programme Officer shall supply each Gram Panchayat with — 
(a) the muster rolls for the works sanctioned to be executed by it; and  
(b) a list of employment opportunities available elsewhere to the residents of the Gram 
Panchayat.  
(7) The Gram Panchayat shall allocate employment opportunities among the applicants and ask them 
to report for work.  
(8) The works taken up by a Gram Panchayat under a Scheme shall meet the required technical 
standards and measurements.  
17. Soci al audit of work by Gram Sabha .—(1) The Gram Sabha shall monitor the execution of 
works within the Gram Panchayat.  
(2) The Gram Sabha shall conduct regular social audits of all the projects under the Scheme taken up 
within the Gram Panchayat.  
(3) The Gram Panchayat shall make available all relevant documents including the muster roll s, bills, 
vouchers, measurement books, copies of sanction orders and other connected books of account and papers 
to the Gram Sabha for the purpose of conducting the social audit.  
18. Responsibilities of State Gov ernment in implementing Scheme .—The State Go vernment shall 
make available to the District Programme Coordinator and the Programme Officers necessary staff and 
technical support as may be necessary for the effective implementation of the Scheme.  
19. Grievance redressal mechanism .—The State Government  shall, by rules, determine appropriate 
grievance redressal mechanisms at the Block level and the district level for dealing with any complaint by 
any person in respect of implementation of the Scheme and lay down the procedure for disposal of such 
complai nts. 
CHAPTER V  
ESTABLISHMENT OF  NATIONAL AND  STATE  EMPLOYMENT  GUARANTEE  FUNDS  AND AUDIT  
20. Nati onal Employment Guarantee Fund .—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, 
establish a fund to be called the National Employment Guarantee Fund for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, 
credit by way of grants or loans such sums of money as the Central Government may consider necessary 
to the National Fund.  
(3) The amoun t standing to the credit of the National Fund shall be utilised in such manner and 
subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
21. S tate Employment Guarantee Fund .—(1) The State Government may, by notification, establish 
a fund to be called the State Employment Guarantee Fund for the purposes of implementation of the 
Scheme.  
(2) The amount standing to the credit of the State Fund shall be expended in such manner and subject 
to such conditions and li mitations as may be prescribed by the State Government for the purposes of 
implementation of this Act and the Schemes made thereunder and for meeting the administrative expenses 
in connection with the implementation of this Act.  
(3) The State Fund shall be  held and administered on behalf of the State Government in such manner 
and by such authority as may be prescribed by the State Government.  11 
 22. Funding pattern .—(1) Subject to the rules as may be made by the Central Government in this 
behalf, the Central G overnment shall meet the cost of the following, namely: - 
(a) the amount required for payment of wages for unskilled manual work under the Scheme;  
(b) up to three -fourths of the material cost of the Scheme including payment of wages to skilled 
and semi -skilled workers subject to the provisions of Schedule II;  
(c) such percentage of the total cost of the Scheme as may be determined by the Central 
Government towards the administrative expenses, which may include the salary and allowances of the 
Programme Offic ers and his supporting staff, the administrative expenses of the Central Council, 
facilities to be provided under Schedule II and such other item as may be decided by the Central 
Government.  
(2) The State Government shall meet the  cost of the following, na mely:— 
(a) the cost of unemployment allowance payable under the Scheme;  
(b) one -fourth of the material cost of the Scheme including payment of wages to skilled and semi -
skilled workers subject to the provisions of Schedule II;  
(c) the administrative expenses of the State Council.  
23. T ransparency and accountability .—(1) The District Programme Coordinator and all 
implementing agencies in the District shall be responsible for the proper utilisation and management of 
the funds placed at their disposal fo r the purpose of implementing a Scheme.  
(2) The State Government may prescribe the manner of maintaining proper books and accounts of 
employment of labourers and the expenditure incurred in connection with the implementation of the 
provisions of this Act a nd the Schemes made thereunder.  
(3) The State Government may, by rules, determine the arrangements to be made for the proper 
execution of Schemes and programmes under the Schemes and to ensure transparency and accountability 
at all levels in the implementa tion of the Schemes.  
(4) All payments of wages in cash and unemployment allowances shall be made directly to the person 
concerned and in the presence of independent persons of the community on pre -announced dates.  
(5) If any dispute or complaint arises concerning the implementation of a Scheme by the Gram 
Panchayat, the matter shall be referred to the Programme Officer.  
(6) The Programme Officer shall enter every complaint in a complaint register maintained by him and 
shall dispose of the disputes and co mplaints within seven days of its receipt and in case it relates to a 
matter to be resolved by any other authority it shall be forwarded to such authority under intimation to the 
complainant.  
24. Audit of accounts .—(1) The Central Government may, in consul tation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India, prescribe appropriate arrangements for audits of the account s of the Schemes at 
all levels.  
(2) The accounts of the Scheme shall be maintained in such form and in such manner as may be 
prescribed by  the State Government.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Penalty for non -compliance .—Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act shall on 
conviction be liable to a fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.  
26. Power to delegate .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that the powers 
exercisable by it (excluding the power to make rules) may, in such circumstances and subject to such 
conditions and limitations, be exercisable also by the State Government or such officer subordinate  to the 
Central Government or the State Government as it may specify in such notification.   12 
 (2) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the powers exercisable by it (excluding the 
power to make rules and Schemes) may, in such circumstances a nd subject to such conditions and 
limitations, be exercisable also by such officer subordinate to it as it may specify in such notification.  
27. Power of Central  Government to give directions .—(1) The Central Government may give such 
directions as it may c onsider necessary to the State Government for the effective implementation of the 
provisions of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may, on receipt of 
any complaint regarding the issue or improper utilisation of funds granted under this Act in respect of any 
Scheme if prima facie  satisfied that there is a case, cause an investigation into the complaint made by any 
agency designated by it and if necessary, order stoppage of release of funds to the Scheme and institute 
appropriate remedial measures for its proper implementation with in a reasonable period of time.  
28. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act or the Schemes made thereunder shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being 
in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of such law:  
Provided that where a State enactment exists or is enacted to provide employment guarantee for 
unskilled manual work to rural households consistent with the provisions of this Act under which the 
entitlement of the households is not less than and the conditions of employment are not inferior to what is 
guaranteed under this Act, the State Government shall have the option of implementing its own 
enactment:  
Provided further that in such cases the financial assis tance shall be paid to the concerned State 
Government in such manner as shall be determined by the Central Government, which shall not exceed 
what the State would have been entitled to receive under this Act had a Scheme made under this Act had 
to be imple mented.  
29. Power to amend Schedules .—(1) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or 
expedient so to do, it may, by notification, amend Schedule I or Schedule II and thereupon Schedule I or 
Schedule II, as the case may be, shall be deem ed to have been amended accordingly.  
(2) A copy of every notification made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid before each House of 
Parliament as soon as may be after it is made.  
30. Protection  of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the District Programme Coordinator, Programme Officer or any other person who is, or who is 
deemed to be, a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) in 
respect of anything whi ch is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or 
Schemes made thereunder.  
31. Power of Ce ntral Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, and subject to the condition of previous publication, ma ke rules to carry out the provisions of 
this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without the prejudice of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or 
any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the number of representatives of the State Governments under  clause ( e) of sub -section ( 3) of 
section 10;  
(b) the terms and conditions subject to which the Chairman and other members of the Central 
Council may be appointed, and the time, place and procedure of the meetings (including the quorum 
at such meetings) of  the Central Council, under sub -section ( 4) of section 10;  
(c) the manner in which and the conditions and limitations subject to which the National Fund 
shall be utilised under sub -section ( 3) of section 20;  
(d) the rules relating to funding pattern to mee t the cost of certain items under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 22;  13 
 (e) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of which provision is to be 
made by the Central Government by rules.  
32. Power of State Government t o make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by notification, 
and subject to the condition of previous publication, and consistent with this Act and the rules made by 
the Central Government, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without p rejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the terms and conditions upon which eligibility for unemployment allowance may be 
determined under sub -section ( 2) of section 7;  
(b) the procedure for payment of unemployment allowance under sub -section ( 6) of section 7;  
(c) the terms and conditions subject to which the Chairperson and members of the State Council 
may be appointed, and the time, place and procedure of the meetings (including the quorum at such 
meetings) of their appointment to the State Council, under sub -section ( 2) of section 12;  
(d) the grievance redressal mechanism at the Block level and the District level and the procedure 
to be followed in such matter under se ction 19;  
(e) the manner in which and the conditions and limitations subject to which the State Fund shall 
be utilised under sub -section ( 2) of section 21;  
(f) the authority who may administer and the manner in which he may hold the State Fund under 
sub-section ( 3) of section 21;  
(g) the manner of maintaining books of account of employment of labourers and the expenditure 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 23;  
(h) the arrangements required for proper execution of Schemes under sub -section ( 3) of section 
23; 
(i) the form and manner in which the accounts of the Scheme shall be maintained under sub -
section ( 2) of section 24;  
(j) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of which provision is to be 
made by the State Government by rules.  
33. Laying of rules and Schemes .—(1) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agr ee 
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall have thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything p reviously done under that rule.  
(2) Every rule or Scheme made by the State Government under this Act shall, as soon as may be after 
it is made, be laid before each House of the State Legislature where there are two Houses, and where 
there is one House of t he State Legislature, before that House.  
34. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not incons istent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order mad e under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  14 
 SCHEDULE I  
[See section 4( 3)] 
MINIMUM  FEATURES OF A RURAL  EMPLOYMENT  GUARANTEE  SCHEME  
1. The focus of the Scheme shall be on the following works in their order of priority: — 
(i) water conservation and water harvesting;  
(ii) drought proofing (including afforestation and tree plantation);  
(iii) irrigation canals including micro and minor irri gation works;  
(iv) provision of irrigation facility to land owned by households belonging to the Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes or to land of beneficiaries of land reforms or that of the beneficiaries 
under the Indira Awas Yojana of the Government o f India;  
(v) renovation of traditional water bodies including desilting of tanks;  
(vi) land development;  
(vii) flood control and protection works including drainage in water logged areas;  
(viii) rural connectivity to provide all -weather access; and  
(ix) any other work which may be notified by the Central Government in consultation with the 
State Government.  
2. Creation of durable assets and strengthening the livelihood resource base of the rural poor shall be 
an important objective of the Scheme.  
3. The w orks taken up under the scheme shall be in rural areas.  
4. The State Council shall prepare a list of preferred works for different areas based on their ability to 
create durable assets.  
5. The Scheme shall be subject to appropriate arrangements as may be l aid down by the State 
Government under the rules issued by it for proper maintenance of the public assets created under the 
Scheme.  
6. Under no circumstances shall the labourers be paid less than the wage rate.  
7. When wages are directly linked with the qu antity of work, the wages shall be paid according to the 
schedule of rates fixed by the State Government for different types of work every year, in consultation 
with the State Council.  
8. The schedule of rates of wages for unskilled labourers shall be so f ixed that a person working for 
seven hours would normally earn a wage equal to the wage rate.  
9. The cost of material component of projects including the wages of the skilled and semi -skilled 
workers taken up under the Scheme shall not exceed forty per cen t. of the total project costs.  
10. It shall be open to the Programme Officer and Gram Panchayat to direct any person who applied 
for employment under the Scheme to do work of any type permissible under it.  
11. The Scheme shall not permit engaging any contr actor for implementation of the projects under it.  
12. As far as practicable, a task funded under the Scheme shall be performed by using manual labour 
and not machines.  
13. Every Scheme shall contain adequate provisions for ensuring transparency and accountability at 
all level of implementation.  
14. Provisions for regular inspection and supervision of works taken up under the Scheme shall be 
made to ensure proper quality of work as well as to ensure that the total wages paid for the completion of 
the work is commensurate with the quality and quantity of work done.  15 
 15. The District Programme Coordinator, the Programme Officer and the Gram Panchayat 
implementing the Scheme shall prepare annually a report containing the facts and figures and 
achievements relating to the implementation of the Scheme within his or its jurisdiction and a copy of the 
same shall be made available to the public on demand and on payment of such fee as may be specified in 
the Scheme.  
16. All accounts and records relating to the Sc heme shall be made available for public scrutiny and 
any person desirous of obtaining a copy or relevant extracts therefrom may be provided such copies or 
extracts on demand and after paying such fee as may be specified in the Scheme.  
17. A copy of the mus ter rolls of each Scheme or project under a Scheme shall be made available in 
the offices of the Gram Panchayat and the Programme Officer for inspection by any person interested 
after paying such fee as may be specified in the Scheme.  
  16 
 SCHEDULE II  
(See section 5)  
CONDITIONS FOR GUARANTEED  RURAL  EMPLOYMENT  UNDER A SCHEME AND MINIMUM  
ENTITLEMENTS OF LABOURERS  
1. The adult  members of every household who — 
(i) reside in any rural areas; and  
(ii) are willing to do unskilled manual work,  
may submit their names, age and the address of the household to the Gram Panchayat at the village level 
(hereafter in this Schedule referred to as the Gram Panchayat) in the jurisdiction of which they reside for 
registration of their household for issuance of a job card.  
2. It shall be the duty of the Gram Panchayat to register the household, after making such enquiry as it 
deems fit and issue a job card containing such details of adult members of the household affixing their 
photographs, as may be specified by the State Go vernment in the Scheme.  
3. The registration made under paragraph 2 shall be for such period as may be laid in the Scheme, but 
in any case not less than five years, and may be renewed from time to time.  
4. Every adult member of a registered household whose name appears in the job card shall be entitled 
to apply for unskilled manual work under the Scheme.  
5. All registered persons belonging to a household shall be entitled to employment in accordance with 
the Scheme made under the provisions of this Act, for as many days as each applicant may request, 
subject to a maximum of one hundred days per household in a given financial year.  
6. The Programme Officer shall ensure that every applicant referred to in paragraph 5 shall be 
provided unskilled manual work in a ccordance with the provisions of the Scheme within fifteen days of 
receipt of an application or from the date he seeks work in case of advance application, whichever is later:  
Provided that priority shall be given to women in such a way that at least one -third of the 
beneficiaries shall be women who have registered and requested for work under this Act.  
7. Applications for work must be for at least fourteen days of continuous work.  
8. There shall be no limit on the number of days of employment for which a p erson may apply, or on 
the number of days of employment actually provided to him subject to the aggregate entitlement of the 
household.  
9. Applications for work may be submitted in writing either to the Gram Panchayat or to the 
Programme Officer, as may be  specified in the Scheme.  
10. The Gram Panchayat and Programme Officer, as the case may be, shall be bound to accept valid 
applications and to issue a dated receipt to the applicant. Group applications may also be submitted.  
11. Applicants who are provided  with work shall be so intimated in writing, by means of a letter sent 
to him at the address given in the job card and by a public notice displayed at the office of the Panchayats 
at the district, intermediate or village level.  
12. As far as possible, employment shall be provided within a radius of five kilometres of the village 
where the applicant resides at the time of applying.  
13. A new work under the Sc heme shall be commenced only if — 
(a) at least fifty labourers become available for such work; and  
(b) the labourers cannot be absorbed in the ongoing works:  
Provided that this condition shall not be applicable for new works, as determined by the State 
Government, in hilly areas and in respect of aforestation.   17 
 14. In cases the employment is provided o utside such radius, it must be provided within the Block, 
and the labourers shall be paid ten per cent. of the wage rate as extra wages to meet additional 
transportation and living expenses.  
15. A period of employment shall ordinarily be at least fourteen days continuously with not more than 
six days in a week.  
16. In all cases where unemployment allowance is paid, or due to be paid, the Programme Officer 
shall inform the District Programme Coordinator in writing the reasons why it was not possible for him to 
provide employment or cause to provide employment to the applicants.  
17. The District Programme Coordinator shall, in his Annual Report to the State Council, explain as 
to why employment could not be provided in cases where payment of unemployment allow ance is 
involved.  
18. Provision shall be made in the Scheme for advance applications, that is, applications which may 
be submitted in advance of the date from which employment is sought.  
19. Provision shall be made in the Scheme for submission of multiple applications by the same person 
provided that the corresponding periods for which employment is sought do not overlap.  
20. The Gram Panchayat shall prepare and maintain or cause to be prepared and maintained such 
registers, vouchers and other documents in such form and in such manner as may be specified in the 
Scheme containing particulars of job cards and passbooks issued, name, age and address of the head of 
the household and the adult members of the household registered with the Gram Panchayat.  
21. The Gram Panchayat shall send such list or lists of the names and addresses of households and 
their adult members registered with it and supply such other information to the concerned Programme 
Officer at such periods and in such form as may be specified in th e Scheme.  
22. A list of persons who are provided with the work shall be displayed on the notice board of the 
Gram Panchayat and at the office of the Programme Officer and at such other places as the Programme 
Officer may deem necessary and the list shall b e open for inspection by the State Government and any 
person interested.  
23. If the Gram Panchayat is satisfied at any time that a person has registered with it by furnishing 
false information, it may direct the Programme Officer to direct his name to be s truck off from the 
register and direct the applicant to return the job card:  
Provided that no such action under this paragraph shall be directed unless the applicant has been 
given an opportunity of being heard in the presence of two independent persons.  
24. If any personal injury is caused to any person employed under the Scheme by accident arising out 
of and in the course of his employment, he shall be entitled to, free of charge, such medical treatment as is 
admissible under the Scheme.  
25. Where hospita lisation of the injured worker is necessary, the State Government shall arrange for 
such hospitalisation including accommodation, treatment, medicines and payment of daily allowance not 
less than half of the wage rate required to be paid had the injured be en engaged in the work.  
26. If a person employed under a Scheme dies or becomes permanently disabled by accident arising 
out of and in the course of employment, he shall be paid by the implementing agency an ex gratia  
payment at the rate of twenty -five tho usand rupees or such amount as may be notified by the Central 
Government, and the amount shall be paid to the legal heirs of the deceased or the disabled, as the case 
may be.  
27. The facilities of safe drinking water, shade for children and periods of rest , first -aid box with 
adequate material for emergency treatment for minor injuries and other health hazards connected with the 
work being performed shall be provided at the work site.  
28. In case the number of children below the age of six years accompanyin g the women working at 
any site are five or more, provisions shall be made to depute one of such women worker to look after such 
children.   18 
 29. The person deputed under paragraph 28 shall be paid wage rate.  
30. In case the payment of wages is not made within the period specified under the Scheme, the 
labourers shall be entitled to receive payment of compensation as per the provisions of the Payment of 
Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936).  
31. The wages under a Scheme may be paid either wholly in cash or in cash and kind provided that at 
least one -fourth of the wages shall be paid in cash only.  
32. The State Government may prescribe that a portion of the wages in cash may be paid to the 
labourers on a daily basis during the period of employment.  
33. If any persona l injury is caused by accident to a child accompanying any person who is employed 
under a Scheme, such person shall be entitled to, free of charge, such medical treatment for the child as 
may be specified in the Scheme and in case of death or disablement, through an ex gratia  payment as may 
be determined by the State Government.  
34. In case of every employment under the Scheme, there shall be no discrimination solely on the 
ground of gender and the provisions of the Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 (25 of 1976) , shall be complied 
with. 
 
 
--------------------------The Manipur University Act, 2005--------------------------
1 
 THE MANIPUR UNIVERSITY ACT, 2005  
__________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Establishment of the University.  
4. Effect of establishment of the University.  
5. Objects of the University.  
6. Powers of the University.  
7. Jurisdiction.  
8. University open to all classes, castes and creed.  
9. The Visitor.  
10. The Chief Rector.  
11. Officers of the University.  
12. The Chancellor.  
13. The Vice - Chancellor.  
14. The Pro -Vice Chancellor.  
15. The Deans of Schools.  
16. The Registrar.  
17. The Finance Officer.  
18. The Controller of Examinations.  
19. The Librarian.  
20. Other officers.  
21. Authorities of the University.  
22. The Court.  
23. The Executive Council.  
24. The Academic Council.  
25. The College Development Council.  
26. The Boards of Studies.  
27. The Finance Committee.  
28. Other auth orities of the University.  
29. Powers to make Statutes.  
30. Statutes, how to be made.  
31. Power to make Ordinances.  
32. Regulations.  
33. Annual report.  
34. Annual accounts.  
35. Returns and information.  
36. Conditions of service of employees.  
37. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in discipl inary cases against students.  
38. Right to appeal.  
39. Provident and pension funds.  
40. Disputes as to constitution of authorities and bodies.  
41. Filling of casual vacancies.  2 
 SECTIONS  
42. Proceedings of authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.  
43. Protection of action  taken in good faith.  
44. Mode of proof of University record.  
45. Power to remove difficulties.  
46. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before 
Parliament.  
47. Transitional provisions.  
48. Repeal and savings.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
  3 
 THE MANIPUR UNIVERSITY ACT, 2005  
ACT NO. 54 OF 2005  
[28th December , 2005.]  
An Act to establish and incorporate a teaching and affiliating University in the State of Manipur 
and to provide for matters connected t herewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -sixth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Manipur University Act, 2005.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 13th day of October,  2005.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless the context otherwise 
requires,— 
(a) “Academic Council ” means the Academic Council of the University;  
(b) “academic staff ” means such categories of staff as are designated as academic staff by the 
Ordinances;  
(c) “Affiliated College ” means a college admitted to the privileges of the University;  
(d) “Board of Studies ” means the Board of Studies of the University;  
(e) “Chancell or”, “Vice -Chancellor ” and “Pro-Vice -Chancellor ” mean, respectively, the 
Chancellor, Vice -Chancellor and Pro -Vice -Chancellor of the University;  
(f) “College Development Council ” means the College Development Council of the University;  
(g) “Constituent Coll ege” means a college maintained by the University;  
(h) “Court” means the Court of the University;  
(i) “Department ” means a Department of Studies and includes a Centre of Studies;  
(j) “distance education system ” means the system of imparting education through any means of 
communication, such as broadcasting, telecasting, correspondence courses, seminars, contact 
programmes or the combination of any two or more such means;  
(k) “employee ” means any person appointed  by the University and includes teachers and other 
staff of the University;  
(l) “Executive Council ” means the Executive Council of the University;  
(m) “Hall” means a unit of residence or of corporate life for the students of the University, or of a 
College  or an Institution, maintained by the University;  
(n) “Institution ” means an academic institution, not being a College, maintained by, or admitted 
to the privileges of, the University;  
(o) “Principal” means the Head of a College or an Institution maintaine d by the University and 
includes, where there is no Principal, the person for the time being duly appointed to act as Principal, 
and in the absence of the Principal, or the acting Principal, a Vice -Principal duly appointed as such;  
(p) “recognised teachers ” means such persons as may be recognised by the University for the 
purpose of imparting instructions in a College or an Institution admitted to the privileges of the 
University;  
(q) “Regulations ” means the Regulations made by any authority of the Universi ty under this Act 
for the time being in force;  
(r) “School” means a School of Studies of the University;  
(s) “Statutes” and “Ordinances ” mean, respectively, the Statutes and the Ordinances of the 
University for the time being in force;  4 
 (t) “teachers of the  University ” means Professors, Readers, Lecturers and such other persons as 
may be appointed for imparting instruction or conducting research in the University or in any College 
or Institution maintained by the University and are designated as teachers by the Ordinances;  
(u) “University ” means the Manipur University established and incorporated as a University 
under this Act.  
3. E stablishment of the University .—(1) The Manipur University in the State of Manipur, 
established under the Manipur University Act,  1980 (Manipur Act 8 of 1980), shall be established as a 
body corporate under this Act by the same name of “Manipur University ”. 
(2) The first Chancellor, the first Vice -Chancellor and the first members of the Court, the Executive 
Council and the Academic Council, and all persons who may hereafter become such officers or members, 
so long as they continue to hold such office or membership, shall constitute the University.  
(3) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall sue and be sued by 
the said name.  
(4) The headquarters of the University shall be at Imphal.  
4. Effect of e stablishment of the University .—On and from the date of commencement of  this 
Act,— 
(a) any reference to the Manipur University in any contract or other instrument shall be deemed 
as a reference to the University;  
(b) all properties, movable and immovable, of or belonging to the Manipur University shall vest 
in the University;  
(c) all rights and liabilities of the Manipur University shall be transferred to, and be the rights and 
liabilities of, the University;  
(d) every person employed by the Manipur University immediately before the commencement of 
this Act shall hold his office or service in the University by the same tenure, at the same remuneration 
and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension, leave, 
gratuity, provident fund and other matters as he would have held the same if this  Act had not been 
enacted, and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment is terminated or until such 
promulgated tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions ar e duly altered by the Statutes:  
Provided that if the alteration so made is not ac ceptable to such employee, his employment may 
be terminated by the University in accordance with the term of the contract with the employee or, if 
no provision is made therein in this behalf, on payment to him by the University of compensation 
equivalent t o three months' remuneration in case of permanent employees and one month's 
remuneration in the case of other employees:  
Provided further that any reference, by whatever form of words, to the Vice -Chancellor and Pro -
Vice -Chancellor of the Manipur Universit y in any law for the time being in force, or in any 
instrument or other document, shall be construed as a reference respectively to the Vice -Chancellor 
and the Pro -Vice-Chancellor of the University;  
(e) the Vice -Chancellor of the Manipur University, appoin ted under the provisions of the Manipur 
University Act, 1980 (Manipur Act 8 of 1980) shall be deemed to have been appointed as the Vice -
Chancellor under this Act, and shall hold office for a period of three months or till such time the first 
Vice -Chancello r is appointed under section 47 of the Act, whichever is earlier; and  
(f) all Colleges, Institutions, Schools and Departments affiliated to, or admitted to the privileges 
of, or maintained by, the Manipur University shall stand affiliated to, or admitted t o the privilege of, 
or maintained by, the University.  
5. Objects of the University .—The objects of the University shall be to disseminate and advance 
knowledge by providing instructional and research facilities in such branches of learning as it may deem 
fit; to make provisions for integrated courses in humanities, natural and physical sciences, social sciences, 
forestry and other allied disciplines in the educational programmes of the University; to take appropriate 5 
 measures for promoting innovations in te aching -learning process, inter -disciplinary studies and research; 
to educate and train manpower for the development of the State of Manipur; and to pay special attention 
to the improvement of the social and economic conditions and welfare of the people of that State, their 
intellectual, academic and cultural development.  
6. Powers of the University .—The University shall hav e the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to provide for instructions in such branches of learning as the University may, from time to 
time, determine and to make provisions for research and for the advancement and dissemination of 
knowledge;  
(ii) to grant, subject to such conditions as the University may determine, diplomas or certificates 
to, and confer degrees or other academic distinctions on the basis of examinations, evaluation or any 
other method of testing, on persons, and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or other 
academic distinctions for good and sufficient cause;  
(iii) to organise and to undertake extramural studie s, training and extension services;  
(iv) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner prescribed by the Statutes;  
(v) to provide facilities through the distance education system to such persons as it may 
determine;  
(vi) to institute Principalships, Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships and other teaching or 
academic positions, required by the University and to appoint persons to such Principalships, 
Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships or other teaching or academic position s; 
(vii) to recognise an institution of higher learning for such purposes as the University may 
determine and to withdraw such recognition;  
(viii) to recognise persons for imparting instructions in any College or Institution admitted to the 
privileges of the University;  
(ix) to appoint persons working in any other University or organisation as teachers of the 
University for a specified period;  
(x) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make appointments thereto;  
(xi) to co -operate or collaborate or associate with any other University or authority or institution 
of higher learning in such manner and for such purposes as the University may determine;  
(xii) to establish, with the prior approval of the Central Government, such Centres and specialised 
laboratories or other units for research and instruction as are, in the opinion of the University, 
necessary for the furtherance of its objects;  
(xiii) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(xiv) to establish and maintain Colleges, Institutions and Halls;  
(xv) to make provision for research and advisory services and for that purpose to enter into such 
arrangements with other institutions, industrial or other organisations, as the University may deem 
necessary;  
(xvi) to organise and conduct refresher courses, workshops, seminars and other programmes for 
teachers, evaluators and other academic staff;  
(xvii) to admit to its privileges colleges and institutions within the State of Manipur not 
maintained by  the University; to withdraw all or any of those privileges in accordance with such 
conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes; to recognise, guide, supervise, and control Halls not 
maintained by the University and other accommodation for students, an d to withdraw any such 
recognition;  
(xviii) to appoint on contract or otherwise visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors, Consultants, 
Scholars and such other persons who may contribute to the advancement of the objects of the 
University;  6 
 (xix) to confer a utonomous status on a College or an Institution or a Department, as the case may 
be, in accordance with the Statutes;  
(xx) to determine standards of admission to the University, which may include examination, 
evaluation or any other method of testing;  
(xxi) to demand and receive payment of fees and other charges;  
(xxii) to supervise the residences of the students of the University and to make arrangements for 
promoting their health and general welfare;  
(xxiii) to lay down conditions of service of all catego ries of employees, including their code of 
conduct;  
(xxiv) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the employees, and to take such 
disciplinary measures in this regard as may be deemed by the University to be necessary;  
(xxv) to make arra ngements for promoting the health and general welfare of the employees;  
(xxvi) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of 
any property, movable or immovable, including trust and endowment properties for the pur poses of 
the University;  
(xxvii ) to borrow, with the approval of the Central Government, on the security of the property of 
the University, money for the purposes of the University;  
(xxviii ) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the 
attainment of all or any of its objects.  
7. Jurisdiction .—The jurisdiction of the University shall extend to the whole of the State of Manipur.  
8. University open to  all classes, castes and creed .—The University shall be open  to persons of 
either sex and of whatever caste, creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt 
or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be 
appointed as a teache r of the University or to hold any other office therein or be admitted as a student in 
the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University from  making special 
provisions for the employment or admission of women, physically handicapped or of persons belonging 
to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.  
9. The Visitor .—(1) The Presiden t of India shall be the Visitor of the University.  
(2) The Visitor may, from time to time, appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress 
of the University, including Colleges and Institutions maintained by it, and to submit a report thereon; and 
upon receipt of that report, the Visitor may, after obtaining the views of the Executive Council thereon 
through the Vice -Chancellor, take such action and issue such directions as he considers necessary in 
respect of any of the matters dealt with in th e report and the University shall be bound to comply with 
such directions.  
(3) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made by such person or persons as he 
may direct, of the University, its buildings, libraries, laboratories and equi pment, and of any College or 
Institution maintained by the University or admitted to its privileges; and also of the examinations, 
teaching and other work conducted or done by the University and to cause an inquiry to be made in like 
manner in respect of a ny matter connected with the administration or finances of the University, Colleges 
or Institutions.  
(4) The Visitor shall, in every matter referred to in sub -section ( 3), give notice of his intention to 
cause an in spection or inquiry to be made, — 
(a) to t he University, if such inspection or inquiry is to be made in respect of the University or 
any College or Institution maintained by it, or  7 
 (b) to the management of the College or Institution, if the inspection or inquiry is to be made in 
respect of College  or Institution admitted to the privileges of the University, and the University or the 
management, as the case may be, shall have the right to make such representations to the Visitor, as it 
may consider necessary.  
(5) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University or the management, as the 
case may be, the Visitor may cause to be made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in sub -section 
(3). 
(6) Where any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the V isitor, the University or the 
management shall be entitled to appoint a representative, who shall have the right to be present and be 
heard at such inspection or inquiry.  
(7) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of the Universit y or any College or 
Institution maintained by it, address the Vice -Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or 
inquiry together with such views and advice with regard to the action to be taken thereon, as the Visitor 
may be pleased to off er, and on receipt of address made by the Visitor, the Vice -Chancellor shall 
communicate, to the Executive Council, the views of the Visitor with such advice as the Visitor may offer 
upon the action to be taken thereon.  
(8) The Visitor may, if the inspecti on or inquiry is made in respect of any College or Institution 
admitted to the privileges of the University, address the management concerned through the Vice -
Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or inquiry, his views thereon and such  advice as 
he may be pleased to offer upon the action to be taken thereon.  
(9) The Executive Council or the management, as the case may be, shall communicate, through the 
Vice -Chancellor to the Visitor such action, if any, as it proposes to take or has bee n taken upon the result 
of such inspection or inquiry.  
(10) Where, the Executive Council or the management, does not, within a reasonable time, take action 
to the satisfaction of the Visitor, the Visitor may, after considering any explanation furnished or 
representation made by the Executive Council or the management, issue such directions as he may think 
fit and the Executive Council or the management, as the case may be, shall comply with such directions.  
(11) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions  of this section, the Visitor may, by order in 
writing, annul any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with the Act, the Statutes or 
the Ordinances:  
Provided that before making any such order, he shall call upon the Registrar to show cau se why such 
an order should not be made, and, if any cause is shown within a reasonable time, he shall consider the 
same.  
(12) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
10. The Chief Rector .—The Governor of the State of  Manipur shall be the Chief Rector of the 
University.  
11. Officer s of the University .—The following shall be the officers of the University, — 
(1) the Chancellor;  
(2) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(3) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(4) the Deans of Schools;  
(5) the Registrar;  
(6) the Finance Officer;  
(7) the Controller of Examinations;  
(8) the Librarian; and  8 
 (9) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be the officers of the University.  
12. The Chancellor .—(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the  Visitor in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the head of the University and shall, if present, 
preside at the Convocations of the University held for conferring degrees and meetings of the Court.  
13. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of the University and 
shall exe rcise general supervision and control over the affairs of the University and give effect to the 
decisions of all the authorities of the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may, if he is of opinion that immediate action is necessary on any matter, 
exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under this Act and shall report to 
such authority at its next meeting the action taken by him on such matter:  
Provided that if the authority concerned is of opinion that such action ought not to have been taken, it 
may refer the matter to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final:  
Provided further that any person in the service of the University who is aggrieved by the action taken 
by the Vice -Chancellor under this sub -section shall have t he right to represent against such action to the 
Executive Council within three months from the date on which decision on such action is communicated 
to him and thereupon the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the action taken by the Vice -
Chancellor.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that any decision of any authority of the University is 
beyond the powers of the authority conferred by the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances 
or that any decision taken is not i n the interest of the University, may ask the authority concerned to 
review its decision within sixty days of such decision and if the authority refuses to review the decision 
either in whole or in part or no decision is taken by it within the said period of sixty days, the matter shall 
be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
14. The Pro -Vice-Chancellor .—The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed in such manner and on 
such terms and conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
15. The Deans of Schools .—Every Dean of Schoo l shall be appointed in such manner and shall 
exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
16. The Registrar .—(1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and 
conditions of service as may be pr escribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreements, sign documents and authenticate 
records on behalf of the University and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
17. The Finance Officer .—The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
18. The Controller of Examinations .—The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed in such 
manner and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
19. The Librarian .—The Librarian shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and 
conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by 
the Statutes.  
20. Other officers .—The manner of appointment and powers and duties of other officers of the 
University shall be prescribed by the Statutes.   9 
 21. Authorities of the University .—The following shall be the  authorities of the University, — 
(1) the Court;  
(2) the Executive Council;  
(3) the Academic Council;  
(4) the College Development Council;  
(5) the Board of Studies;  
(6) the Finance Committee; and  
(7) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the 
University.  
22. The Court .—(1) The constitution of the Court and the term of office of its members shall be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall have the followin g powe rs and functions, 
namely:— 
(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of the University and to 
suggest measures for the improvement and development of the University;  
(b) to consider and pass resolutions on the annual report and th e annual accounts of the University 
and the audit report on such accounts;  
(c) to advise the Visitor in respect of any matter which may be referred to it for advice; and  
(d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
23. The Executive Council .—(1) The Executive Council shall be the principal executive body of the 
University.  
(2) The constitution of the Executive Council, the term of office of its members and its powers and 
functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
24. The  Academic Council .—(1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the 
University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, co -ordinate 
and exercise general supervision over the academic policies of  the University.  
(2) The constitution of the Academic Council, the term of office of its members and its powers and 
functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
25. T he College Development Council .—(1) The College Development Council shall be responsible  
for admitting Colleges to the privileges of the University.  
(2) The constitution of the College Development Council, the term of office of its members and its 
powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
26. The Boards of Studies .—The constit ution, powers and functions of the Boards of Studies shall 
be prescribed by the Statutes.  
27. The Finance Committee .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
28. Other  authorities of the University .—The constitution, powers and functions of other 
authorities, as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the University, shall be prescribed 
by the Statutes.  
29. Powers to make Statutes .—Subject to the provis ions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all 
or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of authorities and other bodies of the University, as 
may be constituted from time to time;   10 
 (b) the appointment and con tinuance in office of the members of the said authorities and bodies, 
the filling up of vacancies of members, and all other matters relating to those authorities and other 
bodies for which it may be necessary or desirable to provide;  
(c) the appointment, p owers and duties of the officers of the University and their emoluments;  
(d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and oth er employees of the University, their 
emoluments and conditions of service;  
(e) the recognition of persons as University recognised teachers;  
(f) the appointment of teachers, academic staff working in any other University or organisation 
for a specific period for undertaking a joint project;  
(g) the conditions of service of employees including provisions for pension, insuran ce, provident 
fund, the manner of termination of service and disciplinary action;  
(h) the principles governing the seniority of service of the employees of the University;  
(i) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or students and the 
University;  
(j) the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council by any employee or student against the 
action of any officer or authority of the University;  
(k) the conferment of autonomous status on a College or an Institution or a Department;  
(l) the establishment and abolition of Schools, Departments, Centres, Halls, Colleges and 
Institutions;  
(m) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(n) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions;  
(o) the conditions under w hich Colleges and Institutions may be admitted to the privileges of the 
University and the withdrawal of such privileges;  
(p) the management of Colleges and Institutions established by the University;  
(q) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the University;  
(r) the maintenance of discipline among the employees and students;  
(s) all other matters which by this Act are to be or may be provided for by the Statutes.  
30. Statutes, how to be made .— (1) The first Statutes are those set  out in the Schedule.  
(2) The Executive Council may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend or 
repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that the Executive Council shall not make, amend or repeal any Statutes aff ecting the status, 
powers or constitution of any authority of the University until such authority has been given an 
opportunity of expressing an opinion in writing on the proposed changes, and any opinion so expressed 
shall be considered by the Executive C ouncil.  
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require 
the assent of the Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold assent or remit to the Executive Council for 
re-consideration.  
(4) A new Statute or  a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless 
it has been assented to by the Visitor.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may make new or 
additional Statutes or amend or rep eal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1), during the period of three 
years immediately after the commencement of this Act:  11 
 Provided that the Visitor may, on the expiry of the said period of three years, make, within one year 
from the date of such ex piry, such detailed Statutes as he may consider necessary and such detailed 
Statutes shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may direct the 
University to make provisi ons in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by him and if the 
Executive Council is unable to implement such direction within sixty days of its receipt, the Visitor may, 
after considering the reasons, if any, communicated by the Executive Council  for its inability to comply 
with such direction, make or amend the Statutes suitably.  
31. Power to make Ordinances .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the 
Ordinances may provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of the 
University;  
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;  
(d) the award of degrees, diplo mas, certificates and other academic distinctions, the qualifications 
for the same and the means to be taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the same;  
(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission to the 
exam inations, degrees and diplomas of the University;  
(f) the conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(g) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and manner of appointment and the 
duties of examinin g bodies, examiners and moderators;  
(h) the conditions of residence of the students of the University;  
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence, discipline and teaching 
of women students and the prescribing of special courses of studies for them;  
(j) the establishment of Centres of Studies, Boards of Studies, Specialised Laboratories and other 
Committees;  
(k) the manner of co -operation and collaboration with other Universities, institutions and other 
agencies including learned bodies or associations;  
(l) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is considered necessary for 
improving the academic life of the University;  
(m) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes ; 
(n) the supervision of management of Colleges and Institutions admitted to the privileges of the 
University;  
(o) the setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances of employees; and  
(p) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes, are to b e or may be, provided for by the 
Ordinances.  
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice -Chancellor with the previous approval of the 
Central Government and the Ordinances so made may be amended, repealed or added to at any time by 
the Executive Cou ncil in the manner prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that till such time as the first Ordinances are not so made by the Vice -Chancellor, in respect 
of the matters that are to be provided for by the Ordinances under this Act and Statutes, the relevant 
provisions of the Statutes and the Ordinances of the Manipur University in force immediately before the 
commencement of this Act shall be applicable insofar as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act and the Statutes.   12 
 32. Regulations .—The authorities of the University may make Regulations, consistent with this Act, 
the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business and that of the Committees, if any, 
appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances, in the manner 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
33. Annual report .—(1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of 
the Executive Council, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the University 
towards the fulfilment of its objects and shall be submitted to the Court on or after such date as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes and the Court shall consider the report in its annual meeting.  
(2) The Court shall submit the annual report to the Visitor alo ng with its comments, if any.  
(3) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub -section ( 1), shall also be submitted to the 
Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of 
Parliament.  
34. Annual acco unts.—(1) The annual accounts and balance -sheet of the University shall be 
prepared under the directions of the Executive Council and shall, once at least every year and at intervals 
of not more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and Audito r-General of India or by such 
persons as he may authorise in this behalf.  
(2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report thereon shall be submitted to the 
Court and the Visitor along with the observations of the Executive Council.  
(3) Any  observations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall be brought to the notice of the 
Court and the observations of the Court, if any, shall, after being considered by the Executive Council, be 
submitted to the Visitor.  
(4) A copy of the annual ac counts together with the audit report as submitted to the Visitor, shall also 
be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before 
both Houses of Parliament.  
(5) The audited annual accounts after having b een laid before both Houses of Parliament shall be 
published in the Gazette of India.  
35. Returns and information .—The University shall furnish to the Central Government such returns 
or other information with respect to its property or activities as the Ce ntral Government may, from time to 
time, require.  
36. Cond itions of service of employees .— (1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed 
under a written contract, which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be furnished 
to the employee concerned.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any employee shall, at the 
request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by 
the Executive Council, one me mber nominated by the employee concerned and an umpire appointed by 
the Visitor.  
(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final, and no suit shall lie in any civil court in respect of the 
matters decided by the Tribunal.  
(4) Every request made by the employee under sub -section ( 2), shall be deemed to be a submission to 
arbitration upon the terms of this section within the meaning of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 
(26 of 1996).  
(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
37. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disci plinary cases against students .—(1) Any student 
or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed from the rolls of the University by the 
orders or resolution of the V ice-Chancellor, Discipline Committee or Examination Committee, as the case 
may be, and who has been debarred from appearing at the examinations of the University for more than 
one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt of such orders or copy of such resolution by him, 13 
 appeal to the Executive Council and the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the decision 
of the Vice -Chancellor or the Committee, as the case may be.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the U niversity against a student shall, 
at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of sub -sections 
(2), (3), (4) and ( 5) of section 36 shall, as far as may be, apply to a reference made under this sub -section.  
38. Right to appeal .—Every employee or student of the University or of a College or Institution 
maintained by the University or admitted to its privileges shall, notwithstanding anything contained in 
this Act, have a right to appeal within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes, to the Executive 
Council against the decision of any officer or authority of the University or of the Principal or the 
management of any College or an Institution, as the case may be, and thereupon the Executive Council 
may c onfirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed against.  
39. Provident and pension funds .— (1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its 
employees such provident or pension fund or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit in such 
mann er and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Where such provident fund or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central Government may 
declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925), shall apply  to such fund, as if it 
were a Government provident fund.  
40. Disputes as to constitu tion of authorities and bodies .—If any question arises as to whether any 
person has been duly elected or appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority or o ther body 
of the University, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.  
41. Filling of casual vacancies .—All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio  
members) of any authority or other body of the Un iversity shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the 
person or body who appoints, elects or co -opts the member whose place has become vacant and person 
appointed, elected or co -opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority or body for the 
residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member.  
42. Proceedings of authorities or bodie s not invalidated by vacancies .—No act or proceedings of 
any authority or other body of the University shall be invalid merely by r eason of the existence of a 
vacancy or vacancies among its members.  
43. Protection  of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any 
officer or other employee of the University for anything which is in good faith done o r intended to be 
done in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
44. Mode  of proof of University record .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) or in any other law for the time being in force, a copy of any receipt, 
application, notice, order, proceeding or resolution of any authority or other body of the University, o r 
any other document in possession of the University, or any entry in any register duly maintained by the 
University, if certified by the Registrar, shall be received as prima facie  evidence of such receipt, 
application, notice, order, proceeding, resoluti on or document or the existence of entry in the register and 
shall be admitted as evidence of the matters and transactions therein where the original thereof would, if 
produced, have been admissible in evidence.  
45. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any  difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, befor e 
each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive s essions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 14 
 in the order or both Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that  any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order.  
46. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette an d to be laid 
before Parliament .—(1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be published 
in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in  
making any modification in the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree that the Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation should not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no eff ect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that Statute, Ordinance or Regulation.  
(3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shal l include the power to give 
retrospective effect, from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation may be applicable.  
47. Transitional provisions .—Notwithstanding anything containe d in this Act and the Statutes, — 
(a) the first Chancellor and first Vic e-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner 
and on such conditions as may be deemed fit and each of the said officer shall hold office for such 
term, not exceeding five years as may be specified by the Visitor;  
(b) the first Registrar and  the first Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Visitor and each of 
the said officers shall hold office for a term of three years;  
(c) the first Court and the first Executive Council shall consist of not more than thirty members 
and eleven members, re spectively, who shall be nominated by the Visitor and shall hold office for a 
term of three years;  
(d) the first College Development Council shall consist of not more than ten members, who shall 
be nominated by the Visitor and they shall hold office for a term of three years;  
(e) the first Academic Council shall consist of not more than twenty -one members, who shall be 
nominated by the Visitor and they shall hold office for a term of three years:  
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or a uthorities, the same shall be filled by 
appointment or nomination, as the case may be, by the Visitor, and the person so appointed or 
nominated shall hold office for so long as the officer or member in whose place he is appointed or 
nominated would have he ld office, if such vacancy had not occurred.  
48. Repeal and savings .—(1) The Manipur University Ordinance, 2005 (Ord.  3 of 2005) is hereby 
repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the correspond ing provisions of this Act and — 
(a) all appointments made, orders issued, degrees and other academic distinctions conferred, 
diplomas and certificates awarded, privileges granted, or other things done under th e Manipur 
University Ordinance, 2005 (Ord. 3 of 2005), shall be deemed to have been respectively made, 
issued, conferred, awarded, granted or done under the corresponding provisions of this Act and, 
except as otherwise provided by or this Act or the Statut es, continue in force unless and until they are 
superseded by any order made under this Act or the Statutes; and  15 
 (b) all proceedings of Selection Committees for the appointment or promotion of teachers that 
took place before the commencement of this Act an d all actions of the Executive Council in respect of 
the recommendations of such Selection Committees where no orders of appointment on the basis 
thereof were passed before the commencement of this Act shall, notwithstanding that the procedure 
for selectio n has been modified by this Act, be deemed to have been valid but further proceeding in 
connection with such pending selections shall be taken in accordance with the provisions of this Act 
and be continued from the stage where they stood immediately before  such commencement, except if 
the concerned authorities take, with the approval of the Visitor, a decision to the contrary.   16 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 30)  
THE STATUTES OF THE  UNIVERSITY  
1. The Chancellor .—(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less 
than three persons recommended by the Executive Council from amongst persons of eminence in the 
academic or public life of the country:  
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons so recommended, he may call for 
fresh recommendations from the Executive Council.  
(2) The Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years and shall not be eligible for re -
appointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office, the Chancellor shall continue to hold 
office until his successor enters upon his office.  
2. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of 
not less than three persons who shall be recommended by a Committee as constituted under c lause ( 2): 
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons included in the panel, he may call 
for an extended fresh panel.  
(2) The Committee referred to in clause ( 1) shall consist of three persons, out of whom two shall be 
nominated by  the Executive Council and one by the Visitor and the nominee of the Visitor shall be  the 
convener of the Committee:  
Provided that none of the members of the Committee shall be an employee of the University or an 
institution maintained by, or admitted to t he privileges of, the University or a member of a ny authority of 
the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters 
upon his office, or until he attains the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier, and he shall not be 
eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of five years, he shall continue in office 
until his  successor is appointed and enters upon his office:  
Provided further that the Visitor may direct any Vice -Chancellor after his term has expired, to 
continue in office for such period, not exceeding a total period of one year, as may be specified by him.  
(5) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Vice -Chancellor shall be as follows: — 
(i) The Vice -Chancellor shall be paid a monthly salary and allowances, other than house rent 
allowance, at the rates fixed by the Central Government from time to time and he shall be entitled, 
without payment of rent, to use a furnished residence throughout his term of office and no charge 
shall fall on the Vice -Chancellor in respect of the maintenance of such residence.  
(ii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled t o such terminal benefits and allowances as may be 
fixed by the Central Government from time to time:  
Provided that where an employee of the University, or a college or an institution maintained by, 
or admitted to the privileges of, the University, or of any other University or any college or institution 
maintained by or admitted to the privileges of, such other University, is appointed as the Vice -
Chancellor, he may be allowed to continue to contribute to any provident fund of which he is a 
member and the  University shall contribute to the account of such person in that provident fund at the 
same rate at which the person had been contributing immediately before his appointment as the Vice -
Chancellor:  
Provided further that where such employee had been membe r of any pension scheme, the 
University shall make the necessary contribution to such scheme.  17 
 (iii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to travelling allowance at such rates as may be fixed by 
the Executive Council.  
(iv) The Vice -Chancellor shall be enti tled to leave on full pay at the rate of thirty days in a 
calendar year and the leave shall be credited to his account in advance in two half -yearly instalments 
of fifteen days each on the first day of January and July every year:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor assumes or relinquishes charge of the office of the Vice -
Chancellor during the currency of a half year, the leave shall be credited proportionately at the rate of 
two and -a-half days for each completed month of service.  
(v) In addition to the l eave referred to in sub -clause ( iv), the Vice -Chancellor shall also be entitled 
to half -pay leave at the rate of twenty days for each completed year of service, and half -pay leave 
may also be availed of as commuted leave on f ull pay on medical certificate:  
Provided that when such commuted leave is availed of, twice the amount of half -pay leave shall 
be debited against half -pay leave due.  
(6) If the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or otherwise, or if he 
is unable to per form his duties due to ill -health or any other cause, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall perform 
the duties of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the Pro -Vice -Chancellor is not available, the senior most Professor shall perform the 
duties of the Vice -Chancel lor until a new Vice -Chancellor assumes office or the existing Vice -Chancellor 
resumes the duties of his office, as the case may be.  
3. Powers and  duties of the Vice -Chancellor .—(1)The Vice -Chancellor shall be ex officio  
Chairman of the Executive Council, the Academic Council and the Finance Committee and shall, in the 
absence of the Chancellor, preside at the Convocations held for conferring degrees and at meetings of the 
Court.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and address, any meeting of any authority 
or other body of the University, but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he is a member of such 
authority or body.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice -Chancellor to see that this Act, th e Statutes, the Ordinances and the 
Regulations are duly observed and he shall have all the powers necessary to ensure such observance.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall have all the powers necessary for the proper maintenance of discipline 
in the University and he may delegate any such powers to such person or persons as he deems fit.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall have the power to convene or cause to be convened the meetings of the 
Executive Council, the Academic Council and the Finance Committee.  
4. Pro -Vice-Chancellor .—(1) The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Executive Council 
on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that where the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor is not accepted by the Executive 
Council, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor who may either appoint the person recommended by 
the Vice -Chancellor or ask the Vice -Chancellor to recommend another person to the Executive Council:  
Provided further that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor, 
appoint a Professor to discharge the duties of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor in addition to his own duties as a 
Professor.  
(2) The term of office of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be such as may be decided by the Executive 
Council but it shall not in any  case exceed five years or until the expiration of the term of office of the 
Vice -Chancellor, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that a Pro -Vice -Chancellor whose term of office has expired shall be eligible for re -
appointment:  
Provided further that, in any cas e, a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall retire on attaining the age of sixty -five 
years:   18 
 Provided also that a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall, while discharging the duties of the Vice -Chancellor 
under clause ( 6) of Statute 2, continue in office notwithstanding the expir ation of his term of office as 
Pro-Vice -Chancellor, until the Vice -Chancellor resumes office or a new Vice -Chancellor assumes office, 
as the case may be.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be such 
as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall assist the Vice -Chancellor in respect of such matters as may be 
specified by the Vice -Chancellor in this behalf, from time to time, and shall also exercise such powers 
and perform such  duties as may be assigned or delegated to him by the Vice -Chancellor.  
5. Deans of Schools .—(1) Every Dean of School shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor from 
amongst the Professors in the School by rotation in the order of seniority for a period of three years:  
Provided that in case there is only one Professor or no Professor in a School, the Dean shall be 
appointed, for the time being, from amongst the Professor, if any, and the Readers in the School by 
rotation in the order of seniority:  
Provided f urther that a Dean on attaining the age of sixty -two years shall cease to hold office as such.  
(2) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness, absence or any 
other cause, unable to perform duties of his office, the duti es of the office shall be performed by the 
senior -most Professor or Reader, as the case may be, in the School.  
(3) The Dean shall be the Head of the School and shall be responsible for the conduct and 
maintenance of the standards of teaching and research i n the School and shall have such other functions 
as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at any meeting of the Boards of Studies 
or Committees of the School, as the case may be, but shall not hav e the right to vote thereat unless he is a 
member thereof.  
6. The Registrar .—(1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the 
recommendation of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and shall be a whole -time salaried 
officer  of the University.  
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for re -appointmen t. 
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Registrar shall be such as may 
be prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time:  
Provided that the Registrar shall retire on attaining the age of sixty -two years:  
Provided further that a Registrar shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty -two years, 
continue in office until his successor is appointed and enter s upon his office or until the expiry of a period 
of one year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar is, by reason of illness, absence or 
any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by 
such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) (a) The Registrar shall have power to take disciplinary action against such of the employees, 
excluding teachers and other academic staff, as may  be specified in the order of the Executive Council 
and to suspend them pending inquiry, to administer warnings to them or to impose on them the penalty of 
censure or the withholding of increment:  
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the p erson has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him.  
(b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice -Chancellor against any order of the Registrar imposing any of the 
penalties specified in sub -clause  (a).  19 
 (c) In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the power of the Registrar is called 
for, the Registrar shall, upon the conclusion of the inquiry, make a report to the Vice -Chancellor along 
with his recommendations:  
Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Executive Council against an order of the Vice -Chancellor 
imposing any penalty.  
(6) The Registrar shall be ex officio  Secretary of the Executive Council, the Academic Council and 
the College Development Council, but shall not be deemed to be a member of any of these authorities and 
he shall be ex officio  Member -Secretary of the Court.  
(7) It shall be the duty of the Regi strar—  
(a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such other property of the University 
as the Executive Council shall commit to his charge;  
(b) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council, the College Development Council and of any Committees appointed by those authorities;  
(c) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council, the College Development Council and of any Committees appoint ed by those authorities;  
(d) to conduct the official correspondence of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council and the College Development Council;  
(e) to supply to the Visitor, copies of the agenda of the meetings of the authorities of the 
University as soon as they are issued and the minutes of such meetings;  
(f) to represent the University in suits or proceedings by or against the University, sign powers of 
attorney and verify pleadings or depute his representative for the purpose; and  
(g) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances or the 
Regulations or as may be required from time to time by the Executive Council or the Vice -
Chancellor.  
7. The Finance Officer .—(1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed  by the Executive Council on 
the recommendations of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time 
salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The Finance Officer shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible  for re -
appointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Finance Officer shall be such as 
may be prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time:  
Provided that the Finance Officer shall retire on attaining the age of sixty -two years:  
Provided further that the Finance Officer shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty -two 
years, continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office or until the expiry of a 
period of one year, whicheve r is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Finance Officer is vacant or when the Finance Officer is, by reason of 
illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall 
be performed by such person as t he Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) The Finance Officer shall be ex officio  Secretary of the Finance Committee, but shall not be 
deemed to be a member of such Committee.  
(6) The Finance Officer shall —  
(a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the University and shall advise it as regards its 
financial policy; and  
(b) perform such other financial functions as may be assigned to him by the Executive Council or 
as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.  20 
 (7) Subject to the  control of the Executive Council, the Finance Officer shall — 
(a) hold and manage the property and investments of the University including trust and endowed 
property;  
(b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Executive Council for recurring and non -recurring  
expenditure for a year are not exceeded and that all moneys are expended on the purpose for which 
they are granted or allotted;  
(c) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget of the University and for 
their presentation to the Ex ecutive Council;  
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank balances and on the state of 
investments;  
(e) watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advise on the methods of collection 
employed;  
(f) ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture and equipment are maintained up -to-date 
and that stock -checking is conducted, of equipment and other consumable materials in all offices, 
Departments, University, Institutes, Centres and Specialised Laboratories;  
(g) bring to the  notice of the Vice -Chancellor unauthorised expenditure and other financial 
irregularities and suggest disciplinary action against persons at fault; and  
(h) call for from any office, Department, Centre, Laboratory, College or Institution maintained by 
the University any information or returns that he may consider necessary for the performance of his 
duties.  
(8) Any receipt given by the Finance Officer or the person or persons duly authorised in this behalf by 
the Executive Council for any money payable to t he University shall be sufficient discharge for payment 
of such money.  
8. The Controller of Examinations .—(1) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed by the 
Executive Council on the recommendations of a Selection Committee constituted for the pur pose and he 
shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for 
re-appointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of t he Controller of Examinations shall 
be such as may be prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time:  
Provided that the Controller of Examinations shall retire on attaining the age of sixty -two years:  
Provided further that the Controller of Examinat ions shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of 
sixty -two years, continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office or until the 
expiry of a period of one year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Controller of  Examinations is vacant or when the Controller of 
Examinations is, by reason of illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his 
office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint f or 
the purpose.  
(5) The Controller of Examinations shall arrange for and superintend the examinations of the 
University in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances.  
9. The Librarian .—(1) The Librarian shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the 
recom mendations of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time 
salaried officer of the University.   21 
 (2) The Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to him by 
the Executive Council.  
10. Meetings of the Court .—(1) An annual meeting of the Court shall be held on a date to be fixed 
by the Executive Council unless some other date has been fixed by the Court in respect of any year.  
(2) At an annual meeting of the Court, a report on the working of the University during the previous 
year, together with a statement of the receipts and expenditure, the balance sheet as audited, and the 
financial estimates for the next year shall be presented.  
(3) A copy of the statement of receipts and expen diture, the balance sheet and the financial estimates 
referred to in clause ( 2) shall be sent to every member of the Court at least seven days before the date of 
the annual meeting.  
(4) Special meetings of the Court may be convened by the Executive Council  or the Vice -Chancellor 
or if there is no Vice -Chancellor, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor or if there is no Pro -Vice -Chancellor, by the 
Registrar.  
(5) Eleven members of the Court shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Court.  
11. Quorum for me eting of the Execut ive Council .—Seven members of the Executive Council 
shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Executive Council.  
12. Powers and func tions of the Executive Council .—(1) The Executive Council shall have the 
power of management and administration of the revenues and property of the University and the conduct 
of all administrative affairs of the University not otherwise provided for.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Ordinance, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Executive 
Council shall, in addition to all other powers vested in it, hav e the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to create teaching and other academic posts, to determine the number and emoluments of such 
posts and to define the duties and conditions of service of Professors, Readers, Lecturers  and other 
academic staff:  
Provided that no action shall be taken by the Executive Council in respect of the number and 
qualifications of teachers and other academic staff otherwise than after consideration of the 
recommendations of the Academic Council;  
(ii) to appoint such Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other academic staff, as may be necessary, 
on the recommendation of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and to fill up 
temporary vacancies therein;  
(iii) to recognise persons as Univers ity recognised teachers in the manner prescribed by the 
Ordinances;  
(iv) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts (including Chairs) and to make 
appointments thereto in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(v) to grant leave of a bsence to any officer of the University other than the Chancellor and the 
Vice -Chancellor, and to make necessary arrangements for the discharge of the functions of such 
officer during his absence;  
(vi) to regulate and enforce discipline among employees in accordance with the Statutes and the 
Ordinances;  
(vii) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, investments, property, business and all other 
administrative affairs of the University and for that purpose to appoint such agents as it may think fit;  
(viii) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non -recurring expenditure for a year on the 
recommendation of the Finance Committee;  
(ix) to invest any money belonging to the University, including any unapplied income, in such 
stocks, funds, share or securities, from time to time as it may think fit or in the purchase of 
immovable property in India, with the like powers of varying such investment from time to time;   22 
 (x) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immovable property on behalf o f the 
University;  
(xi) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus and other means needed for carrying 
on the work of the University;  
(xii) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on behalf of the University;  
(xiii) to entertain, ad judicate upon, and if thought fit, to redress any grievances of the employees 
and students of the University who may, for any reason, feel aggrieved;  
(xiv) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if necessary, to remove them, and to fix their fees, 
emolum ents and travelling and other allowances, after consulting the Academic Council;  
(xv) to select a common seal for the University and provide for the custody and use of such seal;  
(xvi) to make such special arrangements as may be necessary for the residence  and discipline of 
women students;  
(xvii) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(xviii) to provide for the appointment of Visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors, Consultants and 
Scholars and determine the terms and cond itions of such appointments; and  
(xix) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed 
on it by the Ordinances or the Statutes.  
13. Quorum of m eeting of the Academic Council .—Nine members of the Academic Council s hall 
form a quorum for a meeting of the Academic Council.  
14. Powers and fun ctions of the Academic Council .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the 
Statutes and the Ordinances, the Academic Council shall, in addition to all other powers vested in it, ha ve 
the following powers, namely: — 
(a) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University and to give 
directions regarding methods of instruction, co -ordination of teaching among the Colleges and the 
Institutions, evaluation of res earch and improvement of academic standards;  
(b) to bring about and promote inter -School co -ordination and to establish or appoint such 
committees or boards as may be deemed necessary for the purpose;  
(c) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own initiative, or on a reference 
by a School or the Executive Council, and to take appropriate action thereon; and  
(d) to frame such Regulations and rules consistent with the Statutes and the Ordinances regarding 
the academic functioning of the University, discipline, residence, admissions, award of fellowships 
and studentships, fees, concessions, corporate life and attendance.  
15. Scho ols of studies and Departments .— (1) The University shall have such Schools of Studies as 
may be specified in the Statutes.  
(2) Every School shall have a School Board and the members of the first School Board shall be 
nominated by the Executive Council for a period of three years.  
(3) The composition, powers and functions of a School Board shall be prescribed b y the Ordinances.  
(4) The conduct of the meetings of a School Board and the quorum required for such meetings shall 
be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(5) (a) Every School shall consist of such Departments as may be assigned to it by the Ordinances:  
Provided  that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic Council, establish 
Centres of Studies to which may be assigned such teachers of the University as the Executive Council 
may consider necessary.   23 
 (b) Each Department shall consist of  the following members, namely: — 
(i) Teachers of the Department;  
(ii) Persons conducting research in the Department;  
(iii) Dean of the School;  
(iv) Honorary Professors, if any, attached to the Department; and  
(v) such other persons as may be members of the Department in accordance with the provisions of 
the Ordinances.  
16. Board of Studies .—(1) Each Department shall have a Board of Studies.  
(2) The constitution of the Board of Studies and the term of office of its members shall be prescribed 
by the Ordinance s. 
(3) Subject to the overall control and supervision of the Academic Council, the functions of a Board 
of Studies shall be to approve subjects for research for various degrees and other requirements of research 
degrees and to recommend to the concerned Sc hool Board in the mann er prescribed by the Ordinances — 
(a) courses of studies and appointment of examiners for courses, but excluding research degrees;  
(b) appointment of supervisors for research; and  
(c) measures for the improvement of the standard of teaching and research:  
Provided that the above functions of a Board of Studies shall, during the period of three years 
immediately after the commencement of the Act, be performed by the Department.  
17. Co llege maintained by University .—(1) The Manipur Institute of Technology, Imphal shall be 
maintained by the University.  
(2) The organisation, conditions of maintenance and management of the College in clause ( 1) shall be 
prescribed by the Ordinances.  
18. The Finance Committee .—(1) The Finan ce Committee shall consist of  the following members, 
namely:— 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(ii) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(iii) three persons to be nominated by the Executive Council, out of whom at least one shall be a 
member of the Executive Council; and  
(iv) three persons to be nominated by the Visitor.  
(2) Five members of the Finance Committee shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Finance 
Committee.  
(3) All the members of the Finance Committee, other than ex officio  members, shall hold office for a 
term o f three years.  
(4) A member of the Finance Committee shall have the right to record a minute of dissent if he does 
not agree with any decision of the Finance Committee.  
(5) The Finance Committee shall meet at least thrice every year to examine the accounts  and to 
scrutinise proposals for expenditure.  
(6) All proposals relating to creation of posts, and those items which have not been included in the 
Budget, shall be examined by the Finance Committee before they are considered by the Executive 
Council.  
(7) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University prepared by the Finance Officer 
shall be laid before the Finance Committee for consideration and comments and thereafter submitted to 
the Executive Council for approval.   24 
 (8) The Finance Comm ittee shall recommend limits for the total recurring expenditure and the total 
non-recurring expenditure for the year, based on the income and resources of the University (which, in the 
case of productive works, may include the proceeds of loans).  
19. Sele ction Committees .—(1) There shall be Selection Committees for making recommendations 
to the Executive Council for appointment to the posts of Professor, Reader, Lecturer, Registrar, Finance 
Officer, Librarian and Principals of Colleges and Institutions mai ntained by the University.  
(2) The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts specified in Column 1 of the Table below 
shall consist of the Vice -Chancellor, a nominee of the Visitor and the persons specified in the 
corresponding entry in Column 2 of the said Table:  
TABLE  
1 2 
Professor  (i) The Dean of the School.  
 (ii) The Head of the  Department . 
 (iii) Three persons not in the service of the University, nominated by 
the Executive Council, out of a panel of names recommended by the 
Academic Council  for their special knowledge of, or interest in, the 
subject with which the Professor will be concerned.  
Reader/Lecturer  (i) The Head of the Department.  
 (ii) One Professor nominated by the Vice -Chancellor.  
 (iii) Two persons not in the service of the Un iversity, nominated by 
the Executive Council, out of a panel of names recommended by the 
Academic Council for their special knowledge of, or interest in, the 
subject with which the Reader/Lecturer will be concerned.  
Registrar/ Finance Off icer (i) Two memb ers of the Executive Council  nominated by  it. 
 (ii) One person not in the service of the University nominated by the 
Executive Council . 
Librarian  (i) Two persons not in the service of the University who have special 
knowledge of the subject of the Library Science/Library 
Administration nominated by the Executive Council.  
 (ii) One person not in the service of the University nominated by the 
Executive Council.  
Principal of College or 
Institution maintained by the 
University.  Three persons not in th e service of the University of whom two shall 
be nominated by the Executive Council and one by the Academic 
Council for their special knowledge of, or interest in, a subject in 
which instruction is being provided by the College or Institution.  
 
Explanation 1.—Where the appointment is being made for an inter -disciplinary project, the head of 
the project shall be deemed to be the Head of the Department concerned.  
Explanation  2.—The Professor to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor shall be a Professor 
concerned with the speciality for which the selection is being made and the Vice -Chancellor shall consult 
the Head of the Department and the Dean of School before nominat ing the Professor.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor, or in his absence the Pro -Vice -Chancellor, shall convene and preside at the 
meeting of the Selection Committee:   25 
 Provided that the meeting of the Selection Committee shall be fixed after prior consultation with, and 
subject to the convenience of Visitor's nominee and the exp erts nominat ed by the Executive Council:  
Provided further that the proceedings of the Selection Commi ttee shall not be valid unless, — 
(a) where the number of Visitor's nominee and the persons nominated by the Executive Council is 
four in all, at least three of them attend the meeting; and  
(b) where the number of Visitor's nominee and the persons nominated by the Executive Council is 
three in all, at least two of them attend the meeting.  
(4) The procedure to be followed by the Selection Committee shall be laid down in  the Ordinances.  
(5) If the Executive Council is unable to accept the recommendations made by the Selection 
Committee, it shall record its reasons and submit the case to the Visitor for final orders.  
(6) Appointments to temporary posts shall be mad e in the  manner indicated below — 
(i) If the temporary vacancy is for duration longer than one academic session, it shall be filled on 
the advice of the Selection Committee in accordance with the procedure indicated in the foregoing 
clauses:  
Provided that if the Vi ce-Chancellor is satisfied that in the interests of work it is necessary to fill 
the vacancy, the appointment may be made on a purely temporary basis on the advice of a local 
Selection Committee referred to in sub -clause ( ii) for a period not exceeding six  months.  
(ii) If the temporary vacancy is for a period less than a year, an appointment to such vacancy shall 
be made on the recommendation of a local Selection Committee consisting of the Dean of the School 
concerned, the Head of the Department and a nomi nee of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and the Head of the Department, 
the Selection Committee may contain two nominees of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that in the case of sudden casual vacancies  of teaching posts caused by death or 
any other reason, the Dean may, in consultation with the Head of the Department concerned, make a 
temporary appointment for a month and report to the Vice -Chancellor and the Registrar about such 
appointment.  
(iii) No t eacher appointed temporarily shall, if he is not recommended by a regular Selection 
Committee for appointment under the Statutes, be continued in service on such temporary 
employment, unless he is subsequently selected by a local Selection Committee or a r egular Selection 
Committee, for a temporary or permanent appointment, as the case may be.  
20. Special mode of appointment .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 19, the 
Executive Council may invite a person of high academic distinction and prof essional attainments to 
accept a post of Professor or any other equivalent academic post in the University on such terms and 
conditions as it deems fit and on the person agreeing to do so appoint him to the post.  
(2) The Executive Council may appoint a tea cher or any other academic staff working in any other 
University or organisation for undertaking a joint project in accordance with the manner laid down in the 
Ordinances.  
21. Appointment for a fixed tenure .—The Executive Council may appoint a person selected in 
accordance with the procedure laid down in Statute 19 for a fixed tenure on such terms and conditions as 
it deems fit.   26 
 22. Recognised teachers .—(1) The qualifications of recognised teachers shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(2) All applications for the recognition of teachers shall be made in such manner as may be laid down 
by the Ordinances.  
(3) No teacher shall be recognised as a teacher except on the recommendation of a Selection 
Committee constituted for the purpose in t he manner laid down in the Ordinances.  
(4) The period of recognition of a teacher shall be determined by the Ordinances made in that behalf.  
(5) The Academic Council may, by a special resolution passed by a majority of not less than  
two-thirds of the memb ers present and voting, withdraw recognition from a teacher:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until notice in writing has been given to the person 
concerned calling upon him to show cause, within such time as may be specified in the notice,  why such 
resolution should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in 
support of them have been considered by the Academic Council.  
23. Committees .—(1) An authority of the University may appoint as many standing or special 
Committees as it may deem fit, and may appoint to such Committees persons who are not members of 
such authority.  
(2) A Committee appointed under clause ( 1) may deal with any subject delegated to it subject to 
subsequent confirmation by the authorit y appointing it.  
24. Terms and conditions of service and c ode of conduct of teachers, etc .—(1) All the teachers 
and other academic staff of the University shall, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, be 
governed by the terms and conditions of se rvice and code of conduct as are specified in the Statutes, the 
Ordinances and the Regulations.  
(2) The emoluments of members of the academic staff shall be such as may be prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(3) Every teacher and member of the academic staff of the University shall be appointed on a written 
contract, the form of which shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) A copy of every contract referred to in clause ( 3) shall be deposited with the Registrar.  
25. Terms and conditions of service and code  of conduct of other employees .—(1) All the 
employees of the University, other than the teachers and other academic staff shall, in the absence of any 
contract to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as are 
speci fied in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations.  
(2) The manner of appointment and emoluments of employees, other than the teachers and other 
academic staff, shall be such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
26. Seniority list .—(1) Whenever, in accordance with the Statutes, any person is to hold an office or 
be a member of an authority of the University by rotation according to seniority, such seniority shall be 
determined according to the length of continuous service of such person in his gra de and in accordance 
with such other principles as the Executive Council may, from time to time, prescribe.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain in respect of each class of persons to 
whom the provisions of these Statutes apply , a complete and up -to-date seniority list in accordance with 
the provisions of clause ( 1).  27 
 (3) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous service in a particular grade or the relative 
seniority of any person or persons is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar may, on his own motion and shall, 
at the request of any such person, submit the matter to the Executive Council whose decision thereon shall 
be final.  
27. Removal of employees of the University .—(1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct 
against a teacher, a member of the academic staff or other employee of the University, the Vice -
Chancellor, in the case of the teacher or a member of the academic staff, and the authority competent to 
appoint (hereinafter referred to as the appointing auth ority) in the case of other employee may, by order in 
writing, place such teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee, as the case may be, under 
suspension and shall forthwith report to the Executive Council the circumstances in which the order  was 
made:  
Provided that the Executive Council may, if it is of the opinion, that the circumstances of the case do 
not warrant the suspension of the teacher or a member of the academic staff, revoke such order.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the  terms of the contract of appointment or of any other 
terms and conditions of service of the employees, the Executive Council in respect of teachers and other 
academic staff, and the appointing authority in respect of other employees, shall have the power to 
remove a teacher or a member of the academic staff or other employee, as the case may be, on grounds of 
misconduct.  
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Executive Council, or as the case may be, the appointing authority, shall not 
be entitled to remove any teache r, member of the academic staff or other employee except for a good 
cause and after giving three months' notice or on payment of three months' salary in lieu thereof.  
(4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall be removed under cla use ( 2) or 
clause ( 3) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed 
to be taken in regard to him.  
(5) The removal of a teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall take effect from 
the date on which the order of removal is made:  
Provided that where the teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee is under suspension 
at the time of his removal, such removal shall take effect from the date on which he was placed under 
suspension.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Statute, a teacher, member 
of the academic staff or other employee may resign —  
(a) if he is a permanent employee, only after giving three months' notice in writing to the 
Executive Council or the appointing authority, as the case may be, or by paying three months' salary 
in lieu thereof;  
(b) if he is not a permanent employee, only after giving one month's notice in writing to the 
Executive Council or, as the case may be, the appointi ng authority or by paying one month's salary in 
lieu thereof:  
Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date on which the resignation is 
accepted by the Executive Council or the appointing authority as the case may be.  
28. Honorary degre es.—(1) The Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic 
Council and by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and 
voting, make proposals to the Visitor for the conferment of honorary degrees:   28 
 Provided that in case of emergency, the Executive Council may, on its own motion, make such 
proposals.  
(2) The Executive Council may, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the 
members present and voting, withdraw, with the pr evious sanction of the Visitor, any honorary degree 
conferred by the University.  
29. Withdrawal of degrees, etc .—The Executive Council may, by a special resolution passed by a 
majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw  any degree or academic 
distinction conferred on, or any certificate or diploma granted to, any person by the University for good 
and sufficient cause:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been given to that person  
calling upon him to show cause within such time as may be specified in the notice why such a resolution 
should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in support of 
them, have been considered by the Executive Counci l. 
30. Maintenance of discipline amongst students of University .—(1) All powers relating to the 
maintenance of discipline and disciplinary action in relation to the students of the University shall vest in 
the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) There shall be a Proctor of the University to assist the Vice -Chancellor in the exercise of the 
powers referred to in clause ( 1), who shall be appointed by the Executive Council from amongst the 
Professors and Readers in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(3) The Vice -Chance llor may delegate all or any of the powers referred to in clause ( 1), as he deems 
proper, to the Proctor and to such other officers as he may specify in this behalf.  
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to the maintenance of disci pline and 
taking such action, as may seem to him appropriate for the maintenance of discipline, the Vice -Chancellor 
may, in exercise of such powers, by order, direct that any student or students be expelled or rusticated, for 
a specified period, or be not admitted to a course or courses of study in a College, Institution or 
Department or a School of the University for a stated period, or be punished with fine for an amount to be 
specified in the order, or be debarred from taking an examination or examinatio ns conducted by the 
University, College, Institution or Department or a School for one or more years, or that the results of the 
student or students concerned in the examination or examinations in which he or they have appeared be 
cancelled.  
(5) The Princi pals of College, Institutions, Deans of Schools of Studies and Heads of teaching 
Departments in the University shall have the authority to exercise all such disciplinary powers over the 
students in their respective Colleges, Institutions, Schools and teach ing Departments in the University, as 
may be necessary for the proper conduct of such Colleges, Institutions, Schools and teaching 
Departments.  
(6) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice -Chancellor and the Principal and other persons 
specified in clause ( 5), detailed rules of discipline and proper conduct shall be made by the University. 
The Principals of College, Institutions, Deans of Schools of Studies and Heads of teaching Departments 
in the University may also make such supplementary rules as they deem necessary for the purposes stated 
therein.  
(7) At the time of admission, every student shall be required to sign a declaration to the effect that he 
submits himself to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Vice -Chancellor and other authorities of the 
University.   29 
 31. Maintenance of discipline a mong Students of Colleges, etc .—All powers relating to discipline 
and disciplinary action in relation to students of a College or an Institution not maintained by the 
University, shall vest in the Principal of the College or Institution, as the case may be, in accordance with 
the procedure prescribed by the Ordinances.  
32. Admission of Colleges, etc., t o the privileges of University .—(1) Colleges and other Institutions 
situated within the jurisdiction of the University may be admitted to such privileges of the University as 
the Executive Council and the College Development Council may decide on th e following conditions, 
namely:— 
(a) every such College or Institution shall have a regularly constituted Governing  Body, 
consisting of not more than fifteen persons approved by the Executive Council and including among 
others, two teachers of the University to be nominated by the Executive Council and three 
representatives of the teaching staff of whom the Principal o f the College or Institution shall be one. 
The procedure for appointment of members of the Governing Body and other matters affecting the 
management of a College or an Institution shall be prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that the said condition shal l not apply in the case of Colleges and Institutions 
maintained by Government which shall, however, have an Advisory  Committee consisting of not 
more than fifteen persons which shall consist of among others, three teachers including the Principal 
of the Co llege or Institution, and two teachers of the University nominated by the Executive Council;  
(b) every such College or Institution shall satisfy the Executive Council and the College 
Development Council on  the following matters, namely: — 
(i) the suitability and adequacy of its accommodation and equipment for teaching;  
(ii) the qualifications and adequacy of its teaching staff and the conditions of their service;  
(iii) the arrangements for the residence, welfare, discipline and supervision of stude nts; 
(iv) the adequacy of financial provision made for the continued maintenance of the College or 
Institution; and  
(v) such other matters as are essential for the maintenance of the standards of University 
education.  
(c) no College or Institution shall be  admitted to any privileges of the University except on the 
recommendation of the Academic Council made after considering the report of a Committee of 
Inspection appointed for the purpose by the Academic Council;  
(d) colleges and Institutions desirous of a dmission to any privileges of the University shall be 
required to intimate their intension to do so in writing so as to reach the Registrar not later than the 
15th August, preceding the year from which permission applied for is to have effect;  
(e) a Colleg e or an Institution shall not, without the previous permission of the Executive 
Council, College Development Council and the Academic Council, suspend instruction in any subject 
or course of study which it is authorized to teach and teaches.  
(2) Appointmen t to the teaching staff and Principal of Colleges or Institutions admitted to the 
privileges of the University shall be made in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to Colleges and Institutions maintaine d by 
Government.  30 
 (3) The service conditions of the administrative and other non -academic staff of every College or 
Institution referred to in clause ( 2) shall be such as may be laid down in the Ordinances:  
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply t o Colleges and Institutions maintained by 
Government.  
(4) Every College or Institution admitted to the privileges of the University shall be inspected at least 
once in every two academic years by a Committee appointed by the Academic Council, and the repor t of 
the Committee shall be submitted to the Academic Council, which shall forward the same to the College 
Development Council and Executive Council with such recommendations as it may deem fit to make.  
(5) The College Development Council and the Executive  Council, after considering the report and the 
recommendations, if any, of the Academic Council, shall forward a copy of the report to the Governing 
Body of the College or Institution with such remarks, if any, as they may deem fit for suitable action.  
(6) The Executive Council may, after consulting the College Development Council and Academic 
Council, withdraw any privileges granted to a College or an Institution, at any time it considers that the 
College or Institution does not satisfy any of the conditio ns on the fulfillment of which the College or 
Institution was admitted to such privileges:  
Provided that before any privileges are so withdrawn, the Governing Body of the College or 
Institution concerned shall be given an opportunity to represent to the Ex ecutive Council why such action 
should not be taken.  
(7) Subject to the conditions set forth in clause ( 1), the Ordinances may prescribe — 
(i) such other conditions as may be considered necessary; and  
(ii) the procedure for the admission of Colleges and Ins titutions to the privileges of the University 
and for the withdrawal of those privileges.  
33. Convocations .—Convocations of the University for the conferring of degrees or for other 
purposes shall be held in such manner as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
34. Acting Chairman of meetings .—Where no provision is made for a President or Chairman to 
preside over a meeting of any authority of the University or any Committee of such authority or when the 
President or Chairman so provided for is absent,  the members present shall elect one from among 
themselves to preside at such meeting.  
35. Resignation .—Any member, other than an ex officio  member of the Court, the Executive 
Council, the Academic Council or any other authority of the University or any Co mmittee of such 
authority may resign by letter addressed to the Registrar and the resignation shall take effect as soon as 
such letter is received by the Registrar.  
36. Disqualification .—(1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being , a 
member of any of the authorities of the Unive rsity— 
(i) if he is of unsound mind;  
(ii) if he is an undischarged insolvent;  
(iii) if he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving moral turpitude and 
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of the 
disqualifications mentioned in clause ( 1), the question shall be referred to the Visitor and his decision 
shall be final and  no suit or other proceeding shall lie in any civil court against such decision.  31 
 37. Residence condi tion for membership and office .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Statutes, a person who is not ordinarily resident in India shall not be eligible t o be an officer of the 
University or a member of any authority of the University.  
38. Membership of authorities by virtue of membership of o ther bodies .—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Statutes, a person who holds any post in the University or is  a member of any 
authority or body of the University in his capacity as a member of a particular authority or body or as the 
holder of a particular appointment shall hold such office or membership only for so long as he continues 
to be a member of that par ticular authority or body or the holder of that particular appointment, as the 
case may be.  
39. Alumni Association .—(1) There shall be an Alumni Association for the University.  
(2) The subscription for membership of the Alumni Association shall be prescrib ed by the 
Ordinances.  
(3) No member of the Alumni Association shall be entitled to vote or stand for election unless he has 
been a member of the Association for at least one year prior to the date of election and is a degree holder 
of the University of at least five years standing:  
Provided that the condition relating to the completion of one year's membership shall not apply in the 
case of the first election.  
40. Students Council .—(1) There shall be constituted in the University, a Students' Council for ev ery 
academic year, consisting of — 
(a) the Dean of Students' Welfare who shall be the Chairman of the Students' Council;  
(b) all students who have won prizes in the previous academic year in the field of studies, fine 
arts, sports and extension work;  
(c) twenty students to be nominated by the Academic Council on the basis of merit in studies, 
sports, activities and all round development of personality:  
Provided that any student of the University shall have the right to bring up any matter concerning the 
University before the Students' Council if so permitted by the Chairman, and he shall have the right to 
participate in the discussions at any meeting when the matter is taken up for consideration.  
(2) The functions of the Students' Council shall be to make  suggestions to the appropriate authorities 
of the University in regard to the programmes of studies, students' welfare and other matters of 
importance, in regard to the working of the University in general and such suggestions shall be made on 
the basis o f consensus of opinion.  
(3) The Students' Council shall meet at least once in an academic year preferably in the beginning of 
that year.  
41. Ordinances, ho w made .—(1) The first Ordinances made under sub -section ( 2) of section 31 may 
be amended, repealed or  added to at any time by the Executive Council in the manner specified in the 
following sub -sections.  
(2) No Ordinance in respect of the matters enumerated in sub -section ( 1) of section 31 shall be made 
by the Executive Council unless a draft of such Ordin ance has been proposed by the Academic Council.  
(3) The Executive Council shall not have power to amend any draft of any Ordinance proposed by the 
Academic Council under clause ( 2), but may reject the proposal or return the draft to the Academic 32 
 Council fo r re-consideration, either in whole or in part, together with any amendment which the 
Executive Council may suggest.  
(4) Where the Executive Council has rejected or returned the draft of an Ordinance proposed by the 
Academic Council, the Academic Council m ay consider the question afresh and in case the original draft 
is reaffirmed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting and more than 
half the total number of members of the Academic Council, the draft may be sent back to t he Executive 
Council which shall either adopt it or refer it to the Visitor whose decision shall be final.  
(5) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall come into effect immediately.  
(6) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall be subm itted to the Visitor within two 
weeks from the date of its adoption.  
(7) The Visitor shall have the power to direct the University to suspend the operation of any 
Ordinance.  
(8) The Visitor shall inform the Executive Council about his objection to the Ordinance referred to in 
clause ( 7) and may, after receiving the comments of the University, either withdraw the order suspending 
the Ordinance or disallow the Ordinance, and his decision shall be final.  
42. Regulations .—(1) The authorities of the Universi ty may make Regulations consistent with the 
Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for  the following matters, namely: — 
(i) laying down the procedure to be observed at their meetings and the number of members 
required to form a quorum;  
(ii) providing for all matters which are required by the Ordinance, the Statutes or the Ordinance to 
be prescribed by Regulations;  
(iii) providing for all other matters solely concerning such authorities or committees appointed by 
them and not provided for by the Ordinance, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the giving of notice to the 
members of such authority of the dates of meeting and of the business to be considered at meetings and 
for the keeping of a r ecord of the proceedings of meetings.  
(3) The Executive Council may direct the amendment in such manner as it may specify of any 
Regulation made under the Statutes or the annulment of any such Regulation.  
43. Delegation of powers .—Subject to the provisions  of the Act and the Statutes, any officer or 
authority of the University may delegate his or its powers to any other officer or authority or person under 
his or its respective control and subject to the condition that overall responsibility for the exercis e of the 
powers so delegated shall continue to vest in the officer or authority delegating such powers . 
--------------------------The National Commission for Minority Educational Institutes Act, 2004--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR MINORITY EDUCATIONAL  
INSTITUTIONS ACT, 2004  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definition s. 
 
CHAPTER II  
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR MINORITY EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION S 
3. Constitution of National Commission for Minority Educational Institution s. 
4. Qualification s for appointment as Chairperson or other member.  
5. Term of office and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members.  
6. Officers and other employ ees of Commission.  
7. Salaries and allowances to be paid out of grants.  
8. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Commission.  
9. Procedure to be regulated by Commission.  
 
CHAPTER III  
RIGHT S OF A MINORITY EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION  
10. Right to establish a Minority Educational Institution . 
10A. Right of a Minority Educational Institution to seek affiliation . 
 
CHAPTER IV  
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF COMMISSION  
11. Functions of Commission.  
12. Powers of Commission.  
12A. Appeal against orders of the Competent authority . 
12B. Power of Commission to decide on the minority status of an educational institution . 
12C. Power to cancel.  
12D. Power of Commission to investigate matters relating to deprivation of educational rights of 
minorities.  
12E. Power of Commission to call for  information, etc.  
12F. Bar of jurisdiction . 
13. Financial and administrative powers of Chairperson.  
 
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
14. Grants by Central Government.  
15. Accounts and audit.  
16. Annual report.  
17. Annual report and audit report to be laid before Parliament.  
 
 2 
 CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS  
18. [Omitted. ] 
19. Chairperson, Members, Secretary, employees, etc., of Commission to be public se rvants.  
20. Directions by Central Government.  
21. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
22. Act to have overriding effect.  
23. Returns or information.  
24. Power to make rules.  
25. Power to remove difficulties.  
26. Repeal and saving.  
THE SCHEDULE . [Omitted ] 
  3 
 THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR MINORITY EDUCATIONAL  
INSTITUTIONS ACT, 2004  
ACT NO. 2 OF 2005  
[6th January, 2005.]  
An Act to constitute a National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions and to provide 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -fifth Year of the Republic of  India as  follows:— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the  National Commission 
for Minority Educational Institutions Act, 2004.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and  Kashmir.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 11th day of  November, 2004.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “affiliation ” together with its grammatical variations, includes,  in relation to a college, 
recognition of such college by, association  of such college wit h, and admission of such college to the 
privileges  of, a 1*** University;  
2[(aa) “appropriate Government ” means, — 
(i) in relation to an educational institution recogni sed for conducting its programmes of 
studies under any Act of Parliament, the Central Government; and  
(ii) in relation to any other educational institution recogni sed for conducting its programmes 
of studies under any State Act, a State Government in whose jurisdiction such institution is 
established; ]  
3*   *   *   *  * 
(c) “Commission ” means the National Commission for Minority Educational  Institutions 
constituted under section 3;  
2[(ca) “Competent authority ” means the authority appointed by the appropriate Government to 
grant no objection certificate for the establishment of any educat ional institution of their choice by the  
minorities;]  
(d) “degree ” means any such degree as may, with previous approval of  the Central Government, 
be specified in this behalf by the University  Grants Commission, by notification in the Official 
Gazette;  
2[(da) “educational rights to minorities ” means the rights of minorities to establish and administer 
educational institutions of thei r choice;]  
(e) “Member ” means a member of the Commission and includes the  Chairperson;  
(f) “minority ”, for the purpose of this  Act, means a community notified  as such by the Central 
Government;  
4[(g) “Minority Educational Institution ” means a college or an educational institution  established 
and administered by a minority or  minorities; ] 
(h) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules  made under this Act;  
(i) “qualification ” means a degree or any other qualification awarded  by a University;  
                                                           
1. The word “Scheduled” omitted by Act 18 of 2006, s.2 (w.e.f. 23 -1-2006).  
2. Ins. by s.  2, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -1-2006).  
3. Cl. ( b) omitted by Act 20 of 2010, s.  2 (w.e.f.1 -9-2010).  
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for cl. ( g) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2010).  4 
 1*   *   *   *  *  
(k) “technical education ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( g) of section 2 of the All India 
Council for Technical Education Act, 1987  (52 of 1987);  
(l) “University ” means a university defined under clause ( f) of section  2 of the Universit y Grants 
Commission Act, 1956 (3  of 1956), and  includes an institution deemed to be a University under 
section 3 of  that Act, or an institution specifically empowered by an Act of  Parliament to confer or 
grant degrees.  
CHAPTER II  
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR MINORITY EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS  
3. Constitution of National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions .—(1) The Central 
Government shall, by notification in the  Official Gazette, constitute a body to be known as the National  
Commission for Minority Educational Institutions to exercise the powers  conferred on, and to perform the 
functions assigned to, it under this  Act. 
(2) The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and 2[three  members ] to be  nominated by the 
Central Government.  
4. Qualifications for appointment as Chairperson or other Member .—(1) A person shall not be 
qualified for appointment as the Chairperson unless  he,— 
(a) is a member of a minority community; and  
(b) has been a Judge of a High Court.  
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Member unless  he,— 
(a) is a member of a minority community; and  
(b) is a person of eminence, ability and integrity.  
5. Term of office and conditions of service of Chairperson and  Members .—(1) Every Member 
shall hold office for a term of five years  from the date on which he assumes office.  
(2) A Member may, by writing under h is hand addressed to the Central  Government, resign from the 
office of Chairperson or, as the case may  be, of Member at any time.  
(3) The Central Government shall remove a person from the office of  Member if that person — 
(a) becomes an undischarged  insolvent;  
(b) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which, in  the opinion of the 
Central Government, involves moral turpitude;  
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent  court;  
(d) refuses to act or becomes inca pable of acting;  
(e) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Commission, absent  from three consecutive 
meetings of the Commission; or  
(f) in the opinion of the Central Government, has so abused the  position of Chairperson or 
Member as to render tha t person's  continuance in office detrimental to the public interest:  
Provided that no person shall be removed under this clause until that  person has been given an 
opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
(4) A vacancy caused under sub -section ( 2) or othe rwise shall be filled  by fresh nomination and a 
person so nominated shall hold office for the  unexpired period of the term for which his predecessor in 
office would  have held office if such vacancy had not arisen.  
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to , and the other terms and  conditions of service of, the 
Chairperson and Members shall be such as  may be prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Cl. (j) omitted by Act 18 of 2006, s.  2 (w.e.f. 23 -1-2006).  
2. Subs. by Act 20 of 2010, s. 3, for “two members” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2010).  5 
 6. Officers and other employees of Commission .—(1) The Central  Government shall provide the 
Commission with a Secretary and such other  officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient  
performance of the functions of the Commission under this Act.  
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and  conditions of service of, the 
Secretary, officers and other empl oyees  appointed for the purpose of the Commission shall be such as 
may be  prescribed.  
7. Salaries and allowances to be paid out of grants .—The salaries and  allowances payable to the 
Chairperson and Members and the  administrative expenses, including salarie s, allowances and pensions  
payable to the Secretary, officers and other employees referred to in  section 6, shall be paid out of the 
grants referred to in sub -section  (1) of section 14.  
8. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Commission .—No ac t or proceeding of the 
commission shall be questioned or shall be invalid  on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy 
or defect in the  constitution of the Commission.  
9. Procedure to be regulated by Commission .—(1) The Commission shall  meet as and  when 
necessary at such time and place as the Chairperson  may think fit.  
(2) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure.  
(3) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated  by the Secretary or any other 
officer of the Commission duly  authorised  by the Secretary in this behalf.  
1[CHAPTER III  
RIGHT S OF A MINORITY EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION  
10. Right to establish a Minority Educational Institution .—2[(1) Subject to the provisions 
contained in any other law for the time being in force, any person, who desires to establish a Minority 
Educational Institution may apply to the competent authority  for the grant of no objection certificate for 
the said purpose .] 
(2) The Competent authority shall, — 
(a) on perusal of documents, affidavits  or other e vidence, if any; and  
(b) after giving an opportunity o f being heard to the applicant,  
decide every application filed under sub -section ( 1) as expeditiously as possible and grant or reject the 
application , as the case may be:  
Provided that where an applicat ion is rejected, the Competent authority shall communi cate the same 
to the applicant.  
(3) Where within a period of ninety days from the receipt of the application under sub -section ( 1) for 
the grant of no objection certificate, — 
(a) the Competent authority  does not grant such certificate; or  
(b) where an application has been rejected and the same has not been communicated to the person 
who has applied for the grant of such certificate,  
it shall be deemed that the Competent authority has granted a no objecti on certificate to the applicant.  
(4) The applicant shall, on the grant of a no objection certificate or where the Competent authority has 
deemed to have granted the no objection certificate, be entitled to commence and proceed with the 
establishment of a M inority Educational Institution in accordance with the rules and regulations, as the 
case may be, laid down by or under any l aw for the time being in force.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “applicant ” means any person who makes an appli cation under sub -section ( 1) for 
establishment of a Mi nority Educational Institution;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2006, s.3, for CHAPTER III (w.e.f. 23 -1-2006).  
2. Subs. by Act 20 of 2010, s. 4, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2010).  6 
 (b) “no objection certificate ” means a certif icate stating therein, that the Competent authority has 
no objection for the establishment of a Mi nority Educational Institution.  
10A. Right of a Minority Educational Institution to seek affiliation. —(1) A Minority Educational 
Institution may seek affiliation to any University of its choice subject to such affiliation being permissible 
within the Act under which the said  University is establis hed. 
(2) Any person who is authoris ed in this behalf by the Minority Educational Institution, may file an 
application for affiliation under sub -section ( 1) to a University in the manner prescribed by the Statute, 
Ordinance, rules or regulations, of the  University:  
Provided that such authori sed person shall have right to know the status of such application after the 
expiry of sixty days from the date of filing of such application.]  
CHAPTER IV  
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF COMMISSION  
11. Functions of Commission .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any  other law for the time 
being  in force, the Commission shall — 
(a) advise the Central Government or any State Government on any  question relating to the 
education of minorities that may be referred  to it; 
1[(b) enquire, suo motu, or on a petition presented to it by any Minority Educational Institution, or 
any person on its behalf into complaints regarding deprivation or violation of rights of minorities to 
establish and administer educationa l institutions of their choice and any dispute relating to affiliation 
to a University and report its finding to the appropriate Gov ernment for its implementation;  
(c) intervene in any proceeding involving any deprivation or violation of the educational ri ghts of 
the minorities before a court with the leave of such court;  
(d) review the safeguards provided by or under the Constitution, or any law for the time being in 
force, for the protection of educational rights of the minorities and recommend measures f or their 
effective implementation;  
(e) specify measures to promote and preserve the minority status and character of institutions of 
their ch oice established by minorities;  
(f) decide  all questions relating to the status of any institution as a Minority Educational 
Institution and declare its status as such;  
(g) make recommendations to the appropriate Government for the effective, implementation of 
programmes and schemes relating to th e Minorit y Educational Institutions; and  
(h) do such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment 
of all or any of the objects of the Commission.]  
12. Powers of Commission .—(1) If any dispute arises between a minorit y educational institution and 
a 2*** University relating to its  affiliation to such University, the decision of the Commission thereon  
shall be final.  
(2) The Commission shall, for the purposes of discharging its functions  under this Act, have all the 
powers of a civil court trying a suit and  in particular, in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part  of India and examining 
him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian  Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 
1872), requisitioning any public record or  document or copy of such record or document from any 
office;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2006, s.4, for cls. ( b) and ( c) (w.e.f. 23 -1-2006) . 
2. The word “Scheduled” omitted by s.  5, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -1-2006).  7 
 (e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  and 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
1[(3) Every proceeding before the Commission shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196, of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 
1860) and the Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter 
XXVI of the Code of Criminal  Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).]  
2[12A. Appeal against orders of  the Competent authority. —(1) Any person  aggrieved by the order 
of refusal to grant no objection certificate under sub -section ( 2) of section 10 by the Competent authority 
for establishing a Minority Educational Institution, may prefer an appeal agains t such order to the 
Commission.  
(2) An appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed within thirty days from the date of the order referred 
to in sub -section ( 1) communicated to the applicant:  
Provided that the Commission may entertain an appeal after the expi ry of the said period of thirty 
days, if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period.  
(3) An appeal to the Commission shall be made in such form as may be prescribed and shall be 
accompanied by a copy of the order a gainst which the appeal has been filed.  
(4) The Commission, after hearing the parties, shall pass an order as soon as may be practicable, and 
give such directions as may be necessary or expedient to give effect to its orders or to prevent abuse of its 
process or to secure the ends of justice.  
(5) An order made by the Commission under sub -section ( 4) shall be executable by the Commission 
as a decree of a civil court and the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), so far as 
may be, shall apply as they apply in respec t of a decree of a civil court.  
12B. Power of Commission to decide on the minority status of an educational                  
institution. —(1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in the National Commission for 
Minoriti es Act, 1992 (19 of 1992), where an authority established by the Central Government or any State 
Government, as the case may be,  for grant of minority status to any educational institution rejects the 
application for the grant of such status, the aggrieved  person may appeal against such order of the 
authority to the Commission.  
(2) An appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be preferred within thirty days from the date of the order  
communicated to the applicant:  
Provided that the Commission may entertain an appe al after the expiry of the said period of thirty 
days, if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period.  
(3) An appeal to the Commission shall be made in such form as may be prescribed and shall be 
accompanied by a co py of the order against which the appeal has been filed.  
(4) On receipt of the appeal under sub -section ( 3), the Commission may, after giving the parties to the 
appeal an opportunity of being heard, 3*** decide on the minority status of the educational institution and 
shall proceed to give such direction as it may deem fit and, all such directions s hall be binding on the 
parties.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sect ion and section 12C, “authority ” means any authority or 
officer or commission which is established under any law for the time being in force or under any order of 
the appropriate Government, for the purpose of granting a certificate of minority status to an educational 
institution.  
12C. Power to cancel. —The Commission may, after giving a  reasonable opportunity   of being heard 
to a  Minority  Educational   Institution   to  which   minority   status   has been   granted  by  an  authority  or   
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 18 of 2006, s.  5 (w.e.f. 23 -1-2006).  
2. Ins. by s.  6, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -1-2006).  
3. The words “and in consultation with the State Government” omitted by Act 20 of 2010, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2010).  8 
 Commission, as the case may be, cancel such status under the fo llowing circumstances, namely: — 
(a) if the constitution, aims and objects of the educational institution, which has enabled it to 
obtain minority status has subsequently been amended in such a way that it no longer reflects the 
purpose or character of a Minority Educational Instituti on; 
(b) if, on verification of the records during the inspection or investigation, it is found that the 
Minority Educational Institution has failed to admit students belonging to the minority community in 
the institution as per rules and prescribed percentage govern ing admis sions during any academic year.  
12D. Power of Commission to investigate matters relating to deprivation of educational rights 
of minorities. —(1) The Commission shall have the power to  investigate into the complaints relating to 
deprivation of the educational rights of minorities.  
(2) The Commission may, for the purpose of conducting any investigation pertaining to a complaint 
under this Act, utilis e the services of any officer of the Central Government or any State Government with 
the concurrence o f the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be.  
(3) For the purpose of investigation under sub -section ( 1), the officer whose services are utilis ed may, 
subject to the direction and control of the Commission, — 
(a) summon and enforce t he attendance  of any person and examine him;  
(b) require the discovery and production of any document; and  
(c) requisition any public record o r copy thereof from any office.  
(4) The o fficer whose services are utilis ed under sub -section ( 2) shall investigate into any matter 
entrusted to it by the Commission and submit a report thereon to it within such period as may be specified 
by the Commission in this behalf.  
(5) The Commission shall satisfy itself about the correctness of the facts stat ed and the conclusion, if 
any, arrived at in the re port submitted to it under sub -section ( 4) and for this purpose the Commission 
may make such further inquiry as it may think fit.  
12E. Power of Commission to call for information, etc. —(1) The Commission, while enquiring 
into the complaints of violation or deprivation of educational rights of minorities shall call for information 
or report from the Central Government or any State Government o r any other authority or organis ation 
subordinate thereto, within such time as may be specified by it:  
Provided that ,— 
(a) if the information or report is not received within the time stipulated by the Commission, it 
may proceed to inquire into the complaint;  
(b) if, on receipt of information or report, the Commission is  satisfied either that no further 
inquiry is required, or that the required action has been initiated or taken by the concerned 
Government or authority, it may not proceed with the complaint and info rm the complainant 
accordingly.  
(2) Where the inquiry est ablishes violation or deprivation of the educational rights of the minorities 
by a public servant, the Commission may recommend to the concerned Government or authority, the 
initiation of disciplinary proceedings or such other action against the concerned person o r persons as may 
be deemed fit.  
(3) The Commission shall send a copy of the inquiry report, together with its recommendations to the 
concerned Government or authority and the concerned Government authority shall, within a period of one 
month, or su ch further time as the Commission may allow, forward its comments on the report, including 
the action taken, or proposed to be ta ken thereon, to the Commission.  
(4) The Commission shall publish its inquiry report and the action taken or proposed to be take n by 
the concerned Government or authority on the rec ommendations of the Commission.  
12F. Bar of jurisdiction. —No court (except the Supreme Court and a High Court exercising 
jurisdiction under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution) shall entertain any s uit, application or other 
proceedings in respect of any order made under this Chapter.]  9 
 13. Financial and administrative powers of Chairperson .—The Chairperson  shall exercise such 
financial and administrative powers as may be  vested in him by the rules made under this section:  
Provided that the Chairperson shall have authority to delegate such of  the financial and administrative 
powers as he may think fit to any  Member or Secretary or any other officer of the Commission subject to  
the condition that such  Member or Secretary or officer shall, while  exercising such delegated powers, 
continue to act under the direction,  control and supervision of the Chairperson.  
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
14. Grants by Central Government .—(1) The Central Governme nt shall,  after due appropriation 
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay  to the Commission by way of grants such sums of money 
as the Central  Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this  Act. 
(2) The Commission may spend such  sums of money as it thinks fit for  performing the functions 
under this Act, and such sums shall be  treated as expenditure payable out of the grants referred to in    
sub-section  (1). 
15. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Commission shall maintain proper  accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of  accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government in  consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audit ed by the Comptroller  and Auditor -General at such 
intervals as may be specified by him and  any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be 
payable  by the Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor -General.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General and any person appointed by him  in connection with the 
audit of the accounts of the Commission under  this Act shall have the same rights and privileges and the 
authority  in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General  generally ha s in 
connection with the audit of Government accounts and,  in particular, shall have the right to demand the 
production of books,  accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to  inspect any of 
the offices of the Commission.  
16. Annual re port.—The Commission shall prepare, in such form and at  such time, for each 
financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual  report, giving a full account of its activities during the 
previous  financial year and forward a copy thereof to the Central Government.  
17. Annual report and audit report to be laid before Parliament .—The Central Government shall 
cause the annual report, together with a  memorandum of action taken on the advice tendered by the 
Commission  under section 11 and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any  such advice, and the 
audit report to be laid as soon as may be after  they are received before each House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
18. [Power to amend Schedule .] Omitted by the National Commission for Minority Educational 
Institutions (Amendment) Act, 2006  (18 of 2006 ), s. 7 (w.e.f. 23-1-2006 ). 
19. Chairperson, Members, Secretary, employees, etc., of Commission to  be public              
servants .—The Chairperson,  Members, Secretary, officers and  other employees of the Commission shall 
be deemed to be public servants  within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
20. Directions by Central Government .—(1) In the discharge of its  functions under this Act, the 
Commission shall be guided by such  direction on questions of policy relating to national purposes, as may  
be given to it by the Central Government.  
(2) If any dispute arises between the Central Government and the  Commission as to whethe r a 
question is or is not a question of policy  relating to national purposes, the decision of the Central 
Government  shall be final.  
21. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or  other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government,  Commission, Chairperson, Members, Secretary or any officer or 
other  employee of the Commission for anything which is in good faith done or  intended to be done under 
this Act.  10 
 22. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall  have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained  in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument  
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.  
23. Returns or information .—The Commission shall furnish to the C entral  Government such returns 
or other information with respect to its  activities as the Central Government may, from time to time, 
require.  
24. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for c arrying out the  provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the  foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the  following matters, namely: — 
(a) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and  conditions of the service of, 
the Chairperson and Members under sub -section  (5) of section 5 and of the Secretary, officers and 
other  employees under sub -section ( 2) of section 6;  
1[(aa) the forms in which appeal under sub -section ( 3) of the sect ion 12A and sub -section ( 3) of 
section 12B shall be made;]  
(b) the financial and administrative powers to be exercised by the  Chairperson under section 13;  
(c) the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be  prepared under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 15;  
(d) the form in, and the time at, which the annual report shall be  prepared under section 16;  
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be  after it is m ade, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in  session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in  one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the  expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the  successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any  modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not  be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified  form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, howev er, that any such  modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of  anything previously done under that rule.  
25. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in  giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central G overnment  may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions  
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be  necessary or expedient, for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the  expiry of a period  of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after  it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
26. Repeal and saving .—(1) The National Commission for M inority  Educational Institutions 
Ordinance, 2004 (Ord. 6 of 2004) is hereby  repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the said Ordinance, anything done or  any action taken under the 
said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been  done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this 
Act. 
[THE SCHEDULE. ] Omitted by the National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions 
(Amendment) Act, 2006  (18 of 2006 ), s. 9 (w.e.f. 23-1-2006 ). 
________________  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 2006, s.  8 (w.e.f. 23 -1-2006).  
--------------------------The National Tax Tribunal Act, 2005--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL TAX TRIBUNAL ACT, 2005  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NATIONAL TAX TRIBUNAL  
3. Establishment of National Tax Tribunal.  
4. Composition of National Tax Tribunal.  
5. Constitution and jurisdiction of Benches.  
6. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and other Members.  
7. Appointment of Chairperson and other Members.  
8. Terms of office of Chairperson and other Members.  
9. Resig nation of Chairperson and other Members.  
10. Salary and allowances.  
11. Removal and suspension of Chairperson and other Members.  
12. Officers and employees of National Tax Tribunal.  
13. Appearances before National Tax Tribunal.  
14. Member to act as Chairperson or to discharge  his functions in certain circumstances.  
 
CHAPTER III  
JURISDICTION, POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF NATIONAL TAX TRIBUNAL  
15. Appeal to National Tax Tribunal.  
16. Procedure and powers of National Tax Tribunal.  
17. Finality of orders of National Tax Tribunal.  
18. Decision by major ity. 
19. Special Bench.  
20. Interim order.  
21. Power to punish for contempt.  
22. Order of National Tax Tribunal.  
23. Transfer of pending cases from High Court.  
24. Appeal to Supreme Court.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Members, etc., to be public servants.  
26. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
27. Power to remove difficulties.  
28. Power to make rules.  
29. Laying of rules before Parliament.  
30. Consequential amendments.  
THE SCHEDULE.   2 
 THE NATIONAL TAX TRIBUNAL ACT, 2005  
ACT NO. 49 OF 2005  
[20th December , 2005.]  
An Act to provide for the adjudication by the National Tax Tribunal of  disputes with respect to 
levy, assessment, collection and enforcement  of direct taxes and also to provide for the 
adjudication by that  Tribunal of disputes with respect to the determination of the rates of  
dutie s of customs and central excise on goods and the valuation of  goods for the purposes of 
assessment of such duties as well as in  matters relating to levy of tax on service, in pursuance 
of article  323B of the Constitution and for matters connected therewith  or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -sixth Year of the Republic of  India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called  the National Tax Tribunal 
Act, 2005.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government  may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions  of this Act and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement  of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming 
into force  of that provision.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Bench ” means a Bench of the National Tax Tribunal;  
(b) “Board of Direct Taxes ” means the Central Board of Direct Taxes  constituted under the 
Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1963 (54 of 1963);  
(c) “Board of Excise and Customs ” means the Central Board of Excise  and Customs constituted 
under the Central Boards of R evenue Act, 1963  (54 of 1963);  
(d) “Central Excise Act ” means the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of  1944);  
(e) “Central Excise Tariff Act ” means the Central Excise Tariff Act,  1985 (5 of 1986);  
(f) “Chairperson ” means the Chairperson of the National Tax Tribunal;  
(g) “Companies (Profits) Surtax Act ” means the Companies (Profits)  Surtax Act,                            
1964  (7 of 1964);  
(h) “Customs Act ” means the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962);  
(i) “Customs, Excis e and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal ” means the  Customs, Excise and 
Service Tax Appellate Tribunal constituted under  section 129 of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962);  
(j) “Customs Tariff Act ” means the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 (51 of  1975);  
(k) “Expenditu re-tax Act ” means the Expenditure -tax Act, 1987 (35 of  1987);  
(l) “Gift-tax Act ” means the Gift -tax Act, 1958 (18 of 1958);  
(m) “Income -tax Act ” means the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961);  
(n) “Income -tax Appellate Tribunal ” means the Income -tax Appellate  Tribunal constituted under 
section 252 of the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43  of 1961);  
                                                           
1. 28th December, 2005, vide notification No. S.O. 1826(E), dated 28 December, 2005, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part 
II, sec. 3( ii). 3 
 (o) “Interest -tax Act ” means t he Interest -tax Act, 1974 (45 of  1974);  
(p) “law officer ” means the Attorney -General for India, the Solicitor  General of India or the 
Additional  Solicitor General of India;  
(q) “Member ” means a Member of the National Tax Tribunal and includes  the Chairperson;  
(r) “National Tax Tribunal ” means the National Tax Tribunal established  under section 3;  
(s) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official  Gazette;  
(t) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(u) “Supreme Court ” means the Supreme Court of India;  
(v) “Wealth -tax Act ” means the Wealth -tax Act, 1957 (27 of 1957);  
(w) words and e xpressions used in this Act but not defined herein and  defined in the Central 
Excise Act, the Central Excise Tariff Act,  the Customs Act, the Customs Tariff Act (hereinafter 
referred to as the  indirect taxes) or the rules made thereunder or in Chapter V of  the Finance Act, 
1994 (32 of 1994) shall have the meanings, respectively,  assigned to them in the said Acts or the rules 
made thereunder;  
(x) words and expressions used in this Act but not defined herein and  defined in the Income -tax 
Act, the Wealth -tax A ct, the Gift -tax Act, the Expenditure -tax Act, the Interest -tax Act or the 
Companies  (Profits) Surtax Act (hereinafter referred to as the direct taxes) or  the rules made 
thereunder shall have the meanings, respectively,  assigned to them in the said Acts or  the rules made 
thereunder.   
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NATIONAL TAX TRIBUNAL  
3. Establishment of National Tax Tribunal .—The Central Government  shall, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, establish with effect  from such date as may be specified therein, a Tax Tribunal to be 
known  as the National Tax Tribunal to exercise the jurisdiction, powers and  authority conferred on such 
Tribunal by or under this Act.  
4. Composition of National Tax Tribunal .—The National Tax Tribunal  shall consist of a 
Chair person and such number of Members as the  Central Government deems fit, to be appointed by that 
Government, by  notification in the Official Gazette.  
5. Constitution and jurisdiction of Benches .—(1) The jurisdiction of  the National Tax Tribunal 
may be exerci sed by the Benches thereof to be  constituted by the Chairperson.  
(2) The Benches of the National Tax Tribunal shall ordinarily sit at  any place in the National Capital 
Territory of Delhi or such other  places as the Central Government may, in consultation w ith the  
Chairperson, notify:  
Provided that the Chairperson may for adequate reasons permit a Bench  to hold its temporary sitting 
for a period not exceeding fifteen days  at a place other than its ordinary place of seat.  
(3) The Central Government shall notify the areas in relation to which  each Bench of the National 
Tax Tribunal may exercise its jurisdiction.  
(4) The Central Government shall determine the number of Benches and  each Bench shall consist of 
two members.  
(5) The Central Government may 1*** transfer  a Member from headquarters of one Bench in one 
State to the  headquarters of  another Bench in another State or to the headquarters of any other  Bench 
within a State:  
2[Provided that no Member shall be transferred without the concurrence of the Chair person.]  
                                                           
1. The words “in consultation with the Chairperson” omitted by Act 18 of 2007, s. 2 (w.e.f. 29 -1-2007).  
2. Ins. by s. 2. ibid. (w.e.f. 29 -1-2007).  4 
 6. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and other Members .—(1) The Chairperson of 
the National Tax Tribunal shall be a person who has  been a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief 
Justice of a High Court.  
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as Member unless  he— 
(a) is, or has been, or is eligible to be, a Judge of a High Court; or  
(b) is, or has been, a Member of the Income -tax Appellate Tribunal or  of the Customs, Excise and 
Service Tax Appellate Tribunal for at lea st 1[five  years ]. 
7. Appointment of Chairperson and other Members .—(1) Subject to the  provisions of sub -section 
(2), the Chairperson and every other Member  shall be appointed by the Central Government.  
(2) The Chairperson and the other Members shall be app ointed by the  Central Government on the 
recommendations of a Selection Committee  consisting of — 
(a) the Chief Justice of India or a Judge of the Supreme Court  nominated by him;  
(b) the Secretary in the Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of  Legal Affairs);  
(c) the Secretary in the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue).  
(3) No appointment of the Chairperson or of any other Member shall be  invalidated merely by reason 
of any vacancy or any defect in the  constitution of the Selection Committee.  
8. Terms of office of Chairperson and other Members .—The Chairperson  and every other Member 
shall hold office as such for a term of five  years from the date on which he enters upon his office but shall 
be eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that no Chair person or other Member shall hold office as such  after he has attained, — 
(a) in the case of Chairperson, the age of sixty -eight years; and  
(b) in the case of any other Member, the age of sixty -five years.  
9. Resignation of Chairperson and other Members .—The Chairperson or any  other Member may, 
by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the  Central Government, resign his office.  
10. Salary and allowances .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act,  the salary and allowances and 
other terms and conditi ons of the  Chairperson shall be the same as applicable to a sitting Judge of the  
Supreme Court, but no vacation shall be allowed:  
Provided that if a person who, immediately before the date of assuming  the office as the Chairperson 
was in receipt of or bein g eligible so to  do, had elected to draw, a pension in respect of any previous 
service  or office held by such person under the Government of the Union or of a  State, his salary in 
respect of service as Chairperson shall be reduced  by the amount of that pen sion.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, “vacation ” shall  have the meaning assigned to it 
in the Supreme Court Judges (Conditions  of Service) Act, 1958 (41 of 1958).  
(2) A Member shall draw salary of a High Court Judge and other  allowances and the terms and 
conditions of his service shall be the  same as applicable to a Secretary to the Government of India:  
Provided that if a person who, immediately before the date of assuming  the office as Member was in 
receipt of, or being eligible so to  do, had elected to draw, a pension in respect of any previous service  held 
by such person in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a  State, his salary in respect of service as 
Member shall be reduced to  the extent of that pension.  
(3) The salary a nd allowances and other terms and conditions of service  of Chairperson or a Member 
of the Tribunal shall not be varied to his  disadvantage after appointment.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2007, s. 3, for “seven years” (w.e.f. 29 -1-2007).  5 
 11. Removal and suspension of Chairperson and other Members .—(1) The  Central Government 
may, in consultation with the Chief Justice of  India, remove from office the Chairper son or any Member 
who— 
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the  Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude; or  
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such  Chairperson or Member of the 
National Tax Tribunal; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to  affect prejudicially his functions as 
the Chairperson or a Member of  the National Tax Tribunal; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office  prejudicial to the public 
interest.  
(2) The Chairperson or any other Member shall not be removed from his  office except by an order 
made by the Central Govern ment on the ground  of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry 
made by a Judge  of the Supreme Court in which such Chairperson or Member had been  informed of the 
charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity  of being heard in respect of t hose charges.  
(3) The Central Government may suspend from office the Chairperson or  any other Member in 
respect of whom a reference of conducting an  inquiry has been made to the Judge of the Supreme Court 
under sub -section  (2) until the Central Government has passed orders on receipt  of the report of the Judge 
of the Supreme Court on such reference.  
(4) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for  the investigation of 
misbehaviour or incapacity of the Chairperson or a  Member referred to in sub -section ( 2). 
12. Officers and employees of National Tax Tribunal .—(1) The Central  Government shall provide 
the National Tax Tribunal with such officers  and employees as it may deem fit.  
(2) The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service  of officers and employees of the 
National Tax Tribunal shall be such as  may be prescribed.  
(3) The officers and employees of the National Tax Tribunal shall  discharge their functions under the 
general superintendence of the  Chairperson.  
(4) The officers a nd the other employees shall be appointed on the  recommendations of a Selection 
Committee constituted by the Central  Government.  
13. Appearance before National Tax Tribunal .—(1) A party to an appeal  other than Government 
may either appear in person or auth orise one or  more chartered accountants or legal practitioners 1*** to 
present his or its case before the National  Tax Tribunal.  
(2) The Government may authorise one or more legal practitioners or any  of its officers to present its 
case before the National  Tax Tribunal.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section,— 
(a) “chartered accountant ” means a chartered accountant as defined in  clause ( b) of sub -section 
(1) of section 2 of the Chartered  Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949) and who has obtained a  
certificate of practice under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(b) “legal practitioner ” means an advocate, a vakil  or any attorney of  any High Court, and 
includes a pleader in practice.  
14. Member to act as Chairperson or to discharge his functions in  certain              
circumstances .—(1) In the event of any vacancy in the office of  the Chairperson by reason of his death, 
resignation or otherwise, the  Central Government may designate the senior -most Member to act as the  
                                                           
1. The words “ or any person duly authorised by him or it” omitted by Act 18 of 2007, s. 4 (w.e.f. 29 -1-2007).  6 
 Chairperson until the day on wh ich a Chairperson, appointed in  accordance with the provisions of this Act 
to fill such vacancy, enters  upon his office.  
(2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing to  absence, illness or any other 
cause, the Central Government may  authorise the senior -most Member to discharge the functions of the  
Chairperson until the date on which the Chairperson resumes his duties.  
(3) The senior -most member designated to act under sub -section ( 1) or to discharge functions of the 
Chairperson under  sub-section ( 2), of the Chairperson shall continue to draw salary and allowances of a  
Member.  
CHAPTER III  
JURISDICTION, POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF NATIONAL TAX TRIBUNAL  
15. Appeal to National Tax Tribunal .—(1) An appeal shall lie to the  National Tax Tribunal  from 
every order passed in appeal by the Income -tax Appellate Tribunal and the Customs, Excise and Service 
Tax Appellate Tribunal, if the National Tax Tribunal is satisfied that the  case involves a substantial 
question of law.  
(2) The Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner of Income -tax or the  Chief Commissioner or 
Commissioner of Customs and Central Excise, as  the case may be, or an assessee aggrieved by any order 
passed by the  Income -tax Appellate Tribunal or any person aggrieved by any order  passed by the 
Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal  (hereinafter referred to as aggrieved person), may 
file an appeal to  the National Tax Tribunal and such appe al under this sub -section shall — 
(a) be filed within one hundred and twenty days from the dat e on which  the order appealed 
against is received by the assessee or the aggrieved  person or the Chief Commissioner or 
Commissioner, as the case may be;  
(b) be in the form of a memorandum of appeal precisely stating therein  the substantial question of 
law involved; and  
(c) be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed:  
Provided that separate form of memorandum of appeal shall be filed for  matters involving direct and 
indirect taxes:  
Provided further that the National Tax Tribunal may entertain the  appeal  within sixty days after the 
expiry of the said period of one  hundred and twenty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was  prevented 
by sufficient cause from preferring an appeal in time.  
(3) Where an appeal is admitted under sub -section ( 1), the Nat ional Tax  Tribunal— 
(a) shall formulate the question of law for hearing the appeal; and  
(b) may also determine any relevant issue in connection with the  question so formulated — 
(i) which has not been so determined by the Income -tax Appellate  Tribunal or by  the 
Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal;  or 
(ii) which has been wrongly determined by the Income -tax Appellate  Tribunal or by the 
Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal,  
and shall decide the question of law so formulated and the  other  relevant issue so determined and deliver 
such judgment thereon  containing the grounds on which such decision is founded and may award  such 
cost as it deems fit.  
(4) Where in any appeal under this section, the decision of the Income -tax Appellate Tri bunal or the 
Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate  Tribunal involves the payment of any tax or duties, the 
assessee or the  aggrieved person, as the case may be, shall not be allowed to prefer  such appeal unless he 
deposits at least twenty -five per cent . of such  tax or duty payable on the basis of the order appealed 
against:  7 
 Provided that where in a particular case the National Tax Tribunal is  of the opinion that the deposit of 
tax or duty under this sub -section  would cause undue hardship to such person,  it may dispense with such  
deposit subject to such conditions as it may deem fit to impose so as  to safeguard the interest of revenue.  
16. Procedure and powers of National Tax Tribunal .—(1) The National Tax  Tribunal shall not be 
bound by the procedure laid  down by the Code of  Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) but shall be guided 
by the principles  of natural justice.  
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the National Tax  Tribunal shall have powers to 
regulate its own procedure.  
(3) The National Ta x Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of  discharging its functions under this Act, 
the same powers as are vested  in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908)  while 
trying a suit, in respect of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) requiring the discovery and production of books of account and  other documents;  
(b) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian  Evidence Act,                             
1872 (1 of 1872), requisitioning any public record or  document or a  copy of such record or document, 
from any office;  
(c) dismissing an appeal for default or deciding it, ex parte ; 
(d) setting aside any order of dismissal of any appeal for default or  any order passed by it,                
ex parte ; 
(e) rectifying  any mistake or error apparent on the face of record; and  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(4) All proceedings before the National Tax Tribunal shall be deemed to  be judicial proceedings 
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 and  for the p urposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860)  and the National Tax Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for  the purposes of section 
195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal  Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
17. Finality of orders of N ational Tax Tribunal .—Any order passed by  the National Tax Tribunal 
shall be final and shall be given effect to  accordingly and no civil court shall have or be entitled to 
exercise  any jurisdiction, power or authority with respect to any of the matters  falling within the 
jurisdiction of the National Tax Tribunal.  
18. Decision by majority .—If the Members of a Bench consisting of two  Members differ in opinion 
on any point, they shall state the point or  points on which they differ, and make a reference to the 
Chairperson,  who shall hear the point or points himself or nominate any other Member  for such hearing 
and such point or points shall be decided according to  the opinion of the majority, who have heard the 
case including those  who first heard it.  
19. Specia l Bench .—Where a judgment pronounced on a question of law by  a Bench subsequently 
comes up for hearing before any Bench, and the  latter Bench is of the opinion that the question of law 
requires  reconsideration, then the latter Bench shall make a reference to the  Chairperson to constitute a 
Special Bench consisting of five Members  to hear and decide such question of law.  
20. Interim order .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other  provisions of this Act or any 
other law for the time being in force, no  interim order (whether by way of injunction or stay or otherwise) 
shall  be made in relation to an y appeal under this Act, unless — 
(a) copies of such appeal and all documents in support of the plea for  such interim order are 
furnished to the party against w hom the appeal  is preferred; and  
(b) opportunity is given to such party to be heard in the matter.  
21. Power to punish for contempt .—The National Tax Tribunal shall have  and exercise the same 
jurisdiction, powers and authority in respect of  contempt of its elf as the High Court has and may exercise   8 
 such power or  authority, for this purpose under the provisions of the Contempt of  Courts Act, 1971 (70 of 
1971), which shall have effect subject to the  modification that — 
(a) any  reference therein to a High Court shall be construed as  including a reference to the 
National Tax Tribunal;  
(b) any reference to the Advocate General in section 15 of the said Act  shall be construed as a 
reference to such law officer as the Central  Govern ment may specify in this behalf:  
Provided that such matters shall be heard by a Special Bench  consisting of five Members constituted 
by the Chairperson.  
22. Order of National Tax Tribunal .—The National Tax Tribunal may,  after giving the parties to 
any proceedings before it, an opportunity  of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit.  
23. Transfer of pending cases from High Court .—(1) On and from such  date as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify, all  matters and proceedings including appeals and references 
under the  direct taxes and indirect taxes pending before any High Court  immediately before that date shall 
stand transferred to the National  Tax Tribunal.  
(2) Where any matter or proceeding including appeals and references  stand transferred from the High 
Court to the National Tax Tribunal  under sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) the High Court shall, as soon as may be after such transfer,  forward the records pertaining to 
such matter or proceeding to the  National Tax Tribunal;  
(b) the Na tional Tax Tribunal shall, on receipt of such records,  proceed to deal with such matter 
or proceeding from the stage at which  it is transferred or from an earlier stage or de novo  as it may 
deem  fit; 
(c) the Chairperson shall constitute a Bench consisting of such number  of Members as he deems 
fit for hearing cases transferred under this  section.  
24. Appeal to Supreme Court .—Any person including any department of the  Government aggrieved 
by any decision or ord er of the National Tax  Tribunal may file an appeal to the Supreme Court within 
sixty days from  the date of communication of the decision or order of the National Tax  Tribunal to him:  
Provided that the Supreme Court may, if it is satisfied that the  appellan t was prevented by sufficient 
cause from filing the appeal  within the said period, allow it to be filed within such time as it may  deem fit.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Members, etc., to be public servants .—The Chairperson, Members and  other officers and 
employees of the National Tax Tribunal shall be  deemed to be public servants within the meaning of 
section 21 of the  Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
26. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or  other legal proceedings shall 
lie aga inst the National Tax Tribunal or  its Chairperson, Member, officer or other employee in the 
discharge of  any function for any loss or damage caused or likely to be caused by  any act which is, in 
good faith, done or intended to be done in the  discharge of a ny function under this Act.  
27. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in  giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government  may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions,  
not inconsistent with t he provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be  necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period  of two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this sect ion shall, as soon as may be, after  it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  9 
 28. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by  notification, make rules to carry 
out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such  rules may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the procedure under sub -section ( 4) of section 11 for the  investigation of charges of 
misbehaviour or incapacity against the  Chairperson or other Members;  
(b) the salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of  officers and other employees of 
the National Tax Tribunal under sub -section  (2) of section 12;  
(c) the amount of fees payable under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 15;  
(d) the othe r matters in respect of which the National Tax Tribunal may  exercise the powers of a 
civil court under clause ( f) of sub -section  (3) of section 16;  
(e) any other matter which may be prescribed or in respect of which  rules are required to be made 
by the Cen tral Government.  
29. Laying of rules before Parliament .—Every rule made under this Act  by the Central Government 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is  made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for 
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in  two or more successive sessions 
and if, before the expiry of the  session immediately following the session or the successive sessions  
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or  both Ho uses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall  thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect,  as 
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or  annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anythin g previously done under that rule.  
30. Consequential amendments .—On and from such date as the Central  Government may, by 
notification, specify, the enactments mentioned in  the Schedule shall stand amended in the manner 
specified therein.   10 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 30)  
AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN ENACTMENTS  
PART I  
AMENDMENTS TO THE INCOME -TAX ACT, 1961  
(43 OF 1961)  
1. In section 2, after clause ( 29C), the following clause shall be  inserted, namely: — 
'(29D) “National Tax Tribunal ” means the National Tax Tribunal  established under section 3 of 
the N ational Tax Tribunal Act, 2005;’ . 
2. In Chapter XX, — 
(i) in section 254, in sub -section ( 4), for the words, figures and  letter “Save as provided in section 
256 or section 260A ”, the words  and figures “Save as provided in  the National Tax Tribunal Act, 
2005 ” shall be substituted;  
(ii) sub -heading “C.—Reference to High Court ” and sections 256, 258 and  259 shall be omitted;  
(iii) for section 260, the following section shall be substituted,  namely:— 
“260. Effect to the decisi ons of Supreme Court and of the National Tax  Tribunal .—(1) The 
Supreme Court upon hearing any reference made to it  by the Appellate Tribunal under section 
257 shall decide the question  of law raised therein, and shall deliver its judgment thereon  
containing the grounds on which such decision is founded, and a copy of  the judgment shall be 
sent under the seal of the Court and the  signature of the Registrar to the Appellate Tribunal which 
shall pass  such orders as are necessary to dispose of the case  conforming to such  judgment.  
(2) Where the National Tax Tribunal delivers a judgment in an appeal  filed before it or in any 
matter transferred to it under the National  Tax Tribunal Act, 2005, effect shall be given to the 
order of that  Tribunal by the asse ssing officer on the basis of certified copy of the  judgment.  
(3) The cost of any reference to the Supreme Court which shall not  include the fee for making 
the reference shall be at the discretion of  the Court. ”; 
(iv) in section 260A, in sub -section ( 1), after the words “order passed  in appeal by the Appellate 
Tribunal ”, the words “before the date of  establishment of the National Tax Tribunal ” shall be 
inserted;  
(v) in section 261, after the words “any judgment of the High Court  delivered ”, the words “before 
the establishment of the National Tax  Tribunal ” shall be inserted;  
(vi) in section 263, in sub -section ( 3), after the words “the Appellate  Tribunal, ”, the words 
“National Tax Tribunal, ” shall be inserted;  
(vii) in section 264, in sub -section ( 7), after the words “the Appellate Tribunal, ”, the words 
“National Tax Tribunal, ” shall be  inserted.  
PART II  
AMENDMENTS TO THE WEALTH -TAX ACT, 1957  
(27 OF 1957)  
1. In section 2, after clause ( lc), the following clause shall be  inserted, namely: — 
'(ld) “National Tax Tribunal ” means the National Tax Tribunal  established under section 3 of the 
National Tax Tribunal Act, 2005;'.  
2. In section 25, in sub -section ( 4), after the words “Appellate  Tribunal, ” the words “National Tax 
Tribunal ” shall be inserted.  
  11 
 3. In section 27A, — 
(i) in sub -section ( 1), after the words and figures “file on or after  the 1st day of October, 1998 ”, 
the words “but before the date of  establishment of the National Tax Tribunal ” shall be inserted;  
(ii) in sub -section ( 2), after the words “An appeal shall lie to the  High Court ”, the words “before 
the date of establishment of the  National Tax Tribunal ” shall be inserted.  
4. In section 29, in sub -section ( 1), after the words “any judgment of  the High Court delivered ”, the 
words “before the date of establishment  of the National Tax Tribunal ” shall be inserted.  
5. In section 29A, after the words “preferred to the Supreme Court ”, the words and figures “under this 
Act before the commencement of the  National Tax Tribunal Act, 2005 ” shall be inserted.  
PART III  
AMENDMENTS TO THE EXPENDITURE -TAX ACT, 1987  
(35 OF 1987)  
1. In section 13, in sub -section ( 4), for the words “or any order of a  High Court ”, the words “or any 
order of the National Tax Tribunal or of  a High Court ” shall be substituted.  
2. In secti on 21, in sub -section ( 7), after the words “Appellate  Tribunal, ”, the words “the National 
Tax Tribunal, ” shall be inserted.  
PART IV  
AMENDMENTS TO THE INTEREST -TAX ACT, 1974  
(45 OF 1974)  
1. In section 19, in sub -section ( 3), after the words “the Appellate  Tribunal ”, the words “the National 
Tax Tribunal ” shall be inserted.  
2. In section 20, in sub -section ( 7), for the words “Appellate  Tribunal, the High Court or the Supreme 
Court ”, the words “Appellate  Tribunal, the National Tax Tribunal, the High Court or t he Supreme  Court ” 
shall be substituted.  
PART V  
AMENDMENT TO THE FINANCE (NO. 2) A CT, 1998  
(21 OF 1998)  
In section 76, in sub -section ( 1), the words, figures, letter and  brackets “sections 23, 23A, 24, 25, 28 
and 29 of the Wealth -tax Act as  amended and section 27A as inserted by the Finance (No. 2) Act,  1998 ”, 
the words, figures and letter “sections 23, 23A, 24 and 25 of  the Wealth -tax Act ” shall be substituted.  
PART VI  
AMENDMENTS TO THE CUSTOMS ACT, 1962  
(52 OF 1962)  
1. In section 2, after clause ( 30), the following clause shall be  inserted, namely: — 
'(30A) “National Tax Tribunal ” means the National Tax Tribunal  established under section 3 of 
the National Tax Tribunal Act, 2005,'.  
2. In section 27, in sub -section ( 3), after the words “Appellate  Tribunal ”, the words “, the National 
Tax Tribunal ” shall be inserted.  
3. In section 27A, in the Explanation , after the words “Appellate  Tribunal ”, the words “, National Tax 
Tribunal ” shall be inserted.  
4. In  section  28AA,   in  Explanations   1  and  2, after   the  words   “Appellate  Tribunal ”,  the  words 
“, National Tax Tribunal ” shall be inserted.  12 
 5. In  section  28AB,  in  Explanations   1  and  2,  after  the  words “Appellate   Tribunal ”, the  words 
“, National Tax Tribunal ” shall be inserted.  
6. In section 28B, in sub -section ( 1), after the words “Appellate  Tribunal ”, the words “, National Tax 
Tribunal ” shall be inserted.  
7. Sections 130,  130A, 130B, 130C and 130D shall be omitted.  
8. In section 130E, in clause ( b), after the words “any order passed ”, the words “before the 
establishment of the National Tax Tribunal ” shall  be inserted.  
9. In section 131, after the words “an appeal has been preferred to the  Supreme Court ”, the words and 
figure “under this Act before the  commencement of the National Tax Tribunal Act,  2005 ” shall be  
inserted.  
10. In section 131C, clause ( b) shall be omitted.  
PART VII  
AMENDMENTS TO THE CENTRAL EXCISE ACT, 1944  
(1 OF 1944)  
1. In section 2, after clause ( f), the following clause shall be  inserted, namely: — 
'(ff) “National Tax Tribunal ” means the National Tax Tribunal  established under section 3 of the 
National Tax Tribunal Act, 2005;'.  
2. In section 11AA,   in  Explanations   1  and  2,  after  the  words   “Appellate  Tribunal ”,  the  words   
“, National Tax Tribunal ” shall be inserted.  
3. In  section  11AB,   in  Explanations  1 and   2, after  the  words “Appellate   Tribunal ”,  the  words    
“, National Tax Tribunal ” shall be inserted.  
4. In section 11BB, in the Explanation , after the words “Appellate  Tribunal ”, the words “, National 
Tax Tribunal ” shall be inserted.  
5. In section 35C, in sub -section ( 4), for the words, figures and  letters “Save as provided in section 
35G or section 35L ”, the words and  figures “Save as provided in the National Tax Tribunal Act, 2005 ” 
shall  be substituted.  
6. Sections 35G, 35H, 35 -I and 35J shall be omitted.  
7. In section 35K, — 
(i) in sub -section ( 1), the words “High Court or the ” shall be omitted;  
(ii) in sub -section ( 2),— 
(a) the words “the High Court or ” occurring at both the places shall be  omitted;  
(b) the words “as the case may be, ” shall be omitted.  
8. In section 35L, in clause ( b), after the words “any order passed ”, the words “before the 
establishment of the National Tax Tribunal ” shall  be inserted.  
9. In section 35N, after the words “an appeal has been preferred to the  Supreme Court ”, the words and 
figures “under this Act before the  commencement of the National Tax Tribunal Act, 2005 ” shall be  
inserted.  
 
______________  
--------------------------The Private Security Agencies (Regulation) Act, 2005--------------------------
1 
 THE PRIVATE SECURITY AGENCIES (REGULATION) ACT, 2005  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Appointment of Controlling Authority.  
4. Persons or Private Security Agency not to engage or provide private security guard without 
licence.  
5. Eligibility for licence.  
6. Persons not eligible for licence.  
7. Application for grant of licence.  
8. Renewal of licence.  
9. Conditions for commencement of operation and engagement of supervisors.  
10. Eligibility to be a pri vate security guard.  
11. Conditions of licence.  
12. Licence to be exhibited.  
13. Cancellation and suspension of licence.  
14. Appeals.  
15. Register to be maintained by a private security agency.  
16. Inspection of licence, etc.  
17. Issue of photo identity card.  
18. Disclosure of information to unauthorised person.  
19. Delegation.  
20. Punishment for contravention of certain provisions.  
21. Penalty for unauthorised use of certain uniforms.  
22. Offences by companies.  
23. Indemnity.  
24. Framing of model rules for adoption by States.  
25. Power of State Government  to make rules.  
THE SCHEDULE.   
  2 
 THE PRIVATE SECURITY AGENCIES (REGULATION) ACT, 2005  
ACT NO. 29 OF 2005  
[23rd June , 2005.]  
An Act to provide for the regulation of private security agencies and  for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -sixth Year of the Republic of  India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the  Private Security 
Agencies (Regulation) Act, 2005.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and  Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government  may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “armoured car service ” means the service provided by deployment of  armed guards along 
with armoured car and such other related services  which may be notified by the Central Government 
or as the case may be,  the State Government from time to time;  
(b) “Controlling Authority ” means the Controlling Authority appointed  under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 3;  
(c) “licence” means a licence granted under sub -section ( 5) of section  7; 
(d) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official  Gazette;  
(e) “prescribed ” means presc ribed by rules made under this Act;  
(f) “private security ” means security provided by a person, other than  a public servant, to protect 
or guard any person or property or both  and includes provision of armoured car service;  
(g) “private security agency ” means a person or body of persons other  than a government agency, 
department or organisation engaged in the  business of providing private security services including 
training to  private security guards or their supervisor or providing private  security guards  to any 
industrial or business undertaking or a company  or any other person or property;  
(h) “private security guard ” means a person providing private security  with or without arms to 
another person or property or both and includes  a supervisor;  
(i) “State  Government ”, in relation to a Union territory, includes the  Administrator of that Union 
territory appointed by the President under  article 239 of the Constitution.  
3. Appointment of Controlling Authority .—(1) The State Government  shall, by notification, 
designate an officer not below the rank of a  Joint Secretary in the Home Department of the State or an 
equivalent  officer to be the Controlling Authority for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The State Government may, for efficient discharge of functions by  the Controlling Authority, 
provide it with such other officers and  staff as that Government considers necessary.  
4. Persons or Private Security Agency not to engage or provide private  security guard without 
licence .—No person shall carry on or commence  the b usiness of private security agency, unless he holds 
a licence  issued under this Act:  
Provided that the person carrying on the business of private security  agency, immediately before the 
commencement of this Act, may continue  to do so for a period of one ye ar from the date of such 
commencement  and if he has made an application for such licence within the said  period of one year, till 
the disposal of such application:  
                                                           
1. 14th March, 2006, vide notification N o. S.O. 317(E), dated 15th March, 2006, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,          
sec. 3( ii). 3 
 Provided further that no private security agency shall provide private  security abroad witho ut 
obtaining permission of the Controlling  Authority, which shall consult the Central Government before 
according  such permission.  
5. Eligibility for licence .—An application for issue of a licence under  this Act shall only be 
considered from a person after  due verification  of his antecedents.  
6. Persons not eligible for licence .—(1) A person shall not be  considered for issue of a licence under 
this Act, if he has  been— 
(a) convicted of an offence in connection with promotion, formation or  management of a 
company (any fraud or misfeasance committed by him in  relation to the company), including an 
undischarged insolvent; or  
(b) convicted by a competent court for an offence, the prescribed  punishment for which is 
imprisonment of not less than two years; or  
(c) keeping links with any organisation or association which is banned  under any law on account 
of their activities which pose threat to  national security or public order or there is information about 
such a  person indulging in activities which are prejudici al to national  security or public order; or  
(d) dismissed or removed from Government service on grounds of  misconduct or moral turpitude.  
(2) A company, firm or an association of persons shall not be  considered for issue of a licence under 
this Act, if, it  is not  registered in India, or having a proprietor or a majority shareholder,  partner or 
director, who is not a citizen of India.  
7. Application for grant of licence .—(1) An application for grant of  licence to a private security 
agency shall be made to the Controlling  Authority in such form as may be prescribed.  
(2) The applicant shall submit an affidavit incorporating the details  in relation to the provisions 
contained in section 6, ensure the  availability of the training for its private security guards  and supervisors 
required under sub -section ( 2) of section 9, fulfilment of  conditions under section 11 and of cases 
registered with police or  pending in a court of law involving the applicant.  
(3) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be accompani ed by a  fee of— 
(a) rupees five thousand if the private security agency is operating in  one district of a State;  
(b) rupees ten thousand if the agency is operating in more than one but  up to five districts of a 
State; and  
(c) rupees twenty -five thousand if  it is operating in the whole State.  
(4) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the Controlling  Authority may, after making 
such inquiries as it considers necessary  and obtaining no objection certificate from the concerned police  
authority, by  order in writing, either grant a licence or refuse to  grant the same within a period of sixty 
days from the date of receipt  of application with complete particulars and the prescribed fee:  
Provided that no order of refusal shall be made unless — 
(a) the ap plicant has been given a reasonable opportunity of being  heard; and  
(b) the grounds on which licence is refused is mentioned in the order.  
(5) A licence granted under this section — 
(a) shall be valid for a period of five years unless the same is  cancelled under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 13;  
(b) may be renewed from time to time after the expiry of five years,  for a further period of five 
years on payment of such fee as may be  prescribed; and  
(c) shall be subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.  
8. Renewal of licence .—(1) An application for renewal of licence shall  be made to the Controlling 
Authority, not less than forty -five days  before the date of expiry of the period of validity thereof, in such  4 
 form as may be prescribed and shall be accompanied by the requisite fee  and other documents required 
under sections 6, 7 and 11 of this Act.  
(2) The Controlling Authority shall pass an order on application for  renewal of licence within thirty 
days from the date of receipt of  application complete in all res pects.  
(3) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the Controlling  Authority may, after making 
such inquiries as he considers necessary  and by order in writing, renew the licence or refuse to renew the 
same:  
Provided that no order of refusal sh all be made except after giving the  applicant a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard.  
9. Conditions for commencement of operation and engagement of  supervisors .—(1) Every 
private security agency shall, within six months  of obtaining the licence, commence its activities.  
(2) Every private security agency shall ensure imparting of such  training and skills to its private 
security guards and supervisors as  may be prescribed:  
Provided that the person carrying on the business of private security  agency, before t he 
commencement of this Act, shall ensure the required  training to its security guards and supervisors within 
a period of one  year from the date of such commencement.  
(3) Every private security agency shall, within sixty days from the  date of issue of the licence, employ 
such number of supervisors, as may  be prescribed.  
(4) A private security agency shall not employ or engage a person as a  supervisor unless he fulfils the 
conditions specified in sub -section  (1) of section 10.  
(5) While engaging a supervisor  of private security guards, every  private security agency shall give 
preference to a person who has  experience of serving in the Army, Navy, Air Force or any other Armed  
forces of the Union or State Police including armed constabularies and  Home Guards fo r a period of not 
less than three years.  
10. Eligibility to be a private security guard .—(1) A private security  agency shall not employ or 
engage any person as a private security  guard unless he — 
(a) is a citizen of India or a citizen of such other country as the  Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette,  specify;  
(b) has completed eighteen years of age but has not attained the age of  sixty -five years;  
(c) satisfies the agency about  his character and antecedents in such  manner as may be prescribed;  
(d) has completed the prescribed security training successfully;  
(e) fulfils such physical standards as may be prescribed; and  
(f) satisfies such other conditions as may be prescribed.  
(2) No person who has been convicted by a competent court or who has  been dismissed or removed 
on grounds of misconduct or moral turpitude  while serving in any of the armed forces of the Union, State 
Police  Organisations, Central or State Governments or in an y private security  agency shall be employed 
or engaged as a private security guard or a  supervisor.  
(3) Every private security agency may, while employing a person as a  private security guard, give 
preference to a person who has served as a  member in one o r more of the following, namely: — 
(i) Army;  
(ii) Navy;  
(iii) Air Force;  
(iv) any other armed forces of the Union;  
(v) Police, including armed constabularies of States; and  
(vi) Home Guards.  5 
 11. Conditions of licence .—(1) The State Government may frame rules to  prescribe the conditions 
on which licence shall be granted under this  Act and such conditions shall include requirements as to the 
training  which the licensee is to undergo, details of the person or persons  forming the agency, obligation 
as to the  information to be provided  from time to time to the Controlling Authority regarding any change 
in their address, change of management and also about any criminal charge  made against them in the 
course of their performance of duties of the  private security  agency or as the case may be, a private 
security guard  employed or engaged by them.  
(2) The State Government may make provision in the rules to verify  about imparting of required 
training by the private security agency  under sub -section ( 2) of section 9 a nd to review continuation or  
otherwise of licence of such private security agency which may not have  adhered to the condition of 
ensuring the required training.  
12. Licence to be exhibited .—Every private security agency shall  exhibit its licence or copy thereof 
in a conspicuous place of its  business.  
13. Cancellation and suspension of licence .—(1) The Controlling  Authority may cancel any licence 
on any one or more of the following  grounds, namely: — 
(a) that the licence has been obtained on misrepresentati on or  suppression of material facts;  
(b) that the licence holder has used false documents or photographs;  
(c) that the licence holder has violated the provisions of this Act or  the rules made thereunder or 
any of the conditions of the licence;  
(d) that the  licence holder has misused information obtained by him  during the discharge of his 
duties as the private security agency to  any industrial or business undertaking or a company or any 
other  person;  
(e) that the licence holder by using any letter -head, adve rtisement or  any other printed matter or 
in any other manner represented that the  private security agency is an instrumentality of the 
Government or such  agency is or has been using a name different from that for which  licence has 
been granted;  
(f) that  the licence holder is or has been impersonating or permitting  or aiding or abetting any 
body to impersonate as a public servant;  
(g) that the private security agency had failed to commence its  activities or to engage a supervisor 
within the specified time  period;  
(h) that the licence holder is or has wilfully failed or refused to  render the services agreed to any 
person;  
(i) that the licence holder has done any act which is in violation of a  court order or an order of a 
lawful authority or is or has been  advising, encouraging or assisting any person to violate any such  
order;  
(j) that the licence holder has violated the provisions of the Acts  given in the Schedule which may 
be modified by the Central Government,  by notification in the Official Gazette;  
(k) that there have been repeated instances when the private security  guard or guards provided  by 
the private security agency — 
(i) failed to provide private security or were guilty of gross  negligence in not providing such 
security;  
(ii) committed a breach of trust or misappropriated the property or a  part thereof which they 
were supposed to protect;  
(iii) were found habitually drunk or indisciplined;  
(iv) were found to be involved in committing crimes; or  
(v) had  connived or abetted a crime against the person or property  placed under their charge; 
or 6 
 (l) that the licence holder has done any act which poses a threat to  national security, or did not 
provide assistance to the police or other  authority in the discharg e of its duties or acted in a manner  
prejudicial to national security or public order or law and order.  
(2) Where the Controlling Authority, for reasons to be recorded in  writing, is satisfied that pending 
the question of cancelling of  licence on any of th e grounds mentioned in sub -section ( 1), it is  necessary to 
do so, that Controlling Authority may, by order in  writing, suspend the operation of the licence for such 
period not  exceeding thirty days as may be specified in the order and require the  licence h older to show 
cause, within fifteen days from the date of  issue of such order, as to why the suspension of the licence 
should not  be extended till the determination of the question of cancellation.  
(3) Every order of suspending or cancelling of a licence s hall be in  writing and shall specify the 
reasons for such suspension or  cancellation and a copy thereof shall be communicated to the person  
affected.  
(4) No order of cancellation of licence under sub -section ( 1) shall be  made unless the person 
concerned ha s been given a reasonable  opportunity of being heard.  
14. Appeals .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Controlling  Authority refusing the licence 
under sub -section ( 4) of section 7 or  renewal under sub -section ( 3) of section 8 or order of suspension of  
licence under sub -section ( 2) of section 13 or cancellation of licence  under sub -section ( 1) of that section, 
may prefer an appeal against  that order to the Home Secretary of the State Government within a  period of 
sixty days of the date of s uch order:  
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the said  period of sixty days if the 
appellant satisfies the State Government  that he has sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within 
that period.  
(2) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be made in such form as  may be prescribed and shall be 
accompanied by a copy of the order  appealed against.  
(3) Before disposing of an appeal, the State Government shall give the  appellant a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard.  
15. Regis ter to be maintained by a private security agency .—(1) Every  private security agency 
shall  maintain a register containing — 
(a) the names and addresses of the persons managing the private  security agency;  
(b) the names, addresses, photographs and salaries of the private  security guards and supervisors 
under its control;  
(c) the names and addresses of the persons whom it had provided private  security guards or 
services; and  
(d) such other particulars as may be pres cribed.  
(2) The Controlling Authority may call for such information as it  considers necessary from any 
private security agency, supervisor or  private security guard to ensure due compliance of the Act.  
16. Inspection of licence, etc.—The Controlling Authority or any other  officer authorised by it in this 
behalf may at any reasonable time,  enter the premises of the private security agency and inspect and  
examine the place of business, the records, accounts and other  documents connected with the licence  and 
may take copy of any document.  
17. Issue of photo identity card .—(1) Every private security guard  shall be issued a photo identity 
card, by the private security agency  employing or engaging the guard.  
(2) The photo identity card under sub -section ( 1) shall be issued in  such form as may be prescribed.  
(3) Every private security guard or supervisor shall carry on his  person the photo identity card issued 
under sub -section ( 1) and shall  produce it on demand for inspection by the Controlling Authority or a ny 
other officer authorised by it in this behalf.  
18. Disclosure of information to unauthori sed person .—(1) Any person  who may be or has been 
employed or engaged as a private security guard  by the private security agency shall not divulge to 7 
 anyone other t han the employer, or in such manner and to such person as the employer  directs, any 
information acquired by him during such employment with  respect to the work which he has been 
assigned by such employer, except  such disclosure as may be required under thi s Act or in connection 
with any inquiry or investigation by the police or as may be required by an  authority or process of law.  
(2) All private security guards of a private security agency shall  render necessary assistance to the 
police or to such authority in the  process of any investigation pertaining to the activities of that  agency.  
(3) If violation of any law is noticed by any private security guard  during the course of discharge of 
his duties, he shall bring it to the  notice of his superior, w ho in turn shall inform the police either  through 
his employer or agency or on his own.  
19. Delegation .—The State Government may, by notification, direct that  any power or function 
(except the powers to make rules under section  25)— 
(a) which may be exerci sed or performed by it, or  
(b) which may be exercised or performed by the Controlling Authority,  
under this Act, may, in relation to such matter and subject to such  conditions, if any, as may be specified 
in the notification, be also  exercised or performed  by such officer or authority subordinate to the  
Government or officer subordinate to the Controlling Authority, as may  be specified in such notification.  
20. Punishment for contravention of certain provisions .—(1) Any person  who contravenes the 
provisions  of section 4 shall be punishable with  imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, 
or with fine  which may extend to twenty -five thousand rupees, or with both.  
(2) Any person or private security agency who contravenes, the  provisions of sections 9 , 10 and 12 of 
the Act, shall be punishable  with a fine which may extend to twenty -five thousand rupees, in  addition to 
suspension or cancellation of the licence.  
21. Penalty for unauthori sed use of certain uniforms .—If any private  security guard or superv isor 
wears the uniform of the Army, Air force,  Navy or any other armed forces of the Union or Police or any 
dress  having the appearance or bearing any of the distinctive marks of that  uniform, he and the proprietor 
of the private security agency shall be  punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one 
year or  with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.  
22. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been  committed by a 
company, every person who at the  time the offence was  committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the  conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall be  deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded  against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any  such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was  committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due  diligence to prevent the com mission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any  offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved  that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of,  or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director,  manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director,  manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of  
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished  accord ingly.  
Explanation .—For the p urposes of this section — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other  association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
23. Indemnity .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie  against the Controlling 
authority or any other officer authorised by it  in respect of anything in good faith done or intended to be 
done under  this Act.  
24. Framing of model rules for adoption by States .—The Central  Government may frame model 
rules in respect of all or any of the  matters with respect to which the State Government may make rules 8 
 under  this Act, and where any such model rules have been framed the State  Government shall, while 
making any rules in  respect of that matter  under section 25, so far as is practicable, conform to such 
model  rules.  
25. Power of State Government to make rules .—(1) The State Government  may, by notification, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of  this Act.  
(2) In part icular, and without prejudice to the generality of the  foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following  matters, namely: — 
(a) the procedure for verification of character and antecedents under  clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 10; the type of training under  clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 10; the physical 
standard  under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 10; and other  conditions under clause ( f) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 10;  
(b) the number of supervisors to be  employed under sub -section ( 3) of section 9;  
(c) the form of an application for grant of licence under sub -section  (1) of section 7;  
(d) the form in which the licence to be granted under sub -section ( 4) of section 7 and conditions 
subject to which such li cence to be granted  under section 11;  
(e) the form of an application for renewal of licence under sub -section  (1) of section 8;  
(f) the form under sub -section ( 2) of section 14 for preferring an  appeal;  
(g) particulars  to be maintained in a register under sub -section ( 1) of section 15;  
(h) the form in which photo identity card under sub -section ( 2) of section 17 be issued;  
(i) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the St ate Government under this section shall be  laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of the  State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such  
Legislature consists of one House, before that House.  
(4) In respect of Union ter ritories, every rule made to carry out the  provisions of the Act shall be laid 
before each House of Parliament and  where there exists a Legislative Assembly, before that Assembly.  
  9 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 13( 1) (j)] 
(1) The Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4  of 1936).  
(2) The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947).  
(3) The Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (11 of 1948).  
(4) The Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act,  1952 (19 of 1952).  
(5) The Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 (21 of 1965).  
(6) The Co ntract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970 (37 of  1970).  
(7) The Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 (39 of 1972).  
(8) The Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 (25 of 1976).  
(9) The Inter -State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and  Conditions of Service)  Act, 
1979 (30 of 1979).  
--------------------------The Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005--------------------------
1 
 THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ACT, 2005  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE  
3. Definitions of domestic violence.  
 
CHAPTER III  
POWERS AND  DUTIES OF PROTECTION OFFICERS , SERVICE PROVIDERS, ETC.  
4. Information to Protection Officer and exclusion of liability of informant.  
5. Duties of police officers, service providers and Magistrate.  
6. Duties of shelter homes.  
7. Duties of medical facilities.  
8. Appointment of Protection Officers.  
9. Duties and functions of Protection Officers.  
10. Service providers.  
11. Duties of Government.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING ORDERS OF RELIEFS  
12. Application of Magistrate.  
13. Service of notice.  
14. Counsel ling. 
15. Assistance of welfare expert.  
16. Proceedings to be held in camera . 
17. Right to reside in a shared household.  
18. Protection orders.  
19. Residence orders.  
20. Monetary reliefs.  
21. Custody orders.  
22. Compensation orders.  
23. Power to grant interim and ex parte orders.  
24. Court to give copies of order free of cost.  
25. Duration of orders.  
26. Relief in other suits and legal proceedings.  
27. Jurisdiction.  
28. Procedure.  
  2 
 SECTIONS  
29. Appeal.  
 
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
30. Protection Officers and members of service providers to be public servants.  
31. Penalty for breach of protection order by respondent.  
32. Cognizance and proof.  
33. Penalty for not discharging duty by Protection Officers.  
34. Cognizance of offence committed by Protection Officer.  
35. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
36. Act not in derogation of any other law . 
37. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
  3 
 THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ACT, 2005  
ACT NO. 43 OF 2005  
[13th September , 2005.]  
An Act to provide for more effective protection of the rights of women guaranteed under the  
Constitution who are victims of violence of any kind occurring within the family and 
formatters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -sixth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent  and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Protection of Women  
from Domestic Violence Act, 2005.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the  
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “aggrieved person ” means any woman who is, or has been, in a domestic relationship with  
the respondent and who alleges to have been subjected to any act of domestic violence by the  
respondent;  
(b) “child” means any person below the age of eighteen years and includes any adopted, step or  
foster child;  
(c) “compensation order ” means an order grante d in terms of section 22;  
(d) “custody order ” means an order granted in terms of section 21;  
(e) “domestic incident report ” means a report made in the prescribed form on receipt of a  
complaint of domestic violence from an aggrieved person;  
(f) “domestic re lationship ” means a relationship between two persons who live or have, at any  
point of time, lived together in a shared household, when they are related by consanguinity,  marriage, 
or through a relationship in the nature of marriage, adoption or are family  members  living together as 
a joint family;  
(g) “domestic violence ” has the same meaning as assigned to it in section 3;  
(h) “dowry” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 2 of the Dowry  Prohibition 
Act, 1961 (28 of 1961);  
(i) “Magistrate ” means the Judicial Magistrate of the first class, or as the case may be, the  
Metropolitan Magistrate, exercising jurisdiction under the Code of Criminal Procedure,                      
1973(2 of 1974) in the area where the aggrieved person resides tempor arily or otherwise or the  
respondent resides or the domestic violence is alleged to have taken place;  
(j) “medical facility ” means such facility as may be notified by the State Government to be a  
medical facility for the purposes of this Act;  
(k) “monetary  relief” means the compensation which the Magistrate may order the respondent  to 
pay to the aggrieved person, at any stage during the hearing of an application seeking any  relief under 
this Act, to meet the expenses incurred and the losses suffered by the aggrieved  person as a result of 
the domestic violence;  
(l) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression  
“notified” shall be construed accordingly;  
(m) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
                                                           
1. 26th October, 2006, vide notification No. S.O. 1776(E), dated by 17th October, 2006, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3(ii). 4 
 (n) “Protection Officer ” means an officer appointed by the State Government under                    
sub-section  (1) of section 8;  
(o) “protection order ” means an order made in terms of section 18;  
(p) “residence order ” means an order granted in terms of su b-section ( 1) of section 19;  
(q) “respondent ” means any adult male person who is, or has been, in a domestic relationship  
with the aggrieved person and against whom the aggrieved person has sought any relief under  this 
Act: 
Provided that an aggrieved wife or female living in a relationship in the nature of a marriage  may 
also file a complaint against a relative of the husband or the male partner;  
(r) “service provider ” means an entity registered under sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(s) “shared household ” means a household where the person aggrieved lives or at any stage has  
lived in a domestic relationship either singly or along with the respondent and includes such a  house  
hold whether owned or tenanted either jointly by the aggrieved person and the  respond ent, or owned 
or tenanted by either of them in respect of which either the aggrieved  person or the respondent or both 
jointly or singly have any right, title, interest or equity and  includes such a household which may 
belong to the joint family of which th e respondent is a  member, irrespective of whether the 
respondent or the aggrieved person has any right, title or  interest in the shared household;  
(t) “shelter home ” means any shelter home as may be notified by the State Government to be as  
helter home for  the purposes of this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE  
3. Definition of domestic violence. —For the purposes of this Act, any act, omission or  commission 
or conduct of the respondent shall constitut e domestic violence in case it — 
(a) harms or injures or endangers the health, safety, life, limb or well -being, whether mental or  
physical, of the aggrieved person or tends to do so and includes causing physical abuse, sexual  abuse, 
verbal and emotional abuse and economic abuse; or  
(b) harasses, harms, injures or endangers the aggrieved person with a view to coerce her or any  
other person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any dowry or other property or  valuable 
security; or  
(c) has the effect of threatening the aggrieved person or any person related  to her by any  conduct 
mentioned in clause ( a) or clause ( b); or 
(d) otherwise injures or causes harm, whether physical or mental, to the aggrieved person.  
Explanation  I.—For the purposes of this section, — 
(i) “physical abuse ” means any act or conduct which is of such a nature as to cause bodily 
pain,  harm, or danger to life, limb, or health or impair the health or development of the aggrieved  
person and includes assault, criminal intimidation and criminal force;  
(ii) “sexual a buse” includes any conduct of a sexual nature that abuses, humiliates, degrades 
or otherwise violates the dignity of woman;  
(iii) “verba l and emotional abuse ” includes— 
(a) insults, ridicule, humiliation, name calling and insults or ridicule specially with  regard 
to not having a child or a male child; and  
(b) repeated threats to cause physical pain to any person in whom the aggrieved person is  
interested;  
(iv) “economic abuse ” include s— 
(a) deprivation of all or any economic or financial resources to which the aggrieved 
person is  entitled under any law or custom whether payable under an order of a court or 
otherwise or  which the aggrieved person requires out of necessity including, but not limited 5 
 to, house  hold necessities for the aggrieved person and her children, if any, stridhan , 
property, jointly or  separately owned by the aggrieved person, payment of rental related to 
the shared house  hold and maintenance;  
(b) disposal of household effects, any alienation of  assets whether movable or 
immovable,  valuables, shares, securities, bonds and the like or other property in which the 
aggrieved person  has an interest or is entitled to use by virtue of the domestic relationship or 
which may be  reasonably required by the aggrieved person or her children or her stridhan  or 
any other  property jointly or separately held by the aggrieved person; and  
(c) prohibition or restriction to continued access to resources or facilities which the 
aggrieved  person is entitled to use or en joy by virtue of the domestic relationship including 
access to the  shared household.  
Explanation II.—For the purpose of determining whether any act, omission, commission or  conduct 
of the respondent constitutes “domestic violence ” under this section, the overall facts  and circumstances 
of the case shall be taken into consideration.  
CHAPTER III  
POWERS AND DUTIES OF  PROTECTION OFFICERS , SERVICE PROVIDERS, ETC. 
4. Information to Protection Officer and exclu sion of liability of informa nt.—(1) Any person  
who has reason to believe that an act of domestic violence has been, or is being, or is likely to  be 
committed, may give information about it to the concerned Protection Officer.  
(2) No liability, civil or criminal, shall be incurred by any person for giving in good faith of  
information for the purpose of sub -section ( 1). 
5. Duties of police officers, service providers and Magistrate .—A police officer, Protection  
Officer, service provider or Magistrate who has received a complaint of domestic violence or is  otherwise 
present at the place of an incident of domestic violence or when the incident of  domestic violence is 
reported to him, sh all inform the aggrieved person — 
(a) of her right to make an application for obtaining a relief by wa y of a protection order, an  order 
for monetary relief, a custody order, a residence order, a compensation order or more  than one such 
order under this Act;  
(b) of the availability of services of service providers;  
(c) of the availability of services of the  Protection Officers;  
(d) of her right to free legal services under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 (39 of  1987);  
(e) of her right to file a complaint under section 498A of the Indian Penal Code                               
(45 of 1860),wherever relevant:  
Provided that nothing in this Act shall be construed in any manner as to relieve a police officer  
from his duty to proceed in accordance with law upon receipt of information as to the  commission of 
a cognizable offence.  
6. Duties of shelter homes .—If an aggrieved person or on her behalf a Protection Officer or a  service 
provider requests the person in charge of a shelter home to provide shelter to her, such  person in charge of 
the shelter home shall provide shelter to the aggrieved person in the s helter  home.  
7. Duties of medical facilities. —If an aggrieved person or, on her behalf a Protection Officer or a  
service provider requests the person in charge of a medical facility to provide any medical aid  to her, such 
person in charge of the medical facility shall provide medical aid to the aggrieved  person in the medical 
facility.  
8. Appo intment of Protection Officers. —(1) The State Government shall, by notification,  appoint 
such number of Protection Officers in each district as it may consider necessary and  shall also notify the 
area or areas within which a Protection Officer shall exercise the powers  and perform the duties conferred 
on him by or under this Act.  6 
 (2) The Protection Officers shall as far as possible be women and shall possess such  qualifications 
and experience as may be prescribed.  
(3) The terms and conditions of service of the Protection Officer and the other officers  subordinate to 
him shall be such as may be prescribed.  
9. Duties and fu nctions of Protection Officers .—(1) It shal l be the  duty of the Protection Officer — 
(a) to assist the Magistrate in the discharge of his functions under this Act;  
(b) to make a domestic incident report to the Magistrate, in such form and in such manner as  may 
be prescribed, upon receipt of a complaint of domestic violence and forward copies  thereof to the 
police officer in charge of the police station within the local limits of whose  jurisdiction domestic 
violence is alleged to have been committed and to the service providers  in that area;  
(c) to make an application in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed to the  
Magistrate, if the aggrieved person so desires, claiming relief for issuance of a protection  order;  
(d) to ensure that the aggrieved person is provided legal aid under the Legal Services  Authorities 
Act, 1987 (39 of 1987) and make available free of cost the prescribed form in  which a complaint is to 
be made;  
(e) to maintain a list of all service providers providing legal aid or counsel ling, shelter homes  and 
medical faciliti es in a local area within the jurisdiction of the Magistrate;  
(f) to make available a safe shelter home, if the aggrieved person so requires and forward a  copy 
of his report of having lodged the aggrieved person in a shelter home to the police station  and the 
Magistrate having jurisdiction in the area where the shelter home is situated;  
(g) to get the aggrieved person medically examined, if she has sustained bodily injuries and  
forward a copy of the medical report to the police station and the Magistrate ha ving jurisdiction  in the 
area where the domestic violence is alleged to have been taken place;  
(h) to ensure that the order for monetary relief under section 20 is complied with and executed,  in 
accordance with the procedure prescribed under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of  1974);  
(i) to perform such other duties as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Protection Officer shall be under the control and supervision of the Magistrate, and  shall 
perform the duties imposed on him by the Magistrate and the Gove rnment by, or under,  this Act.  
10. Service providers. —(1) Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, any voluntary  
association registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) or a company  registered 
under the Companies Act, 195 6 (1 of 1956) or any other law for the time being in  force with the objective 
of protecting the rights and interests of women by any lawful means  including providing of legal aid, 
medical, financial or other assistance shall register itself with  the State Government as a service provider 
for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) A service provider registered under sub -section (1) shall have the power to — 
(a) record the domestic incident report in the prescribed form if the aggrieved person so desires  
and forward a copy thereof to the Magistrate and the Protection Officer having jurisdiction in  the area 
where the domestic violence took place;  
(b) get the aggrieved person medically examined and forward a copy of the medical repot to  the 
Protection Officer and the poli ce station within the local limits of which the domestic  violence took 
place;  
(c) ensure that the aggrieved person is provided shelter in a shelter home, if she so requires and  
forward a report of the lodging of the aggrieved person in the shelter home to the police station  within 
the local limits of which the domestic violence took place.  
(3) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any service provider or any  
member of the service provider who is, or who is deemed to be, acting or purporting to act  under this Act, 
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in the exercise  of powers or discharge of 
functions under this Act towards the prevention of the commission of  domestic violence.  7 
 11. Duties of Government .—The Central Government and every State Government, shall take all  
measures to ensure that — 
(a) the provisions of this Act are given wide publicity through public media including the  
television, radio and the print media at regular intervals;  
(b) the Central Government and State Government officers including the police officers and the  
members of the judicial services are given periodic sensitization and awareness training on the  issues 
addressed by this Act;  
(c) effective co -ordination between the services pr ovided by concerned Ministries and  
Departments dealing with law, home affairs including law and order, health and human  resources to 
address issues of domestic violence is established and periodical review of the  same is conducted;  
(d) protocols for the va rious Ministries concerned with the delivery of services to women under  
this Act including the courts  are prepared and put in place.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE FOR OBTAININGORDERS OF RELIEFS  
12. Application to Magistrate. —(1) An aggrieved person or a Protection Officer or any other  person 
on behalf of the aggrieved person may present an application to the Magistrate seeking  one or more 
reliefs under this Act:  
Provided that before passing any order on such application, the Magistrate shall take into  
consideration any domestic incident report received by him from the Protection Officer or the  service 
provider.  
(2) The relief sought for under sub -section ( 1) may include a relief for issuance of an order for  
payment of compensation or damages without prejudice to the right of such person to institute  a suit for 
compensation or damages for the injuries caused by the acts of domestic violence  committed by the 
respondent:  
Provided that where a decree for any amount as compensation or damages has been passed by  any 
court i n favour of the aggrieved person, the amount, if any, paid or payable in pursuance of  the order 
made by the Magistrate under this Act shall be set off against the amount payable  under such decree and 
the decree shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of  Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), or 
any other law for the time being in force, be executable  for the balance amount, if any, left after such set 
off. 
(3) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form and contain such particula rs as may 
be prescribed or as nearly as possible thereto.  
(4) The Magistrate shall fix the first date of hearing, which shall not ordinarily be beyond three  days 
from the date of receipt of the application by the court.  
(5) The Magistrate shall Endeavour to dispose of every application made under sub -section ( 1) within 
a period of sixty days from  the date of its first hearing.  
13. Service of notice. —(1) A notice of the date of hearing fixed under section 12 shall be given  by 
the Magistrate to the Protectio n Officer, who shall get it served by such means as may be  prescribed on 
the respondent, and on any other person, as directed by the Magistrate within a  maximum period of two 
days or such further reasonable time as may be allowed by the  Magistrate from the  date of its receipt.  
(2) A declaration of service of notice made by the Protection Officer in such form as may be  
prescribed shall be the proof that such notice was served upon the respondent and on any other  person as 
directed by the Magistrate  unless th e contrary is proved.  
14. Counse lling.—(1) The Magistrate may, at any stage of the proceedings under this Act, direct the 
respondent or  the aggrieved person, either singly or jointly, to undergo counselling with any member of a  
service provider who possess  such qualifications and experience in counselling as may be  prescribed.  
(2) Where the Magistrate has issued any direction under sub -section ( 1), he shall fix the next  date of 
hearing of the case within a period not exceeding two months.  8 
 15. Assistance of welfare expert .—In any proceeding under this Act, the Magistrate may secure  the 
services of such person, preferably a woman, whether related to the aggrieved person or  not, including a 
person engaged in promoting family welfare as he thinks fit, for the pu rpose of  assisting him in 
discharging his functions.  
16. Pr oceedings to be held in camera. —If the Magistrate considers that the circumstances of the  
case so warrant, and if either party to the proceedings so desires, he may conduct the  proceedings under 
this Act in camera . 
17. Right t o reside in a shared household. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other  
law for the time being in force, every woman in a domestic relationship shall have the right to  reside in 
the shared household, whether or not she has any right, title or beneficial interest in  the same.  
(2) The aggrieved person shall not be evicted or excluded from the shared household or any  part of it 
by the respondent save in accordance with th e procedure established by law.  
18. Protection or ders.—The Magistrate may, after giving the aggrieved person and the  respondent 
an opportunity of being heard and on being prima facie  satisfied that domestic  violence has taken place or 
is likely to take place, pass a protection order in favo ur of the  aggrieved person a nd prohibit the 
respondent from — 
(a) committing any act of domestic violence;  
(b) aiding or abetting in the commission of acts of domestic violence;  
(c) entering the place of employment of the aggrieved person or, if the person aggrieved is a 
child, its school or any other place frequented by the aggrieved person;  
(d) attempting to communicate in any form, whatsoever, with the aggrieved person, including  
personal, oral or written or electronic or telephonic contact;  
(e) alienating any asse ts, operating bank lockers or bank accounts used or held or enjoyed by  both 
the parties, jointly by the aggrieved person and the respondent or singly by the  respondent, including 
her stridhan or any other property held either jointly by the parties or  separately by them without the 
leave of the Magistrate;  
(f) causing violence to the dependants, other relatives or any person who give the aggrieved  
person assistance from domestic violence;  
(g) committing any other act as spe cified in the protection order.  
19. Residence orders. —(1) While disposing of an application under sub -section ( 1) of section12, the 
Magistrate may, on being satisfied that domestic violence has taken place, pass a  residence order — 
(a) restraining the respondent from dispossessing or in any other manner disturbing the  
possession of the aggrieved person from the shared household, whether or not the respondent  has a 
legal or equitable interest in the shared household;  
(b) directing the respondent to remove himself from the shared household;  
(c) restraining the respondent or any of his relatives from entering any portion of the shared  
household in which the aggrieved person resides;  
(d) restraining the respondent from alienating or disposing off the shared household or  
encumbering the same;  
(e) restraining the respondent from renouncing his rights in the shared household except with  the 
leave of the Magistrate; or  
(f) directing the respondent to secure same level of alternate accommodation for the aggrieved  
person as enjoyed by her in the shar ed household or to pay rent for the same, if the  circumstances so 
require:  
Provided that no order under clause ( b) shall be passed against any person who is a woman.  
  9 
 (2) The Magistrate may impose any additional conditions or pass any other direction whic h he may 
deem reasonably necessary to protect or to provide for the safety of the aggrieved person  or any child of 
such aggrieved person.  
(3) The Magistrate may require from the respondent to execute a bond, with or without  sureties, for 
preventing the com mission of domestic violence.  
(4) An order under sub -section ( 3) shall be deemed to be an order under Chapter VIII of the  Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) and shall be dealt with accordingly.  
(5) While passing an order under sub -section ( 1), sub-section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), the court  may 
also pass an order directing the officer in charge of the nearest police station to give  protection to the 
aggrieved person or to assist her or the person making an application on her  behalf in the implemen tation 
of the order.  
(6) While making an order under sub -section ( 1), the Magistrate may impose on the respondent  
obligations relating to the discharge of rent and other payments, having regard to the financial  needs and 
resources of the parties.  
(7) The M agistrate may direct the officer in -charge of the police station in whose jurisdiction  the 
Magistrate has been approached to assist in the implementation of the protection order.  
(8) The Magistrate may direct the respondent to return to the possession of t he aggrieved  person her 
stridhan  or any other property or valuable security to which she is entitled to.  
20. Monetary reliefs .—(1) While disposing of an application under sub -section ( 1) of section 12,the 
Magistrate may direct the respondent to pay monetar y relief to meet the expenses incurred  and losses 
suffered by the aggrieved person and any child of the aggrieved person as a result of  the domestic 
violence and such relief m ay include, but not limited to, — 
(a) the loss of earnings;  
(b) the medical expenses;  
(c) the loss caused due to the destruction, damage or removal of any property from the control  of 
the aggrieved person; and  
(d) the maintenance for the aggrieved person as well as her children, if any, including an order  
under or in addition to a n order of maintenance under section 125 of the Code of Criminal  Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974) or any other law for the time being in force.  
(2) The monetary relief granted under this section shall be adequate, fair and reasonable and  
consistent with the sta ndard of living to which the aggrieved person is accustomed.  
(3) The Magistra te shall have the power to order  an appropriate lump sum payment or monthly  
payments of maintenance, as the nature and circumstances of the case may require.  
(4) The Magistrate sh all send a copy of the order for monetary relief made under sub -section  (1) to 
the parties to the application and to the in charge of the police station within the local  limits of whose 
jurisdiction the respondent resides.  
(5) The respondent shall pay the monetary relief granted to the aggrieved person within the  period 
specified in the order under sub -section ( 1). 
(6) Upon the failure on the part of the respondent to make payment in terms of the order under                 
sub-section ( 1), the Magistrate may direct the employer or a debtor of the respondent, to  directly pay to 
the aggrieved person or to deposit with the court a portion of the wages or  salaries or debt due to or 
accrued to the credit of the respondent, which amount may be  adjusted towards t he monetary relief 
payable by the respondent.  
21. Custody orders. —Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in  
force, the Magistrate may, at any stage of hearing of the application for protection order or for  any other 
relief u nder this Act grant temporary custody of any child or children to the  aggrieved person or the 
person making an application on her behalf and specify, if necessary,  the arrangements for visit of such 
child or children by the respondent:  10 
 Provided that if the  Magistrate is of the opinion that any visit of the respondent may be harmful  to the 
interests of the child or children, the Magistrate sh all refuse to allow such visit.  
22. Compensation orders .—In addition to other reliefs as may be granted under this Act , the  
Magistrate may on an application being made by the aggrieved person, pass an order directing  the 
respondent to pay compensation and damages for the injuries, including mental torture and  emotional 
distress, caused by the acts of domestic violenc e com mitted by that respondent.  
23. Power to grant interim and ex parte  orders .—(1) In any proceeding before him under this  Act, 
the Magistrate may pass such interim order as he deems just and proper.  
(2) If the Magistrate is satisfied that an application prima  facie  discloses that the respondent is  
committing, or has committed an act of domestic violence or that there is a likelihood that the  respondent 
may commit an act of domestic violence, he may grant an ex parte  order on the  basis of the affidavit in 
such form, as may be prescribed, of the aggrieved person under section18, section 19, section 20, section 
21 or, as the case may be, sec tion 22 against the respondent.  
24. Court to give copies of order free of cost. —The Magistrate shall, in all cases where he h as 
passed any order under this Act, order that a copy of such order, shall be given free of cost, to  the parties 
to the application, the police officer in -charge of the police station in the jurisdiction  of which the 
Magistrate has been approached, and any  service provider located within the local  limits of the 
jurisdiction of the court and if any service provider has registered a domestic  incident report, to that 
service provider.  
25. Duration and alteration of orders .—(1) A protection order made under section 18 shall be in  
force till the aggrieved person applies for discharge.  
(2) If the Magistrate, on receipt of an application from the aggrieved person or the respondent,  is 
satisfied that there is a change in the circumstances requiring alteration, mo dification or  revocation of any 
order made under this Act, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing pass  such order, as he may deem 
appropriate.  
26. Relief in oth er suits and legal proceedings .—(1) Any relief available under sections 18, 19,20, 
21 and  22 may also be sought in any legal proceeding, before a civil court, family court or  a criminal 
court, affecting the aggrieved person and the respondent whether such proceeding  was initiated before or 
after the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Any relief ref erred to in sub -section ( 1) may be sought for in addition to and along with any  other 
relief that the aggrieved person may seek in such suit or legal proceeding before a civil or  criminal court.  
(3) In case any relief has been obtained by the aggrieved per son in any proceedings other than  a 
proceeding under this Act, she shall be bound to inform the Magistrate of the grant of such  relief . 
27. Jurisdiction .—(1) The court of Judicial Magistrate of the first class or the Metropolitan  
Magistrate, as the case ma y be, w ithin the local limits of which — 
(a) the person aggrieved permanently or temporarily resides or carries on business or is  
employed; or  
(b) the respondent resides or carries on business or is employed; or  
(c) the cause of action has arisen,  shall be the competent court to grant a protection order and 
other orders under this Act and to  try offences under this Act.  
(2) Any order made under this Act shall be enforceable throughout India.  
28. Procedure .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all proc eedings under sections 12,18,      
19, 20, 21, 22 and 23 and offences under section 31 shall be governed by the provisions of  the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall prevent the court from laying down its own procedure for  disposal 
of an application under section 12 or under  sub-section ( 2) of section 23.  11 
 29. Appeal. —There shall lie an appeal to the Court of Session within thirty days from the date  on 
which the order made by the Magistrate is served on the aggr ieved person or the respondent,  as the case 
may be, whichever is later.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
30. Protection Officers and members of service p roviders to be public servants .—The Protection  
Officers and members of service providers, while acting or purporting to act in pursuance of  any of the 
provisions of this Act or any rules or orders made thereunder shall be deemed to be  public servants within 
the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
31. Penalty for breach of protection or der by respondent. —(1) A breach of protection order, or  of 
an interim protection order, by the respondent shall be an offence under this Act and shall be  punishable 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year,  or with fi ne which may 
extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with both.  
(2) The offence under sub -section ( 1) shall as far as practicable be tried by the Magistrate who  had 
passed the order, the breach of which has been alleged to have been caused by the accused.  
(3) While framing charges under sub -section (1), the Magistrate may also frame charges under  section 
498A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or any other provision of that Code or the  Dowry Prohibition 
Act, 1961 (28 of 1961), as the case may be, if the fac ts disclose the  commission of an offence under those 
provisions.  
32. Cognizance and proof .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal  
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the offence under sub -section ( 1) of section 31 shall be  cognizable and                  
non-bailable.  
(2) Upon the sole testimony of the aggrieved person, the court may conclude that an offence  under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 31 has been committed by the accused.  
33. Penalty for not discharg ing duty by Protection Officer. —If any Protection Officer fails or  
refuses to discharge his duties as directed by the Magistrate in the protection order without any  sufficient 
cause, he shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which  may extend to one 
year, or wit h fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with  both.  
34. Cognizance of offence c ommitted by Protection Officer .—No prosecution or other legal  
proceeding shall lie against the Protection Officer unless a complaint is filed with the previous  sanction of 
the State Government or an officer authorised by it in this behalf.  
35. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall  
lie against the Protection Officer for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything  which is in 
good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or any rule or order made  thereunder.  
36. Act not in derogation of any other law. —The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to,  and 
not in derogation of the provisions of a ny other law, for the time being in force.  
37. Power of Ce ntral Government to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by  
notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of  the foregoing power, such rules may  
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the qualifications and experience which a Protection Officer shall possess under                              
sub-section  (2) of section 8;  
(b) the terms and  conditions of service of the Protection Officers and the other officers  
subordinate to him, under sub -section ( 3) of section 8;  
(c) the form and manner in which a domestic incident report may be made under clause ( b) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 9;  
(d) the form and the manner in which an application for protection order may be made to the  
Magistrate under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 9;  12 
 (e) the form in which a complaint is to be filed under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) of section 9;  
(f) the o ther duties to be performed by the Protection Officer under clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 9;  
(g) the rules regulating registration of service providers under sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(h) the form in which an application under sub -section ( 1) of section 12 seeking reliefs under  this 
Act may be made and the particulars which such application shall contain under sub -section  (3) of 
that section;  
(i) the means of serving notices under sub -section ( 1) of section 13;  
(j) the form of declaration of  service of notice to be made by the Protection Officer under                       
sub-section  (2) of section 13;  
(k) the qualifications and experience in counselling which a member of the service provider  shall 
possess under sub -section ( 1) of section 14;  
(l) the form in which an affidavit may be filed by the aggrieved person under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 23;  
(m) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,  before each  House 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be  comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the  session immediately 
following the session or the succe ssive sessions aforesaid, both Houses  agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be  made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the  case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice  to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
 
 
--------------------------The Right of Information Act, 2005--------------------------
1 
 THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005  
__________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title , extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
RIGHT TO INFORMATION AND OBLIGATIONS OF PUBLIC AUTHORITIES  
3. Right to information.  
4. Obligations of public authorities.  
5. Designation of Public Information Officers.  
6. Request for obtaining information.  
7. Disposal of request.  
8. Exemption from disclosure of information.  
9. Grounds for rejection to access in certain cases.  
10. Severability.  
11. Third party information.  
 
CHAPTER III  
THE CENTRA L INFORMATION  COMMISSION  
12. Constitution of Central Information Commission.  
13. Terms of office and conditions of service.  
14. Removal of C hief Information Commissioner or  Information Commissioner.  
 
CHAPTE R IV  
THE STATE  INFORMATION  COMMISSION  
15. Constitution of State Information Commission.  
16. Term of office and conditions of service.  
17. Removal of State Chief Information Commissioner or State Information Commissioner.  
 
CHAPTER V  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE INFORMATION  COMMISSIONS , APPEAL AND PENALTIES  
18. Powers and functions of Information Commissions.  
 2 
 SECTIONS  
19. Appeal.  
20. Penalties.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
21. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
22. Act to have overriding effect.  
23. Bar of jurisdiction of courts.  
24. Act not to apply to certain organisations.  
25. Monitoring and reporting.  
26. Appropriate Government to prepare programmes.  
27. Power to make rules by appropriate Government.  
28. Power to make rules by competent authority.  
29. Laying of rules.  
30. Power to remove difficulties.  
31. Repeal . 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
  3 
 THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005  
ACT NO. 22 OF 2005  
[15th June , 2005.]  
An Act to provide for setting out the practical regime of right to information for citizens to 
secure access to information under the control of public authorities, in order to promote 
transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, the constitution of a 
Central Information Commission and State Information Commissions and for matters 
connected therewith or incid ental thereto.  
WHEREAS  the Constitution of India has established democratic Republic;  
AND WHEREAS democracy requires an informed citizenry and transparency of information which are 
vital to its functioning and also to contain corruption and to hold Governm ents are their instrumentalities 
accountable to the governed;  
AND WHEREAS  revelation of information in actual practice is likely to conflict with other public 
interests including efficient operations of the Governments, optimum use of limited fiscal resources and 
the preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information;  
AND WHEREAS  it is necessary to harmonise these conflicting interests while preserving the 
paramountcy of the democratic ideal;  
Now, THEREFORE, it is expendient to provide for furnishing certain information to citizens who 
desire to have it.  
BE it enacted by P arliament in the Fifty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Right to Information 
Act, 2005.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 4, sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 5, sections 12, 
13, 15,16, 24, 27 and 28 shall come into force at once, and the remaining provisions of this Act shall 
come into force on the one hun dred and twentieth day of its enactment.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) "appropriate Government" means in relation to a public authority which is established, 
constituted, owned, controlled or substantially financed by funds provided directly or indirectly — 
(i) by the Central Government or the Union territory administration,  the Central Government;  
(ii) by the State Government, the State Government;  
(b) "Central Information Commission" means the Central Information Commission constituted 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 12;  
(c) "Central Public Information Officer" means the C entral Public Information Officer designated 
under sub -section ( 1) and includes a Central Assistant Public Information Officer designated as such 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 5;  
(d) "Chief Information Commissioner" and "Information Commissioner" mean t he Chief 
Information Commissioner and Information Commissioner appointed under sub -section ( 3) of section 
12;  4 
 (e) "competent authority" means — 
(i) the Speaker in the case of the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a State 
or a Union territo ry having such Assembly and the Chairman in the case of the Council of States 
or Legislative Council of a State;  
(ii) the Chief Justice of India in the case of the Supreme Court;  
(iii) the Chief Justice of the High Court in the case of a High Court;  
(iv) the President or the Governor, as the case may be, in the case of other authorities 
established or constituted by or under the Constitution;  
(v) the administrator appointed under article 239 of the Constitution;  
(f) "information" means any material in any form, including records, documents, memos, e -mails, 
opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, 
models, data material held in any electronic form and information relating to any private body which 
can be accessed by a public authority under any other law for the time being in force;  
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act by the appropriate Government or 
the competent authority,  as the case may be;  
(h) "public authority" means any authority or body or institution of self - govern ment established 
or constituted — 
(a) by or under the Constitution;  
(b) by any other law made by Parliament;  
(c) by any other law made by State Legislature;  
(d) by notification issued or order made by the appropri ate Government,  
and includes any — 
(i) body owned, controlled or substantially financed;  
(ii) non -Government organisation substantially financed,  
directly or indirectly by funds provided by the appropriate Government;  
(i) "record" includes — 
(a) any document, manuscript and file;  
(b) any microfilm, microfiche and facsimile copy of a document;  
(c) any reproduction of image or images embodied in such microfilm (whether enlarged or 
not); and  
(d) any other material produced by a computer or any other devi ce; 
(j) "right to information" means the right to information accessible under this Act which is held 
by or under the control of any public auth ority and includes the right to — 
(i) inspection of work, documents, records;  
(ii) taking notes, extracts or certified copies of documents or records;  
(iii) taking certified samples of material;  
(iv) obtaining information in the form of diskettes, floppies, tapes, video cassettes or in any 
other electronic mode or through printouts where such information is store d in a computer or in 
any other device;  
(k) "State Information Commission" means the State Information Commission constituted under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 15;   5 
 (l) "State Chief Information Commissioner" and "State Information Commissioner" mean the 
State Chief Information Commissioner and the State Information Commissioner appointed under sub -
section ( 3) of section 15;  
(m) "State Public Information Officer" means the State Public Information Officer designated 
under sub -section ( 1) and includes a State Assistant Public Information Officer designated as such 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 5;  
(n) "third party" means a person other than the citizen making a request for information and 
includes a public authority.  
CHAPTER II  
RIGHT TO INFORMATION AND OBLIGA TIONS OF PUBLIC AUTHORITIES  
3. Right to information .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, all citizens shall have the right to 
information.  
4. Obl igations of public authorities .—(1) Every public authority shall — 
(a) maintain all its records duly catalogu ed and indexed in a manner and the form which 
facilitates the right to information under this Act and ensure that all records that are appropriate to be 
computerised are, within a reasonable time and subject to availability of resources, computerised and 
connected through a network all over the country on different systems so that access to such records 
is facilitated;  
(b) publish within one hundred and twenty days from the enactment of this Act, — 
(i) the particulars of its organisation, functions and duties;  
(ii) the powers and duties of its officers and employees;  
(iii) the procedure followed in the decision making process, including channels of supervision 
and accountability;  
(iv) the norms set by it for the discharge of its functions;  
(v) the rules,  regulations, instructions, manuals and records, held by it or under its control or 
used by its employees for discharging its functions;  
(vi) a statement of the categories of documents that are h eld by it or under its control;  
(vii) the particulars of any arrangement that exists for consultation with, or representation by, 
the members of the public in relation to the formulation of its policy or implementation thereof;  
(viii) a statement of the boards, councils, committees and other bodies consisting of two  or 
more persons constituted as its part or for the purpose of its advice, and as to whether meetings of 
those boards, councils, committees and other bodies are open to the public, or the minutes of such 
meet ings are accessible for public;  
(ix) a directory  of its officers and employees;  
(x) the monthly remuneration received by each of its officers and employees, including the 
system of compensation as provided in its regulations;  
(xi) the budget allocated to each of its agency, indicating the particulars of  all plans, proposed 
expenditures and  reports on disbursements made;  
(xii) the manner of execution of subsidy programmes, including the amounts allocated and 
the details of be neficiaries of such programmes;  
(xiii) particulars of recipients of concessions, permits or authorisations granted by it;  
(xiv) details in respect of the information, available to or held by it,  reduced in an electronic 
form;  6 
 (xv) the particulars of facilities available to citizens for obtaining information, including the 
working hours  of a library or reading room , if maintained for public use;  
(xvi) the names, designations and other particulars of t he Public Information Officers;  
(xvii) such other information as may be prescribed;  
and thereafter update these publications every year;  
(c) publish all relevant facts while formulating important policies or announcing the decisions 
which affect public;  
(d) provide reasons for its administrative or quasi -judicial decisions to affected persons.  
(2) It shall be a constant endeavour of every pub lic authority to take steps in accordance with the 
requirements of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) to provide as much information suo motu  to the public at 
regular intervals through various means of communications, including internet, so that the public have  
minimum resort to the use of this Act to obtain information.  
(3) For the pur poses of sub -section ( 1), every information shall be disseminated widely and in such 
form and manner which is e asily accessible to the public.  
(4) All materials shall be disseminated taking into consideration the cost effectiveness, local language 
and the most effective method of communication in that local area and the information should be easily 
accessible, to the extent possible in electronic format with the Central Pu blic Information Officer or State 
Public Information Officer, as the case may be, available free or at such cost of the medium or the print 
cost price as may be prescribed.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4), "disseminated" means making known or 
communicated the information to the public through notice boards, newspapers, public announcements, 
media broadcasts, the internet or any other means, including inspection of offices of any public authority.  
5. Designation of Public Informa tion Offic ers.—(1) Every public authority shall, within one 
hundred days of the enactment of this Act, designate as many officers as the Central Public Information 
Officers or State Public Information Officers, as the case may be, in all administrative uni ts or offices 
under it as may be necessary to provide information to persons requesting for the information under this 
Act. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), every public authority shall designate an 
officer, within one hundred da ys of the enactment of this Act, at each sub -divisional level or other sub -
district level as a Central Assistant Public Information Officer or a State Assistant Public Information 
Officer, as the case may be, to receive the applications for information or appeals under this Act for 
forwarding the same forthwith to the Central Public Information Officer or the State Public Information 
Officer or senior officer specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 19 or the Central Information 
Commission or the State In formation Commission, as the case may be:  
Provided that where an application for information or appeal is given to a Central Assistant Public 
Information Officer or a State Assistant Public Information Officer, as the case may be, a period of five 
days sha ll be added in computing the period for response specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 7.  
(3) Every Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, 
shall deal with requests from persons seeking information a nd render reasonable assistance to the persons 
seeking such information.  
(4) The Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, 
may seek the assistance of any other officer as he or she considers it necessary fo r the proper discharge of 
his or her duties.  
(5) Any officer, whose assistance has been sought under sub -section ( 4), shall render all assistance to 
the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, seeking 
his or her assistance and for the purposes of any contravention of the provisions of this Act, such other 
officer shall be treated as a Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the 
case may be.   7 
 6. Req uest for obtaining infor mation .—(1) A person, who desires to obtain any information under 
this Act, shall make a request in writing or through electronic means in English or Hindi or in the official 
language of the area in which the application is being made, accompanying such fe e as may be 
prescribed, to — 
(a) the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may 
be, of the concerned public authority;  
(b) the Central Assistant Public Information Officer or State Assistant Public Information Of ficer, 
as the case may be,   
specifying the particulars of the information sought by him or her:  
Provided that where such request cannot be made in writing, the Central Public Information Officer 
or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, shal l render all reasonable assistance to the 
person making the request orally  to reduce the same in writing.  
(2) An applicant making request for information shall not be required to give any reason for 
requesting the information or any other personal details except those that may be necessary for contacting 
him. 
(3) Where an application is made to a public authority  requesting for an information, — 
(i) which is held by another public authority; or  
(ii) the subject matter of which is more closely connected with the functions of another public 
authority,  
the public authority, to which such application is made, shall transfer the application or such part of it as 
may be appropriate to that other public authority and inform the applicant immediately about such 
trans fer: 
Provided that the transfer of an application pursuant to this sub -section shall be made as soon as 
practicable but in no case later than five days from the date of receipt of the application.  
7. Disposal of request .—(1) Subject to the proviso to sub -section ( 2) of section 5 or the proviso to 
sub-section ( 3) of section 6, the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as 
the case may be, on receipt of a request under section 6 shall, as expeditiously as possible, and in any case 
within thirty days of the receipt of the request, either provide the information on payment of such fee as 
may be prescribed or reject the request for any of the reasons specified in sections 8 and 9:  
Provided that where the information sought for con cerns the life or liberty of a person, the same shall 
be provided within forty -eight hours of the receipt of the request.  
(2) If the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, 
fails to give decision on the r equest for information within the period specified under sub -section ( 1), the 
Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, shall be 
deemed to have refused the request.  
(3) Where a decision is taken to provide the information on payment of any further fee representing 
the cost of providing the information, the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information 
Officer, as  the case may be, shall send an intimation to the pe rson making the request, giving— 
(a) the details of further fees representing the cost of providing the information as determined by 
him, together with the calculations made to arrive at the amount in accordance with fee prescribed 
under sub -section ( 1), requesting him to deposit that fees, and the period intervening between the 
despatch of the said intimation and payment of fees shall be excluded for the purpose of calculating 
the period of thirty days referred to in that sub -section;  
(b) information concerning his or her right wi th respect to review the decision as to the amount of 
fees charged or the form of access provided, including the particulars of the appellate authority, time 
limit, process and any other forms.  8 
 (4) Where access to the record or a part thereof is required t o be provided under this Act and the 
person to whom access is to be provided is sensorily disabled, the Central Public Information Officer or 
State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, shall provide assistance to enable access to the 
information , including providing such assistance as may be appropriate for the inspection.  
(5) Where access to information is to be provided in the printed or in any electronic format, the 
applicant shall, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 6), pay such fee as  may be prescribed:  
Provided that the fee prescribed under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 and sub -sections ( 1) and ( 5) of 
section 7 shall be reasonable and no such fee shall be charged from the persons who are of below poverty 
line as may be determined by th e appropriate Government.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 5), the person making request for the 
information shall be provided the information free of charge where a public authority fails to comply with 
the time limits specified in s ub-section ( 1). 
(7) Before taking any decision under sub -section ( 1), the Central Public Information Officer or State 
Public Information Officer, as the case may be, shall take into consideration the representation made by a 
third party under section 11.  
(8) Where a request has been rejected under sub -section ( 1), the Central Public Information Officer or 
State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, shall communicate to  the person making the 
request,— 
(i) the reasons for such rejection;  
(ii) the period within which an appeal against such rejection may be preferred; and  
(iii) the particulars of the appellate authority.  
(9) An information shall ordinarily be provided in the form in which it is sought unless it would 
disproportionately divert the res ources of the public authority or would be detrimental to the safety or 
preservation of the record in question.  
8. Exemption from disclosure of information .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, 
there shall be no obligation to give any citize n,— 
(a) information, disclosure of which would prejudicially affect the sovereignty and integrity of 
India, the security, strategic, scientific or economic interests of the State, relation with foreign State or 
lead to incitement of an offence;  
(b) informa tion which has been expressly forbidden to be published by any court of law or 
tribunal or the disclosure of which may constitute contempt of court;  
(c) information, the disclosure of which would cause a breach of privilege of Parliament or the 
State Legislature;  
(d) information including commercial confidence, trade secrets or intellectual property, the 
disclosure of which would harm the competitive position of a third party, unless the competent 
authority is satisfied that larger public interest warr ants the disclosure of such information;  
(e) information available to a person in his fiduciary relationship, unless the competent authority 
is satisfied that the larger public interest warrants the disclosure of such information;  
(f) information received in confidence from foreign Government;  
(g) information, the disclosure of which would endanger the life or physical safety of any person 
or identify the source of information or assistance given in confidence for law enforcement or security 
purposes;  
(h) information which would impede the process of investigation or apprehension or prosecution 
of offenders;  
(i) cabinet papers including records of deliberations of the Council of Ministers, Secretaries and 
other officers:  9 
 Provided that the decisions of Counci l of Ministers, the reasons thereof, and the material on the 
basis of which the decisions were taken shall be made public after the decision has been taken, and 
the matter is complete, or over:  
Provided further that those matters which come under the exemp tions specified in this section 
shall not be disclosed;  
(j) information which relates to personal information the disclosure of which has no relationship 
to any public activity or interest, or which would cause unwarranted invasion of the privacy of the 
individual unless the Central Public Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer or the 
appellate authority, as the case may be, is satisfied that the larger public interest justifies the 
disclosure of such information:  
Provided that the info rmation which cannot be denied to the Parliament or a State Legislature 
shall not be denied to any person.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything in  the Official Secrets Act, 1923 (19 of 1923) nor any of the 
exemptions permissible in accordance with sub -section ( 1), a public authority may allow access to 
information, if public interest in disclosure outweighs the harm to the protected interests.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of clauses ( a), (c) and ( i) of sub -section ( 1), any information relating to 
any occurrence,  event or matter which has taken place, occurred or happened twenty years before the date 
on which any request is made under sect ion 6 shall be provided to any person making a request under that 
section:  
Provided that where any question arises as to the da te from which the said period of twenty years has 
to be computed, the decision of the Central Government shall be final, subject to the usual appeals 
provided for in this Act.  
9. Grounds for reject ion to access in certain cases .—Without prejudice to the provisions of section 
8, a Central Public Information Officer or a State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, may 
reject a request for information where such a request for providing access would involve an infringement 
of copyright subsisting in  a person other than the State.  
10. Severability .—(1) Where a request for access to information is rejected on the ground that it is in 
relation to information which is exempt from disclosure, then, notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, access ma y be provided to that part of the record which does not contain any information which is 
exempt from disclosure under this Act and which can reasonably be severed from any part th at contains 
exempt information.  
(2) Where access is granted to a part of the record under sub -section ( 1), the Central Public 
Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, shall give a not ice to the 
applicant, informing — 
(a) that only part of the record requested, after severance of the record contain ing information 
which is exempt from  disclosure, is being provided;  
(b) the reasons for the decision, including any findings on any material question of fact, referring 
to the material on which those findings were based;  
(c) the name and designation of the person giving the decision;  
(d) the details of the fees calculated by him or her and the amount of fee which the applic ant is 
required to deposit; and  
(e) his or her rights with respect to review of the decision regarding non -disclosure of part of the 
information, the amount of fee charged or the form of access provided, including the particulars of the 
senior officer specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 19 or the Central Information Commission or 
the State Information Commission, as the case may be,  time limit, process and any other form of 
access.  
11. Third party infor mation .—(1) Where a Central Public Information Officer or a State Public 
Information Officer, as the case may be, intends to disclose any information or record, or part thereof on a 10 
 request made under this Act, which relates to or has been supplied by a third party and has been treated as 
confidential by that third party, the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information 
Officer, as the case may be, shall, within five  days from the receipt of the request, give a written notice to 
such third party of the request and of the fact that the Central Public Information Officer or State Public 
Information Officer, as the case may be, intends to disclose the information or reco rd, or part thereof, and 
invite the third party to make a submission in writing or orally, regarding whether the information should 
be disclosed, and such submission of the third party shall be kept in view while taking a decision about 
disclosure of infor mation:  
Provided that except in the case of trade or commercial secrets protected by law, disclosure may be 
allowed if the public interest in disclosure outweighs in importance any possible harm or injury to the 
interests of such third party.  
(2) Where a n otice is served by the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information 
Officer, as the case may be, under sub -section ( 1) to a third party in respect of any information or record 
or part thereof, the third party shall, within ten days from t he date of receipt of such notice, be given the 
opportunity to make representation a gainst the proposed disclosure.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 7, the Central Public Information Officer or State 
Public Information Officer, as the case  may be, shall, within forty days after receipt of the request under 
section 6, if the third party has been given an opportunity to make representation under sub -section ( 2), 
make a decision as to whether or not to disclose the information or record or par t thereof and give in 
writing the notice of his decision to the third party.  
(4) A notice given under sub -section ( 3) shall include a statement that the third party to whom the 
notice is given is entitled to prefer an appeal under section 19 against the de cision.  
CHAPTER III  
THE CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION  
12. Constitution of Ce ntral Information Commission .—(1) The Central Government shall, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a body to be known as the Central Information Commission 
to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to, it u nder this Act.  
(2) The Central Informat ion Commission shall consist of — 
(a) the Chief Information Commissioner; and  
(b) such number of Central Information Commissioners, not ex ceeding ten, as may be deemed 
necessary.  
(3) The Chief Information Commissioner and Information Commissioners shall be appointed by the 
President on the recommendati on of a committee consisting of — 
(i) the Prime Minister, who shall be the Chairperson of th e committee;  
(ii) the Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha; and  
(iii) a Union Cabinet Minister to be nominated by the Prime Minister.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that where the Leader of 
Opposition in the House of the People has not been recognised as such, the Leader of the single largest 
group in opposition of the Government in the House of the People s hall be deemed to be the Leader of 
Opposition.  
(4) The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs of the Central Information 
Commission shall vest in the Chief Information Commissioner who shall be assisted by the Information 
Commissi oners and may exercise all such powers and do all such acts and things which may be exercised 
or done by the Central Information Commission autonomously without being subjected to directions by 
any other authority under this Act.  11 
 (5) The Chief Information Commissioner and Information Commissioners shall be persons of 
eminence in public life with wide knowledge and experience in law, science and technology, social 
service, management, journalism, mass media or administration and governance.  
(6) The Chief Inf ormation Commissioner or an Information Commissioner shall not be a Member of 
Parliament or Member of the Legislature of any State or Union territory, as the case may be, or hold any 
other office of profit or connected with any political party or carrying on any business or pursuing any 
profession.  
(7) The headquarters of the Central Information Commission shall be at Delhi and the Central 
Information Commission may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, establish offices at 
other places in India.  
13. Term of of fice and conditions of service .—(1) The Chief Information Commissioner shall hold 
office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office and shall not be eligible 
for reappointment:  
Provided that no Chief Information Commissioner shall hold office as such after he has attained the 
age of sixty -five years.  
(2) Every Information Commissioner shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which 
he enters upon his office or till he attains the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier, and shall not be 
eligible for reappointment as such Information Commissioner:  
Provided that every Information Commissioner shall, on vacating his office under this sub -section be 
eligible for appointment as the Ch ief Information Commissioner in the manner specified in sub -section 
(3) of section 12:  
Provided further that where the Information Commissioner is appointed as the Chief Information 
Commissioner, his term of office shall not be more than five years in aggr egate as the Information 
Commissioner and the Chief Information Commissioner.  
(3) The Chief Information Commissioner or an Information Commissioner shall before he enters 
upon his office make and subscribe before the President or some other person appointe d by him in that 
behalf, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the  purpose in the First Schedule.  
(4) The Chief Information Commissioner or an Information Commissioner may, at any time, by 
writing under his hand addressed to the Presiden t, resign from his office:  
Provided that the Chief Information Commissioner or an Information Commissioner may be removed 
in the manner specified under section 14.  
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to and other ter ms and conditions of service of — 
(a) the Chief Information Commissioner shall be the same as that of the Chief Election 
Commissioner;  
(b) an Information Commissioner shall be the same as that of an Election Commissioner:  
Provided that if the Chief Information Commissioner or an Information C ommissioner, at the time of 
his appointment is, in receipt of a pension, other than a disability or wound pension, in respect of any 
previous service under the Government of India or under the Government of a State, his salary in respect 
of the service as the Chief Information Commissioner or an Information Commissioner shall be reduced 
by the amount of that pension including any portion of pension which was commuted and pension 
equivalent of other forms of retirement benefits excluding pension equivalent o f retirement gratuity:  
Provided further that if the Chief Information Commissioner or an Information Commissioner if, at 
the time of his appointment is, in receipt of retirement benefits in respect of any previous service rendered 
in a Corporation establis hed by or under any Central Act or State Act or a Government company owned 
or controlled by the Central Government or the State Government, his salary in respect of the service as 
the Chief Information Commissioner or an Information Commissioner shall be r educed by the amount of 
pension equivalent to the retirement benefits:   12 
 Provided also that the salaries, allowances and other conditions of service of the Chief Information 
Commissioner and the Information Commissioners shall not be varied to their disadva ntage after their 
appointment.  
(6) The Central Government shall provide the Chief Information Commissioner and the Information 
Commissioners with such officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of 
their functions under this Ac t, and the salaries and allowances payable to and the terms and conditions of 
service of the officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of this Act shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
14. Removal of Chief Information Commission er or Information  Commissioner .—(1) Subject to 
the provisions of sub -section ( 3), the Chief Information Commissioner or any Information Commissioner 
shall be removed from his office only by order of the President on the ground of proved misbehaviour or 
incapacity after the  Supreme Court, on a reference made to it by the President, has, on inquiry, reported 
that the Chief Information Commissioner or any Information Commissioner, as the case may be, o ught on 
such ground be removed.  
(2) The President may suspend from office, a nd if deem necessary prohibit also from attending the 
office during inquiry, the Chief Information Commissioner or Information Commissioner in respect of 
whom a reference has been made to the Supreme Court under sub -section ( 1) until the President has 
passed orders on receipt of the report of the S upreme Court on such reference.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the President may by order remove from 
office the Chief Information Commissioner or any Information Commissioner if the Ch ief Information 
Commissioner or a Information Co mmissioner, as the case may be, — 
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the President, involves moral 
turpitude; or  
(c) engages during his term of offic e in any paid employment outside the duties of his office; or  
(d) is, in the opinion of the President, unfit to continue in office by reason of infirmity of mind or 
body; or  
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudici ally his functions as 
the Chief Information Commissioner or a Information Commissioner.  
(4) If the Chief Information Commissioner or a Information Commissioner in any way, concerned or 
interested in any contract or agreement made by or on behalf of the Gov ernment of India or participates in 
any way in the profit thereof or in any benefit or emolument arising therefrom otherwise than as a 
member and in common with the other members of an incorporated company, he shall, for the purposes 
of sub -section ( 1), be deemed to be guilty of misbehaviour.  
CHAPTER IV  
THE STATE  INFORMATION  COMMISSION  
15. Constitution o f State Information Commission .—(1) Every State Government shall, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a body to be known as the ......... (name of the State) 
Information Commission to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to, it 
under this Act.  
(2) The State Informat ion Commission shall consist of — 
(a) the State Chief Information Commissioner, and  
(b) such n umber of State Information Commissioners, not exceeding ten, as may be deemed 
necessary.   13 
 (3) The State Chief Information Commissioner and the State Information Commissioners shall be 
appointed by the Governor on the recommendatio n of a committee consisting of — 
(i) the Chief Minister, who shall be the Chairperson of the committee;  
(ii) the Leader of Opposition in the Legislative Assembly; and  
(iii) a Cabinet Minister to be nominated by the Chief Minister.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of removal of  doubts, it is hereby declared that where the Leader of 
Opposition in the Legislative Assembly has not been recognised as such, the Leader of the single largest 
group in opposition of the Government in the Legislative Assembly shall be deemed to be the Lea der of 
Opposition.  
(4) The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs of the State Information 
Commission shall vest in the State Chief Information Commissioner who shall be assisted by the State 
Information Commissioners and may exer cise all such powers and do all such acts and things which may 
be exercised or done by the State Information Commission autonomously without being subjected to 
directions by any other authority under this Act.  
(5) The State Chief Information Commissioner a nd the State Information Commissioners shall be 
persons of eminence in public life with wide knowledge and experience in law, science and technology, 
social service, management, journalism, mass media or administration and governance.  
(6) The State Chief I nformation Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner shall not be a 
Member of Parliament or Member of the Legislature of any State or Union territory, as the case may be, 
or hold any other office of profit or connected with any political party or ca rrying on any business or 
pursuing any profession.  
(7) The headquarters of the State Information Commission shall be at such place in the State as the 
State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify and the State Information 
Commissi on may, with the previous approval of the State Government, establish offices at other places in 
the State.  
16. Term of of fice and conditions of service .—(1) The State Chief Information Commissioner shall 
hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office and shall not be 
eligible for reappointment:  
Provided that no State Chief Information Commissioner shall hold office as such after he has attained 
the age of sixty -five years.  
(2) Every State Information Commissioner shal l hold office for a term of five years from the date on 
which he enters upon his office or till he attains the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier, and shall 
not be eligible for reappointment as such State Information Commissioner:  
Provided that every State Information Commissioner shall, on vacating his office under this sub -
section, be eligible for appointment as the State Chief Information Commissioner in the manner specified 
in sub -section ( 3) of section 15:  
Provided further that where the Sta te Information Commissioner is appointed as the State Chief 
Information Commissioner, his term of office shall not be more than five years in aggregate as the State 
Information Commissioner and the State Chief Information Commissioner.  
(3) The State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner, shall before he 
enters upon his office make and subscribe before the Governor or some other person appointed by him in 
that behalf, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the p urpose in the First Schedule.  
(4) The State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner may, at any 
time, by writing under his hand addressed to the Governor, resign from his office:  
Provided that the State Chief Information Commissi oner or a State Information Commissioner may 
be removed in the manner specified under section 17.   14 
 (5) The salaries and allowances payable to and other ter ms and conditions of service of — 
(a) the State Chief Information Commissioner shall be the same as that of an Election 
Commissioner;  
(b) the State Information Commissioner shall be the same as that of the Chief Secretary to the 
State Government:  
Provided that if the State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner, at 
the time of  his appointment is, in receipt of a pension, other than a disability or wound pension, in respect 
of any previous service under the Government of India or under the Government of a State, his salary in 
respect of the service as the State Chief Information  Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner 
shall be reduced by the amount of that pension including any portion of pension which was commuted 
and pension equivalent of other forms of retirement benefits excluding pension equivalent of retirement 
gratuity:  
Provided further that where the State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information 
Commissioner if, at the time of his appointment is, in receipt of retirement benefits in respect of any 
previous service rendered in a Corporation establishe d by or under any Central Act or State Act or a 
Government company owned or controlled by the Central Government or the State Government, his 
salary in respect of the service as the State Chief Information Commissioner or the State Information 
Commissioner  shall be reduced by the amount of pension equivalent to the retirement benefits:  
Provided also that the salaries, allowances and other conditions of service of the State Chief 
Information Commissioner and the State Information Commissioners shall not be v aried to their 
disadvantage after their appointment.  
(6) The State Government shall provide the State Chief Information Commissioner and the State 
Information Commissioners with such officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient 
performance of their functions under this Act, and the salaries and allowances payable to and the terms 
and conditions of service of the officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of this Act shall 
be such as may be prescribed.  
17. Removal of State Chief I nformation Commissioner or State Information Commissioner .—
(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), the State Chief Information Commissioner or a State 
Information Commissioner shall be removed from his office only by order of the Governor on the ground 
of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after the Supreme Court, on a reference made to it by the Governor, 
has on inquiry, reported that the State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information 
Commissioner, as the case may be, ought on such gr ound be removed.  
(2) The Governor may suspend from office, and if deem necessary prohibit also from attending the 
office during inquiry, the State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner in 
respect of whom a reference has been ma de to the Supreme Court under sub -section ( 1) until the 
Governor has passed orders on receipt of the report of the Supreme Court on such reference.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Governor may by order remove from 
office the State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner if a State Chief 
Information Commissioner or a State Information Co mmissioner, as the case may be, — 
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the  opinion of the Governor, involves moral 
turpitude; or  
(c) engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside the duties of his office; or  
(d) is, in the opinion of the Governor, unfit to continue in office by reason of infirmity of mind or 
body; or  
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
the State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner.  15 
 (4) If the State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Inform ation Commissioner in any way, 
concerned or interested in any contract or agreement made by or on behalf of the Government of the State 
or participates in any way in the profit thereof or in any benefit or emoluments arising therefrom 
otherwise than as a m ember and in common with the other members of an incorporated company, he 
shall, for the purposes of sub -section ( 1), be deemed to be guilty of misbehaviour.  
CHAPTER V  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE INFORMATION  COMMISSIONS , APPEAL AND PENALTIES  
18. Powers and  functions of Info rmation Commissions .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, 
it shall be the duty of the Central Information Commission or State Information Commission, as the case 
may be, to receive and inquire in to a complaint from any person, — 
(a) who has been unable to submit a request to a Central Public Information Officer or State 
Public Information Officer, as the case may be, either by reason that no such officer has been 
appointed under this Act, or because the Central Assistant Public Inform ation Officer or State 
Assistant Public Information Officer, as the case may be, has refused to accept his or her application 
for information or appeal under this Act for forwarding the same to the Central Public Information 
Officer or State Public Informa tion Officer or senior officer specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 19 
or the Central Information Commission or the State Information Commission, as the case may be;  
(b) who has been refused access to any information requested under this Act;  
(c) who ha s not been given a response to a request for information or access to information within 
the time limit specified under this Act;  
(d) who has been required to pay an amount of fee which he or she considers unreasonable;  
(e) who believes that he or she has been given incomplete, misleading or false information under 
this Act; and  
(f) in respect of any other matter relating to requesting or obtaining access to records under this 
Act. 
(2) Where the Central Information Commission or State Information Commission , as the case may 
be, is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to inquire into the matter, it may initiate an inquiry in 
respect thereof.  
(3) The Central Information Commission or State Information Commission, as the case may be, shall, 
while inquiri ng into any matter under this section, have the same powers as are vested in a civil court 
while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in respect of  the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and compel them to give oral or written 
evidence on oath and to p roduce the documents or things;  
(b) requiring the discovery and inspection of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from any court or office;  
(e) issuing summons for examination of witnesses or documents; and  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything inconsistent contained in any other Act of Parliament or State 
Legislature, as the case may be, the Central Information Commission or the State Information 
Commission, as the case may be, may, during the inquiry of any complaint under this Act, examine any 
record to which this Act applies which is under the control of the public authority, an d no such record 
may be withheld from it on any grounds.  
19. Appeal .—(1) Any person who, does not receive a decision within the time specified in  
sub-section ( 1) or clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3) of section 7, or is aggrieved by a decision of the Central  16 
 Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, may within thirty days 
from the expiry of such period or from the receipt of such a decision prefer an appeal to such officer who 
is senior in rank to the Central Public In formation Officer or State Public Information Officer as the case 
may be, in each public authority:  
Provided that such officer may admit the appeal after the expiry of the period of thirty days if he or 
she is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.  
(2) Where an appeal is preferred against an order made by a Central Public Information Officer or a 
State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, under section 11 to disclose third party information,  
the appeal by the concerned third party shall be made within thirty days from the date of the order.  
(3) A second appeal against the decision under sub -section ( 1) shall lie within ninety days from the 
date on which the decision should have been made or w as actually received, with the Central Information 
Commission or the State Information Commission:  
Provided that the Central Information Commission or the State Information Commission, as the case 
may be, may admit the appeal after the expiry of the period  of ninety days if it is satisfied that the 
appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.  
(4) If the decision of the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as 
the case may be, against which an appeal is preferred relates to information of a third party, the Central 
Information Commission or State Information Commission, as the case may be, shall give a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard to that third party.  
(5) In any appeal proceedings, the onus to prove that a denial of a request was justified shall be on the 
Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, who denied 
the request.  
(6) An appeal under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be dispo sed of within thirty days of the 
receipt of the appeal or within such extended period not exceeding a total of forty -five days from the date 
of filing thereof, as the case may be, for reasons to be recorded in writing.  
(7) The decision of the Central Infor mation Commission or State Information Commission, as the 
case may be, shall be binding.  
(8) In its decision, the Central Information Commission or State Information Commission, as th e case 
may be, has the power to — 
(a) require the public authority to take  any such steps as may be necessary to secure compliance 
with the pr ovisions of this Act, including — 
(i) by providing access to information, if so requested, in a particular form;  
(ii) by appointing a Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as 
the case may be;  
(iii) by publishing certain information or categories of information;  
(iv) by making necessary changes to its practices in relation to the maintenance, management 
and destruction of records;  
(v) by enhancing the pro vision of training on the right to information for its officials;  
(vi) by providing it with an annual report in compliance with clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 4;  
(b) require the public authority to compensate the complainant for any loss or other  detriment 
suffered;  
(c) impose any of the penalties provided under this Act;  
(d) reject the application.  17 
 (9) The Central Information Commission or State Information Commission, as the case may be, shall 
give notice of its decision, including any right of appeal, to the complainant and the public authority.  
(10) The Central Information Commission or State Information Commission, as the case may be, 
shall decide the appeal in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed.  
20. Penalties .—(1)Where the Ce ntral Information Commission or the State Information Commission, 
as the case may be, at the time of deciding any complaint or appeal is of the opinion that the Central 
Public Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer, as the case may be,  has, without any 
reasonable cause, refused to receive an application for information or has not furnished information 
within the time specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 7 or malafidely denied the request for 
information or knowingly given incorrec t, incomplete or misleading information or destroyed information 
which was the subject of the request or obstructed in any manner in furnishing the information, it shall 
impose a penalty of two hundred and fifty rupees each day till application is received  or information is 
furnished, so however, the total amount of such penalty shall not exceed twenty -five thousand rupees:  
Provided that the Central Public Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer, as the 
case may be, shall be given a reas onable opportunity of being heard before any penalty is imposed on 
him: 
Provided further that the burden of proving that he acted reasonably and diligently shall be on the 
Central Public Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer, as the c ase may be.  
(2) Where the Central Information Commission or the State Information Commission, as the case 
may be, at the time of deciding any complaint or appeal is of the opinion that the Central Public 
Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, has, without any 
reasonable cause and persistently, failed to receive an application for information or has not furnished 
information within the time specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 7 or malafidely denied the request  
for information or knowingly given incorrect, incomplete or misleading information or destroyed 
information which was the subject of the request or obstructed in any manner in furnishing the 
information, it shall recommend for disciplinary action against the Central Public Information Officer or 
the State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, under the service rules applicable to him.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
21. Protection of action t aken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or 
any rule made thereunder.  
22. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inc onsistent therewith contained in  the Official Secrets Act, 1923 (19 of 1923), and any other 
law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.  
23. Bar of ju risdiction of courts .—No court shall entertain any suit, application or other proceeding 
in respect of any order made under this Act and no such order shall be called in question otherwise than 
by way of an appeal under this Act.  
24. Act not to apply in certain organis ations .—(1) Nothing cont ained in this Act shall apply to the 
intelligence and security organisations specified in the Second Schedule, being organisations established 
by the Central Government or any information furnished by such organisations to that Government:  
Provided that th e information pertaining to the allegations of corruption and human rights violations 
shall not be excluded under this sub -section:  
Provided further that in the case of information sought for is in respect of allegations of violation of 
human rights, the i nformation shall only be provided after the approval of the Central Information 
Commission, and notwithstanding anything contained in section 7, such information shall be provided 
within forty -five days from the date of the receipt of request.   18 
 (2) The Cen tral Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule by 
including therein any other intelligence or security organisation established by that Government or 
omitting therefrom any organisation already specified therein and on the  publication of such notification, 
such organisation shall be deemed to be included in or, as the case may be, omitted from the Schedule.  
(3) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 2) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.  
(4) Nothing contain ed in this Act shall apply to such intelligence and security organisation being 
organisations established by the State Government, as that Government may, from time to time, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify:  
Provided that the information pe rtaining to the allegations of corruption and human rights violations 
shall not be excluded under this sub -section:  
Provided further that in the case of information sought for is in respect of allegations of violation of 
human rights, the information shall  only be provided after the approval of the State Information 
Commission and, notwithstanding anything contained in section 7, such information shall be provided 
within forty -five days from the date of the receipt of request.  
(5) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 4) shall be laid before the State Legislature.  
25. Monitoring and reporting .—(1) The Central Information Commission or State Information 
Commission, as the case may be, shall, as soon as practicable after the end of each year, prepare a report 
on the implementation of the provisions of this Act during that year and forward a copy thereof  to the 
appropriate Government.  
(2) Each Ministry or Department shall, in relation to the public authorities within their jurisdiction, 
collect and provid e such information to the Central Information Commission or State Information 
Commission, as the case may be, as is required to prepare the report under this section and comply with 
the requirements concerning the furnishing of that information and keeping  of records for the purposes of 
this section.  
(3) Each report shall state in respect of the ye ar to which the report relates, — 
(a) the number of requests made to each public authority;  
(b) the number of decisions where applicants were not entitled to acces s to the documents 
pursuant to the requests, the provisions of this Act under which these decisions were made and the 
number of times such provisions were invoked;  
(c) the number of appeals referred to the Central Information Commission or State Informatio n 
Commission, as the case may be, for review, the nature of the appeals and the outcome of the appeals;  
(d) particulars of any disciplinary action taken against any officer in respect of the administration 
of this Act;  
(e) the amount of charges collected by each public authority under this Act;  
(f) any facts which indicate an effort by the public authorities to administer and implement the 
spirit and intention of this Act;  
(g) recommendations for reform, including recommendations in respect of the particul ar public 
authorities, for the development, improvement, modernisation, reform or amendment to this Act or 
other legislation or common law or any other matter relevant for operationalising the right to access 
information.  
(4) The Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, may, as soon as practicable 
after the end of each year, cause a copy of the report of the Central Information Commission or the State 
Information Commission, as the case may be, referred to in sub -section ( 1) to be lai d before each House 
of Parliament or, as the case may be, before each House of the State Legislature, where there are two 
Houses, and where there is one House of the State Legislature before that House.  
(5) If it appears to the Central Information Commissi on or State Information Commission, as the case 
may be, that the practice of a public authority in relation to the exercise of its functions under this Act 19 
 does not conform with the provisions or spirit of this Act, it may give to the authority a recommend ation 
specifying the steps which ought in its opinion to be taken for promoting such conformity.  
26. Appropriate Go vernment to prepare programmes .—(1) The appropriate Government may, to 
the extent of availability of financial  and other resources, — 
(a) develop and organise educational programmes to advance the understanding of the public, in 
particular of disadvantaged communities as to how to exercise the rights contemplated under this Act;  
(b) encourage public authorities to participate in the developm ent and organisation of 
programmes referred to in clause ( a) and to undert ake such programmes themselves;  
(c) promote timely and effective dissemination of accurate information by public authorities 
about their activities; and  
(d) train Central Public Info rmation Officers or State Public Information Officers, as the case may 
be, of public authorities and produce relevant training materials for use by the public authorities 
themselves.  
(2) The appropriate Government shall, within eighteen months from the com mencement of this Act, 
compile in its official language a guide containing such information, in an easily comprehensible form 
and manner, as may reasonably be required by a person who wishes to exercise any right specified in this 
Act. 
(3) The appropriate Government shall, if necessary, update and publish the guidelines referred to in 
sub-section ( 2) at regular intervals which shall, in particular and without prejudice to the general ity of 
sub-section ( 2), include — 
(a) the objects of this Act;  
(b) the postal and street address, the phone and fax number and, if available, electronic mail 
address of the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may 
be, of every public authority appointed under sub -section ( 1) of s ection 5;  
(c) the manner and the form in which request for access to an information shall be made to a 
Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be;  
(d) the assistance available from and the duties of the Central Public Information Officer or State 
Public Information Officer, as the case may be, of a public authority under this Act;  
(e) the assistance available from the Central Information Commission or State Information 
Commission, as the case may be;  
(f) all remedies in law available regarding an act or failure to act in respect of a right or duty 
conferred or imposed by this Act including the manner of filing an appeal to the Commission;  
(g) the provisions providing for the voluntary disclosure of categor ies of records in accordance 
with section 4;  
(h) the notices regarding fees to be paid in relation to requests for access to an information; and  
(i) any additional regulations or circulars made or issued in relation to obtaining access to an 
information in  accordance with this Act.  
(4) The appropriate Government must, if necessary, update and publish the guidelines at regular 
intervals.  
27. Power to make r ules by appropriate Government .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gaz ette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the cost of the medium or print cost price of the materials to be disseminated under sub -
section ( 4) of section 4;   20 
 (b) the fee payable under sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(c) the fee payable under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 5) of section 7;  
(d) the salaries and allowances payable to and the terms  and conditions of service of the officers 
and other employees under sub -section ( 6) of section 13 and sub -section ( 6) of section 16;  
(e) the procedure to be adopted by the Central Information Commission or State Information 
Commission, as the case may be,  in deciding the appeals under sub -section ( 10) of section 19; and  
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
28. Power to mak e rules by competent authority .—(1) The competent authority may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the foll owing matters, namely: — 
(i) the cost of the medium or print cost price of the materials to be disseminated under sub -section 
(4) of section 4;  
(ii) the fee payable under sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(iii) the fee payable under sub -section ( 1) of section 7 ; and  
(iv) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
29. Laying of rules .—(1) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in  session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in m aking any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be  without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule.  
(2) Every rule made under this Act by a State Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
notified, before the State Legislature.  
30. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or ex pedient for removal of 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of 
the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
31. Repeal .—The Freedom of Information Act, 2002 (5 of 2003) is hereby repealed.   21 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See sections 13 ( 3) and 16( 3)] 
FORM OF OATH OR AFFIRMATION TO BE MADE BY THE CHIEF INFORMATION  COMMISSIONER/THE  
INFORMATION  COMMISSIONER /THE S TATE  CHIEF INFORMATION  COMMISSIONER /THE STATE  
INFORMATION  COMMISSIONER  
"I, ....................., having been appointed Chief Information Commissioner/Information 
Commissioner/State Chief Information Commissioner /State Informat ion Commissioner  
swear in the name of God  that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the  
solemnly affirm  
Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I 
will duly and faithfully and to the  best of my ability, knowledge and judgment perform the duties of my 
office without fear or favour, affection or ill -will and that I will uphold the Constitution and the laws.".   22 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 24)  
INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY ORGANISATION E STABLISHED BY THE CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  
1. Intelligence Bureau.  
2. Research and Analysis Wing of the Cabinet Secretariat.  
3. Directorate of Revenue Intelligence.  
4. Central Economic Intelligence Bureau.  
5. Directorate of Enforcement.  
6. Narcotics Control Bure au. 
7. Aviation Research Centre.  
8. Special F rontier Force.  
9. Border Security Force.  
10. Central Reserve Police Force.  
11. Indo -Tibetan Border Police.  
12. Central Industrial Security Force.  
13. National Security Guards.  
14. Assam Rifles.  
1[15.Sashtra Seema Bal .] 
2[16. Directorate General of Income -tax (Investigation).]  
2[17. National Technical Research Organisation.]   
2[18. Financial Intelligence Unit, India.]  
3[19. Special Protection Group.  
  20. Defence Research and Development Organisation.  
  21. Border Road Development Board.  
  4*       *       *       *       *] 
 5[22. National Security Council Secretariat.]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 347, dated 28 -9-2005  
2. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 235(E)  dated 27 -3-2008  
3. Ins . by notification No. G. S.R. 347, dated 28 -9-2005  
4. Omitted by G.S.R. 235( E) dated 2 7-3-2008  
5. Added by notification No.  G.S.R. 726(E), dated 8-10-2008  
--------------------------The Special Economic Zones Act, 2005--------------------------
1 
 THE SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONES ACT, 2005  
__________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF  SPECIAL  ECONOMIC  ZONE 
3. Procedure for making proposal to establish Special Economic Zone.  
4. Establishment of Special Economic Zone and approval and authorisation to operate it to, 
Developer.  
5. Guidelines for notifying Special Economic Zone.  
6. Processing and non -processing areas.  
7. Exemption from taxes, dutie s or cess.  
 
CHAPTER III  
CONSTITUTION OF  BOARD  OF APPROVAL  
8. Constitution of Board of Approval.  
9. Duties, Powers and functions of Board.  
10. Suspension of letter of approval and transfer of Special Economic Zone in certain cases.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
DEVELOPMENT  COMMISSIONER  
11. Development Commissioner.  
12. Functions of Development Commissioner.  
 
CHAPTER V  
SINGLE  WINDOW  CLEARANCE  
13. Constitution of Approval Committee.  
14. Powers and functions of Approval Committee.  
15. Setting up of Unit.  
16. Cancellation of letter of approval to entrepreneur.  
17. Setting up and operation of Offshore Banking Unit.  2 
 SECTIONS  
18. Setting up of International Financial Services Centre.  
19. Single application form, return, etc.  
20. Agency to inspect.  
21. Single enforcement officer or agency for notified offences.  
22. Investigation, inspection, search or seizure.  
23. Designated Courts to try suits and notified offences.  
24. Appeal to High Court.  
25. Offences by companies.  
CHAPTE VI  
SPECIAL FISCAL PROVISIONS FOR SPECIAL  ECONOMIC  ZONES  
26. Exemptions, drawbacks and concessions to every D eveloper and entrepreneur.  
27. Provisions of Income -tax Act,  1961 to apply with certain modification in relation to Developers 
and entrepreneurs.  
28. Duration of goods or services in Special Economic Zones.  
29. Transfer of ownership and removal of goods.  
30. Domestic clea rance by Units.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
SPECIAL  ECONOMIC  ZONE AUTHORITY  
31. Constitution of Authority.  
32. Officers of Authority and other staff.  
33. Special provision for transfer of officers or other employees to Authority.  
34. Functions of Authority.  
35. Grants and loans by Central Government.  
36. Constitution of Fund and its application.  
37. Accounts and audit.  
38. Directions by Central Government.  
39. Returns and reports.  
40. Power to supersede Authority.  
41. Members, officers and other employees of Authority to be public servants.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
42. Reference of dispute.  
43. Limitation.  
44. Applicability of provisions of this Act to existing Special Economic Zones.  
45. Person to whom a communication may be sent under this Act.  
46. Identity Card.  
47. Authorities responsible for administration.  
48. Protection of a ction taken in good faith.  
49. Power to modify provisions of this Act or other enactments in relation to Special Economic 
Zones.  3 
 SECTIONS  
50. Power of State Government to grant exemption.  
51. Act to have overriding effect.  
52. Certain pro visions not to apply.  
53. Special Econ omic Zones to be ports, airports, inland container depots, land stations, etc., in 
certain cases.  
54. Amendment to First Schedule.  
55. Power to make rules.  
56. Power to remove difficulties.  
57. Amendment of certain enactments.  
58. Savings.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE . 
 
  4 
 THE SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONES ACT, 2005  
ACT NO. 28 OF 2005  
[23rd June , 2005.]  
An Act to provide for the establishment, development and management of the Special Economic 
Zones for the promotion of exports and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Special Economic Zones 
Act, 2005.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and 
any refere nce in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to 
the coming into force of that provision.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” with reference to a Special Economic Zone means the date on which the 
Special Economic Zone is notified by the Central Government under  sub-section ( 1) of section 4;  
(b) “Approval Committee ” means an Approval Committee constituted under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 13;  
(c) “authorised operations ” means operations which may be authorised under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 4 and sub -section ( 9) of section 15;  
(d) “Authority ” means a Special Economic Zone Authority constituted under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 31;  
(e) “Board ” means the Board of Approval constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 8;  
(f) “Co-Developer ” means a person who, or a State Government which, has been granted by the 
Central Government a letter of approval under sub -section ( 12) of section 3; 
(g) “Developer ” means a person who, or a State Government which, has been granted by the 
Central Government a letter of approval under sub -section ( 10) of section 3 and includes an Authority 
and a Co -Developer;  
(h) “Development Commissioner ” means the D evelopment Commissioner appointed for one or 
more Special Economic Zones under sub -section ( 1) of section 11;  
(i) “Domestic Tariff Area ” means the whole of India (including the territorial waters and 
continental shelf) but does not include the areas of the  Special Economic Zones;  
(j) “entrepreneur ” means a person who has been granted a letter of approval by the Development 
Commissioner under sub -section ( 9) of section 15;  
(k) “existing Special Economic Zone ” means every Special Economic Zone which is in exi stence 
on or before the commencement of this Act;  
                                                           
1. 10th February, 2006 (ss. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 42, 43 , 44, 45, 46, 
47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57 and 58), vide notification No.  S.O. 196(E),  dated 10th February , 2006, see Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, P art II, sec. 3( ii). 
1st October, 2008 (ss. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40 and 41), vide notification No. S.O.2320(E), dated  1st October, 2008, 
see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec 3( ii). 
13th January, 2010 (ss. 20, 21 and 22), vide notification No. S.O. 75(E), dated 13th January, 2010, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 5 
 (l) “existing Unit ” means every Unit which has been set up on or before the commencement of 
this Act in an existing Special Economic Zone;  
(m) “export ” means— 
(i) taking goods, or providing services, out of  India, from a Special Economic Zone, by land, 
sea or air or by any other mode, whether physical or otherwise; or  
(ii) supplying goods, or providing services, from the Domestic Tariff Area to a Unit or 
Developer; or  
(iii) supplying goods, or providing services, from one Unit to another Unit or Developer, in 
the same or different Special Economic Zone;  
(n) “Free Trade and Warehousing Zone ” means a Special Economic Zone wherein mainly trading 
and warehousing and other activities related thereto are carrie d on;  
(o) “import ” means— 
(i) bringing goods or receiving services, in a Special Economic Zone, by a Unit or Developer 
from a place outside India by land, sea or air or by any other mode, whether physical or 
otherwise; or  
(ii) receiving goods, or services by a Unit or Developer from another Unit or Developer of the 
same Special Economic Zone or a different Special Economic Zone;  
(p) “infrastructure facilities ” means industrial, commercial or social infrastructure or other 
facilities necessary for the develo pment of a Special Economic Zone or such other facilities which 
may be prescribed;  
(q) “International Financial Services Centre ” means an International Financial Services Centre 
which has been approved by the Central Government under  sub-section ( 1) of sec tion 18;  
(r) “manufacture ” means to make, produce, fabricate, assemble, process or bring into existence, 
by hand or by machine, a new product having a distinctive name, character or use and shall include 
processes such as refrigeration, cutting, polishing, blending, repair, remakin g, re -engineering and 
includes agriculture, aquaculture, animal husbandry, floriculture, horticulture, pisciculture, poultry, 
sericulture, viticulture and mining;  
(s) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression 
“notify ” shall be construed accordingly;  
(t) “notified offences ” means the offences specified as such under sub -section ( 1) of section 21;  
(u) “Offshore Banking Unit ” means a branch of a bank located in a Special Economic Zone and 
which has obtained the pe rmission under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) of section 23 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949);  
(v) “person ” includes an individual, whether resident in India or outside India, a Hindu undivided 
family, co -operative society, a company, whether  incorporated in India or outside India, a firm, 
proprietary concern, or an association of persons or body of individuals, whether incorporated or not, 
local authority and any agency, office or branch owned or controlled by such individual, Hindu 
undivided  family, co -operative, association, body, authority or company;  
(w) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government under this Act;  
(x) “Reserve Bank ” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under section 3 of the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
(y) “Schedule ” means Schedules to this Act;  
  6 
 (z) “services ” mean s such tradable services which, — 
(i) are covered under the General Agreement o n Trade in Services annexed as IB to the 
Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation concluded at Marrakesh on the 15th day of 
April, 1994;  
(ii) may be prescribed by the Central Government for the purposes of this Act; and  
(iii) earn foreign exchan ge; 
(za) “Special Economic Zone ” means each Special Economic Zone notified under the proviso to 
sub-section ( 4) of section 3 and sub -section ( 1) of section 4 (including Free Trade and Warehousing 
Zone) and includes an existing Special Economic Zone;  
(zb) “State Government ” means a State Government of the State in which a Special Economic 
Zone is established or proposed to be established;  
(zc) “Unit” means a Unit set up by an entrepreneur in a Special Economic Zone and includes an 
existing Unit, an Offshore Banking Unit and a Unit in an International Financial Services Centre, 
whether established before or established after the commencement of this Act;  
(zd) all other words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Central 
Excise Act , 1944 (1 of 1944), the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951), 
the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962) and the Foreign Trade 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 (22 of 1992) shall have the meani ngs respectively assigned 
to them in those Acts.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF SPECIAL  ECONOMIC  ZONE 
3. Procedure for making proposal to e stablish Special Economic Zone .—(1) A Special Economic 
Zone may be established under this Act, either jointly or several ly by the Central Government, State 
Government, or any person for manufacture of goods or rendering services or for both or as a Free Trade 
and Warehousing Zone.  
(2) Any person, who intends to set up a Special Economic Zone, may, after identifying the area, make 
a proposal to the State Government concerned for the purpose of setting up the Special Economic Zone.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), any person, who intends to set up a 
Special Economic Zone, may, after identifying th e area, at his option, make a proposal directly to the 
Board for the purpose of setting up the Special Economic Zone:  
Provided that where such a proposal has been received directly from a person under this sub -section, 
the Board may grant approval and afte r receipt of such approval, the person concerned shall obtain the 
concurrence of the State Government within the period, as may be prescribed.  
(4) In case a State Government intends to set up a Special Economic Zone, it may after identifying the 
area, forw ard the proposal directly to the Board for the purpose of setting up the Special Economic Zone:  
Provided t hat the Central Government may, — 
(a) after consulting the State Government concerned;  
(b) without referring the proposal for setting up the Special Ec onomic Zone to the Board; and  
(c) after identifying the area,  
suo motu  set up and notify the Special Economic Zone.  
(5) Every proposal under sub -sections ( 2) to ( 4) shall be made in such form, and, manner, containing 
such pa rticulars as may be prescribed.  
(6) The State Government may, on receipt of the proposal made under sub -section ( 2), forward the 
same together with its recommendations to the Board within such period as may be prescribed.  7 
 (7) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 8), the Board may, after receipt of 
the proposal under sub -sections ( 2) to ( 4), approve the proposal subject to such terms and conditions as it 
may deem fit to impose, or modify or reject the proposal.  
(8) The Central Government may prescribe the following  requirements for establishment of a  Special 
Economic Zone, namely: — 
(a) the minimum area of land and other terms and conditions subject to which the Board shall 
approve, modify or reject any proposal received by it under  sub-sections ( 2) to ( 4); and  
(b) the terms and conditions, subject to which the Developer shall undertake the authorised 
operations and his obligations and entitlements:  
Provided that different minimum area of land and other terms and conditions referred to in clause ( a) 
may be prescribed by the Central Government for a class or classes of Special Economic Zones.  
(9) If the Board, — 
(a) approves without any modification the proposal received under sub -sections ( 2) to ( 4), it shall 
communicate the same to the Central Government;  
(b) approves with modifications the proposal received under sub -sections ( 2) to ( 4), it shall, 
communicate such modifications to the person or the State Government concerned and if such 
modifications have been accepted by such person or State Government, the Board shal l communicate 
the approval to the Central Government;  
(c) rejects the proposal received under sub -sections ( 2) to ( 4), it shall record the reasons therefor 
and communicate the rejection to the Central Government which shall intimate to the State 
Government  or the person concerned.  
(10) The Central Government shall, on receipt of communication under clause ( a) or clause ( b) of 
sub-section ( 9), grant, within such time as may be prescribed, a letter of approval on such terms and 
conditions and obligations and entitlements as may be approved by the Board, to the Developer, being the 
person or the State Government concerned:  
Provided that the Central Government may, on the basis of approval of the Board, approve more than 
one Developer in a Special Economic Zone in cases where one Developer does not have in his possession 
the minimum area of contiguous land, as may be prescribed, for setting up a Special Economic Zone and 
in such cases, each Developer shall be considered as a Developer in respect of the land in hi s possession.  
(11) Any person who, or a State Government which, intends to provide any infrastructure facilities in 
the identified area referred to in sub -sections ( 2) to ( 4), or undertake any authorised operation may, after 
entering into an agreement with  the Developer referred to in sub -section ( 10), make a proposal for the 
same to the Board for its approval and the provisions of sub -section ( 5) and sub -sections ( 7) to ( 10) shall, 
as far as may be, apply to the said proposal made by such person or the Sta te Government.  
(12) Every person or the State Government referred to in sub -section ( 11), whose proposal has been 
approved by the Board and who, or which, has been granted letter of approval by the Central 
Government, shall be considered as a Co -Developer of the Special Economic Zone.  
(13) Subject to the provisions of this section and the letter of approval granted to a Developer, the 
Developer may allocate space or built up area or provide infrastructure services to the approved Units in 
accordance with th e agreement entered into by him with the entrepreneurs of such Units.  
4. Establishment of Special Economic Zone and approval and authorisat ion to operate it to , 
Developer .—(1) The Developer shall, after the grant of letter of approval under sub -section ( 10) of 
section 3, submit the exact particulars of the identified area referred to in sub -sections ( 2) to ( 4) of that 
section, to the Central Government and thereupon that Government may, after satisfying that the 
requirements, under sub -section ( 8) of sectio n 3 and other requirements, as may be prescribed, are 
fulfilled, notify the specifically identified area in the State as a Special Economic Zone:  8 
 Provided that an existing Special Economic Zone shall be deemed to have been notified and 
established in accor dance with the provisions of this Act and the provisions of this Act shall, as far as 
may be, apply to such Zone accordingly:  
Provided further that the Central Government may, after notifying the Special Economic Zone, if it 
considers appropriate, notify s ubsequently any additional area to be included as a part of that Special 
Economic Zone.  
(2) After the appointed day, the Board may, authorise the Developer to undertake in a Special 
Economic Zone, such operations which the Central Government may authorise.  
5. Guidelines for n otifying Special Economic Zone .—The Central Government, while notifying 
any area as a Special Economic Zone or an additional area to be included in the Special Economic Zone 
and discharging its functions under this Act, shall be g uided by the following, namely: — 
(a) generation of additional economic activity;  
(b) promotion of exports of goods and services;  
(c) promotion of investment from domestic and foreign sources;  
(d) creation of employment opportunities;  
(e) development of infrastructure facilities; and  
(f) maintenance of sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State and friendly 
relations with foreign States.  
6. Proce ssing and non -processing areas .—The areas falling within the Special Economic Zones 
may be d emarcated by the Central Government or any authority specified by it  as— 
(a) the processing area for setting up Units for activities, being the manufacture of goods, or 
rendering services; or  
(b) the area exclusively for trading or warehousing purposes; or  
(c) the non -processing areas for activities other than those specified under clause ( a) or clause ( b). 
7. Exempt ion from taxes, duties or cess .—Any goods or services exported out of, or imported into, 
or procured fr om the Domestic Tariff Area by, — 
(i) a U nit in a Special Economic Zone; or  
(ii) a Developer,  
shall, subject to such terms, conditions and limitations, as may be prescribed, be exempt from the 
payment of taxes, duties or cess under all enactments specified in the First Schedule.  
CHAPTER III  
CONSTITUTION OF  BOARD  OF APPROVAL  
8. Con stitution of Board of Approval .—(1) The Central Government shall, within fifteen days of 
the commencement of this Act, by notification, constitute, for the purposes of this Act, a Board to be 
called the Board of Approval.  
(2) The Board shall consist of — 
(a) an officer not below the rank of an Additional Secretary to the Government of India in the 
Ministry or Department of the Central G overnment dealing with commerce —Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(b) two officers, not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India, to be 
nominated by the Central Government to represent the Ministry or Department of the Central 
Government dealing with revenue —Members, ex officio ; 
(c) one officer not be low the rank of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India to be nominated 
by the Central Government to represent the Ministry or Department of the Central Government 
dealing with economi c affairs (financial services)  —Member, ex officio ; 9 
 (d) such number  of officers, not exceeding ten, not below the rank of the Joint Secretary to the 
Government of India, to be nominated by the Central Government to represent the Ministries or 
Departments of the Central Government dealing with commerce, industrial policy a nd promotion, 
science and technology, small scale industries and agro and rural industries, home affairs, defence, 
environment and forests, law, overseas India n affairs and urban development —Members, ex officio ; 
(e) a nominee of  the State Government concerned —Member, ex officio ; 
(f) the Director General of Foreign Trade or his nominee —Member, ex officio ; 
(g) the Dev elopment Commissioner concerned —Member, ex officio ; 
(h) a Professor in the Indian Institute of Management, being a s ociety registered under the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) or the Indian Institute of Foreign Trade, being a society 
registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, as may be, nomi nated by the Central 
Government —Member, ex officio ; 
(i) an officer not below the rank of Deputy Secretary to the Government of India dealing with the 
Special Economic Zones in the Ministry or Department of the Central Government, dealing with 
commerce to be nomi nated by the Central Government —Member -Secretary , ex officio : 
Provided that the member, being the Joint Secretary, nominated under clauses ( b) to ( d) of this  
sub-section may, if he is unable to attend the meeting of the Board, authorise any other officer to attend 
the meeting of the Board on his behalf . 
(3) The term of office of an ex officio  Member shall come to an end as soon as he ceases to hold the 
office by virtue of which he was so nominated.  
(4) For the purposes of performing its functions, the Board may co -opt as members, such number of 
persons as it deems fit, who have special knowledge of, and practical experience in, matters relating to, or 
relevant to activity connected with the Special Economic Zones and any such person shall have the right 
to take part in the discussions of the Board but sh all not be counted for the quorum and shall not be a 
member for any other purpose and such person shall be entitled to receive such allowances or fees, as the 
case may be, fixed by the Board.  
(5) The Board shall meet at such times and places as may be appo inted by it and shall have the power 
to regulate its own procedure.  
(6) One -third of the total Members of the Board shall form a quorum, and all the acts of the Board 
shall be decided by a general consensus of the Members present.  
(7) No act or proceeding of the Board shall be called in question on the ground merely of existence of 
any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board.  
(8) All orders and decisions of the Board and all other instruments issued by it shall be authenticated 
by the si gnature of the Member -Secretary, or any other Member as may be authorised by the Board in this 
behalf.  
9. Duties,  powers and functions of Board .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board 
shall have the duty to promote and ensure orderly developm ent of the Special Economic Zones.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the powers and 
functions of the Board shall include — 
(a) granting of approval or rejecting proposal or modifying such proposals for e stablishment of 
the Special Economic Zones;  
(b) granting approval of authorised operations to be carried out in the Special Economic Zones by 
the Developer;  
(c) granting of approval to the Developers or Units (other than the Developers or the Units which 
are exempt from obtaining approval under any law or by the Central Government) for foreign 
collaborations and foreign direct investments (including investments by a person resident outside 
India), in the Special Economic Zone for its development, operation and maintenance;  10 
 (d) granting of approval or rejecting of proposal for providing infrastructure facilities in a Special 
Economic Zone or modifying such proposals;  
(e) granting, notwithstanding anything contained in the Industries (Development and Regulation) 
Act, 1951 (65 of 1951), a licence to an industrial undertaking referred to in clause ( d) of section 3 of 
that Act, if such undertaking is established, as a whole or part thereof, or proposed to be established, 
in a Special Economic Zone;  
(f) suspension of the letter of approval granted to a Developer and appointment of an 
Administrator under sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(g) disposing of appeals preferred under sub -section ( 4) of section 15;  
(h) disposing of appeals preferred under sub -sectio n (4) of section 16;  
(i) performing such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central Government.  
(3) The Board may, if so required for the purposes of this Act or any other law for the time being in 
force relating to Special Economic Zones, by notification, decide as to whether a particular activity 
constitutes manufacture as defined in clause ( r) of section 2 and such decision of the Board shall be 
binding on all Ministries and Departments of the Central Government.  
(4) The Board may delegate s uch powers and functions as it may deem fit to one or more 
Development Commissioners for effective and proper discharge of the functions of the Board.  
(5) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Board shall, in exercise of its 
powers  or the performance of its functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of 
policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time.  
(6) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or  not shall be final.  
10. Suspension of letter of approval and transfer of Special Economic Zone in certain cases .—
(1) If, at any time, the Board is of the opinion that a Devel oper— 
(a) is unable to discharge the functions or perform the duties imposed on him by or under the 
provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder; or  
(b) has persistently defaulted in complying with any direction given by the Board under this Act; 
or 
(c) has violated the terms and conditions of the letter of approval; or  
(d) whose f inancial position is such that he is unable to fully and efficiently discharge the duties 
and obligations imposed on him by the letter of approval, and   
the circumstances exist which render it necessary for it in public interest so to do, the Board may, on  
application, or with the consent of the Developer, or otherwise, for reasons to be recorded in writing, 
suspend the letter of approval, granted to the Developer for a whole or part of his area established as 
Special Economic Zone, for a period not exceedi ng one year and appoint an Administrator to discharge 
the functions of the Developer in accordance with the terms and conditions of the letter of approval and 
manage the Special Economic Zone accordingly.  
(2) Consequent upon appointment of an Administrator , the management of the Special Economic 
Zone of the Developer referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall vest in the Administrator.  
(3) No letter of approval shall be suspended under sub -section ( 1) unless the Board has given to the 
Developer not less than thre e months' notice, in writing, stating the grounds on which it proposes to 
suspend the letter of approval, and has considered any cause shown by the Developer within the period of 
that notice, against the proposed suspension.  
(4) The Board may, instead of s uspending the letter of approval under sub -section ( 1), permit it to 
remain in force subject to such further terms and conditions as it thinks fit to impose, and any further 
terms or conditions so imposed shall be binding upon and be complied with by the D eveloper and shall be 
of like force and effect as if they were contained in the letter of approval.  11 
 (5) In case the Board suspends a letter of approval under this section, it shall serve a notice of 
suspension upon the Developer and fix a date on which the  suspension shall take effect.  
(6) Upon suspension of the letter of approval under sub -section ( 1), the Special Economic Zone of the 
Developer referred to in sub -section ( 5) shall vest in the Administrator under sub -section ( 2) for a period 
not exceeding o ne year or up to the date on which the letter of approval for such Special Economic Zone 
is transferred, whichever is earlier, in accordance with the provisions contained in sub -sections ( 7) and 
(9), as the case may be.  
(7) Where the Board has given notice  for suspension of letter of approval under sub -section ( 5), the 
Developer may, after prior approval of the Board, transfer his letter of approval to any person who is 
found eligible by the Board for grant of such approval.  
(8) If at any time, it appears t o the Board that the purpose of the order appointing the Administrator 
has been fulfilled or that for any reason it is undesirable that the order of appointment should remain in 
force, the Board may cancel the order and thereupon the Administrator shall be  divested of the 
management of the Special Economic Zone which shall, unless otherwise directed by the Board, again 
vest in the person, being the Developer, in whom it was vested immediately prior to the date of 
appointment of the Administrator.  
(9) Where the Board suspends the letter of approval, under this section, in respect of any Developer, 
the following provisions shall apply, namely: — 
(a) the Board shall invite applications for transferring the letter of approval of the Developer, 
whose appro val has been suspended and select the person or persons, in accordance with the 
procedure as may be prescribed, to whom the letter of approval of the Developer in the Special 
Economic Zone may be transferred;  
(b) upon selection of person or persons under s ub-clause ( a), the Board may, by notice in writing, 
require the Developer to transfer his letter of approval in a Special Economic Zone to the person or 
persons so selected and thereupon the Developer shall transfer his interests, rights and liabilities in  the 
Special Economic Zone to any of the persons (hereafter in this section referred to as the “transferee ”) 
who has been selected by the Board on such terms and conditions and consideration as may be agreed 
upon between the Developer and the transferee;  
(c) all the rights, duties, obligations and liabilities of the Developer, on and from the date of 
suspension of letter of approval or on and from the date, if earlier, on which his letter of approval in 
the Special Economic Zone of the Developer has been tr ansferred to the transferee, shall cease 
absolutely except for any liabilities which have accrued prior to that date;  
(d) the Board may make such interim arrangements in regard to the operation of the Special 
Economic Zone as may be considered appropriate;  
(e) the Administrator shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as the Board may 
direct.  
(10) The Board may, in order to promote export or to protect the interest of Units or in the public 
interest, issue such directions or formulate such sc heme as it may consider necessary for operation of the 
Special Economic Zone.  
CHAPTER IV  
DEVELOPMENT  COMMISSIONER  
11. Development Commissioner .—(1) The Central Government may appoint any of its officers not 
below the rank of Deputy Secretary to the Government of India as the Development Commissioner of one 
or more Special Economic Zones.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such officers and other employees as it considers necessary 
to assist the Development Commissioner in the performance of his f unctions in the Special Economic 
Zones established by a Developer (other than the Central Government) under this Act on such terms and 
conditions as it deems fit.  12 
 (3) Every Development Commissioner, officer and other employee shall be entitled to such sala ry and 
allowances and subject to such terms and conditions of service in respect of leave, pension, provident 
fund and other matters as may, from time to time, be specified by the Central Government.  
12. Functions of Development Commissioner .—(1) Every Dev elopment Commissioner shall take 
all steps in order to discharge his functions under this Act to ensure speedy development of the Special 
Economic Zone and promotion of exports therefrom.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions,  the Development Commissioner 
shall— 
(a) guide the entrepreneurs for setting up of Units in the Special Economic Zone;  
(b) ensure and take suitable steps for effective promotion of exports from the Special Economic 
Zone;  
(c) ensure proper co -ordination with the Central Government or State Government Departments 
concerned or agencies with respect to, or for the purposes, of clauses ( a) and ( b); 
(d) monitor the performance of the Developer and the Units in a Special Economic Zone;  
(e) discharge such other functions as may be assigned to him by the Central Government under 
this Act or any other law for the time being in force; and  
(f) discharge such other functions as may be delegated to him by the Board.  
(3) Every Development Commissioner shall be overall i n-charge of the Special Economic Zone and 
shall exercise administrative control and supervision over the officers and employees appointed under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 11 (including the officials deputed to such Special Economic Zone) to discharge 
any o f the functions under this Act.  
(4) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) to ( 3), every Development Commissioner 
shall discharge such functions and exercise such powers as may be delegated to him by a general or 
special order by the Centr al Government or the State Government concerned, as the case may be.  
(5) Every Development Commissioner may call for such information from a Developer or Unit from 
time to time as may be necessary to monitor the performance of the Developer or the Unit, as  the case 
may be.  
(6) The Development Commissioner may delegate any or all of his powers or functions to any of the 
officers employed under him.  
CHAPTER V  
SINGLE  WINDOW  CLEARANCE  
13. Cons titution of Approval Committee .—(1) The Ce ntral Government shall, — 
(a) in the case of existing Special Economic Zones, within six months from the date of 
commencement of this Act;  
(b) in case of other Special Economic Zones established after the commencement of this Act, 
within six months from the date of establishment of s uch Special Economic Zone,  
by notification, constitute a Committee for every Special Economic Zone, to be called the Approval 
Committee to exercise the powers and perform the functions specified in section 14.  
(2) Every Approval Com mittee shall consist of — 
(a) the Development Commissioner —Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(b) two officers of the Central Government to be nominated by that Government —Members,  
ex officio ; 
(c) two officers of the Central Government to be nominated by that Government to represent the 
Ministry or Department dealing with revenue —Members, ex officio ; 13 
 (d) one officer of the Central Government to be nominated by that Government to represent the 
Ministry or Department dealing with econom ic affairs (financial services) —Member, ex officio ; 
(e) two officers of the State Government concerned to be nom inated by that State Government —
Members, ex officio ; 
(f) a representa tive of the Developer concerned —Special invitee.  
(3) For the purpose of exercising its powers and performing its functions, the App roval Committee 
may invite to its meetings, such persons as the Committee deems fit, whose assistance or advice it may 
consider necessary.  
(4) Every Approval Committee shall meet at such times and places as it considers necessary and shall 
have the power t o regulate its own procedure.  
(5) One -half of the total Members of the Approval Committee shall form a quorum, and all the acts of 
the Approval Committee shall be decided by a general consensus of the Members present:  
Provided that in case the Approval Com mittee is unable to decide any matter by a general consensus, 
such matter shall stand referred to the Boar d of Approval for its decision.  
(6) No act of the Approval Committee shall be called in question on the ground merely of existence 
of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Approval Committee.  
(7) All orders and decisions of the Approval Committee and all other communications issued by it 
shall be authenticated by the signature of the Chairperson or any other member as may be authoris ed by 
the Approval Committee in this behalf.  
(8) The term of office of an ex officio  Member shall come to an end as soon as he ceases to hold 
office by virtue of which he was so nominated.  
14. Powers and f unctions of Approval Committee .—(1) Every Approval Committee may discharge 
the functions and exercise the powers in respect of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) approve the import or procurement of goods from the Domestic Tariff Area, in the Special 
Economic Zone for carrying on the authorised operations  by a Developer;  
(b) approve the providing of services by a service provider, from outside India, or from the 
Domestic Tariff Area, for carrying on the authorised operations by the Developer, in the Special 
Economic Zone;  
(c) monitor the utilisation of goo ds or services or warehousing or trading in the Special Economic 
Zone;  
(d) approve, modify or reject proposals for setting up Units for manufacturing or rendering 
services or warehousing or trading in the Special Economic Zone [other than the grant of lice nce 
under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2) of section 9] in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 8) 
of section 15:  
Provided that where the Approval Committee is unable to decide whether a particular process 
constitutes manufacture or not it shall re fer the same to the Board of Approval for decision;  
(e) allow, on receipt of approval under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 9, foreign 
collaborations and foreign direct investments (including investments by a person outside India) for 
setting up a Unit;  
(f) monitor and supervise compliance of conditions subject to which the letter of approval or 
permission, if any, has been granted to the Developer or entrepreneur; and  
(g) perform such other functions as may be entrusted to it by the Central Government or the State 
Government concerned, as the case may be.  
(2) The Approval Committee shall not discharge such functions and exercise such powers referred to 
in sub -section ( 1) in relation to a Developer, being the Central Government, as may be specified, by 
notifica tion, by the Central Government : 14 
 Provided that till such time, the Approval Committee is constituted, the concerned Development 
Commissioner shall discharge all functions and exercise all powers of the Approval Committee.  
15. Setting up of Un it.—(1) Any person, who intends to set up a Unit for carrying on the authorised 
operations in a Special Economic Zone, may submit a proposal to the Development Commissioner 
concerned in such form and manner containing such particulars as may be pre scribed:  
Provided that an existing Unit shall be deemed to have been set up in accordance with the provisions 
of this Act and such Units shall not r equire approval under this Act.  
(2) On receipt of the proposal under sub -section ( 1), the Development Commis sioner shall submit the 
same to the Approval Committee for its approval.  
(3) The Approval Committee may, either approve the proposal without modification, or approve the 
proposal with modifications subject to such terms and conditions as it may deem fit to  impose, or reject 
the proposal in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 8): 
Provided that in case of modification or rejection of a proposal, the Approval Committee shall afford 
a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the person concerned and after recording the reasons, either 
modify or reject the proposal.  
(4) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Approval Committee, made under sub -section ( 3), may 
prefer an appeal to the Board within such time as may be prescribed.  
(5) No appeal shall be a dmitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the time prescribed therefor:  
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period prescribed therefor if the 
appellant satisfies the Board that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the  appeal within the 
prescribed time.  
(6) Every appeal made under sub -section ( 4) shall be in such form and shall be accompanied by a 
copy of the order appealed against and by such fees as may be prescribed.  
(7) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shall  be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that before disposing of an appeal, the appellant shall be given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard.  
(8) The Ce ntral Government may prescribe, — 
(a) the requirements (including the period for which a Unit may be set up) subject to which the 
Approval Committee shall approve, modify or reject any proposal referred to in sub -section ( 3); 
(b) the terms and conditions, subject to which the Unit shall undertake the authorised operations 
and it s obligations and entitleme nts. 
(9) The Development Commissioner may, after approval of the proposal referred to in sub -section 
(3), grant a letter of approval to the person concerned to set up a Unit and undertake such operations 
which the Development Commissioner may authorise and  every such operation so authorised shall be 
mentioned in the letter of approval.  
16. Cancellation of lett er of approval to entrepreneur .—(1) The Approval Committee may, at any 
time, if it has any reason or cause to believe that the entrepreneur has persistently contravened any of the 
terms and conditions or its obligations subject to which the letter of approval was granted to the 
entrepreneur, cancel the letter of approval:  
Provided that no such letter of approval shall be cancelled unless the entre preneur has been afforded a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
(2) Where the letter of approval has been cancelled under sub -section ( 1), the Unit shall not, from the 
date of such cancellation, be entitled to any exemption, concession, benefit or deduc tion available to it, 
being a Unit, under this Act.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the entrepreneur whose letter of approval has been 
cancelled under sub -section ( 1), shall remit, the exemption, concession, drawback and any other bene fit 15 
 availed by him in respect of the capital goods, finished goods lying in stock and unutilised raw materials 
relatable to his Unit, in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(4) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Approval Committee made under sub -section  (1), may 
prefer an appeal to the Board within such time as may be prescribed.  
(5) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the time prescribed therefor:  
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period prescribed therefor if the 
appellant satisfies the Board that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the 
prescribed time.  
(6) Every appeal made under sub -section ( 4) shall be in such form and shall be accompanied by a 
copy of the orde r appealed against and by such fees as may be prescribed.  
(7) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that before disposing of an appeal, the appellant shall be given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard.  
17. Setting up and operation of Offshore Banking Unit .—(1) An application for setting up and 
operation of an Offshore Banking Unit in a Special Economic Zone may be made to the Reserve Bank in 
such form and manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the Reserve Bank shall, if it is satisfied that the 
applicant fulfils all the conditions specified under sub -section ( 3), grant permission to such applicant for 
setting up and operation of an Offshore Banking Unit.  
(3) The Reserve Bank may, by notification, specify the terms and conditions subject to which an 
Offshore Banking Unit may be set up and operated in the Special Economic Zone.  
18. Setting up of Internati onal Financial Services Centre .—(1) The Central Government m ay 
approve the setting up of an International Financial Services Centre in a Special Economic Zone and 
prescribe the requirements for setting up and operation of such Centre:  
Provided that the Central Government shall approve only one International Financi al Services Centre 
in a Special Economic Zone.  
(2) The Central Government may, subject to such guidelines as may be framed by the Reserve Bank, 
the Securities and Exchange Board of India, the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority and 
such other concerned authorities, as it deems fit, prescribe the requirements for setting up and the terms 
and conditions of the operation of Units in an International Financial Services Centre.  
19. Single  application form, return, etc .—Notwithstanding anything conta ined in any other law for 
the time being in force, the Centr al Government may, if required, — 
(a) prescribe a single application form for obtaining any licence, permission or registration or 
approval by a Developer, or an entrepreneur under one or more Cent ral Acts;  
(b) authorise the Board, the Development Commissioner or Approval Committee, to exercise the 
powers of the Central Government on matters relating to the development of a Special Economic 
Zone or setting up and operation of Units;  
(c) prescribe a single form for furnishing returns or information by a Developer or an 
entrepreneur under one or more Central Acts.  
20. Agency to inspect .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, the Central Government may, by notification, specify any officer or agency to carry out surveys or 
inspections for securing of compliance with the provisions of any Central Act by a Developer or an 
entrepreneur, as the case may be, and such officer or agency shall submit verification an d compliance 
reports, in such manner and within such time as may be specified in the said notification.  
21. Single enforcement officer o r agency for notified offences .—(1) The Central Government may, 
by notification, specify any act or omission made punish able under any Central Act, as notified offence 
for th e purposes of this Act.  16 
 (2) The Central Government may, by general or special order, authorise any officer or agency to be 
the enforcement officer or agency in respect of any notified offence or offence s committed in a Special 
Economic Zone.  
(3) Every officer or agency authorised under sub -section ( 2) shall have all the corresponding powers 
of investigation, inspection, search or seizure as is provided under the relevant Central Act in respect of 
the notified offences.  
22. Investigation, inspection, search o r seizure .—The agency or officer, specified under section 20 
or section 21, may, with prior intimation to the Development Commissioner concerned, carry out the 
investigation, inspection, search or s eizure in the Special Economic Zone or in a Unit if such agency or 
officer has reasons to believe (reasons to be recorded in writing) that a notified offence has been 
committed or is likely to be committed in the Special Economic Zone:  
Provided that no investigation, inspection, search or seizure shall be carried out in a Special 
Economic Zone by any agency or officer other than those referred to in sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) 
of section 21 without prior approval of the Development Commissioner co ncerned:  
Provided further that any officer or agency, if so authorised by the Central Government, may carry 
out the investigation, inspection, search or seizure in the Special Economic Zone or Unit without prior 
intimation or approval of the Development Co mmissioner.  
23. Designated Courts to try suits and notified off ences .—(1) The State Government, in which the 
Special Economic Zone is situated, may, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court of 
that Stat e, designate one or more courts — 
(a) to try all suits of a civil nature arising in the Special Economic Zone; and  
(b) to try notified offences committed in the Special Economic Zone.  
(2) No court, other than the court designated under sub -section ( 1), shall try any suit or conduct the 
trial of any notified offence referred to in that sub -section:  
Provided that the courts, in which any suit of a civil nature in a Special Economic Zone had been filed 
before the commencement of this Act, shall continue to try such suit after such commencement:  
Provided further that the courts, in which any trial of any notified offence is being conducted before 
the commencement of this Act, shall continue to conduct the trial of such offence after the 
commencement of this Act:  
Provided also that the courts compe tent to try any notified offence, before the commencement of this 
Act, shall conduct the trial in respect of such offence after the commencement of this Act until the courts 
have been designated under sub -section ( 1) and all such cases relating to such tri als shall thereafter be 
transferred to such courts so designated which shall conduct the trial from the stage at which such cases 
were so transferred.  
24. Appeal to High Court .—Any person aggrieved, by any decision or order of the court designated 
under sub-section ( 1) of section 23, may file an appeal to the High Court within sixty days from the date 
of communication of the decision or order of the courts so designated to him on any question of fact or 
law arising out of such orders:  
Provided that the Hi gh Court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from filing an appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further period not exceeding sixty 
days.  
Explanation .—In section 23 and in this section “High Court ” means the High Court of the State in 
which the Special Economic Zone is situated.  
25. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence has been committed by a company, every 
person, who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company 
for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of 
the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  17 
 Provided that nothing contained in this su b-section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided for the offence, if he has proved that the offence was committed without his 
knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwit hstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence has been committed by a 
company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manage r, secretary or other officer of the company, 
such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall 
be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this se ction,— 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
CHAPTER VI  
SPECIAL FISCAL PROVISIONS FOR SPECIAL  ECONOMI C ZONES  
26. Exemptions, drawbacks and concessions  to every Developer and entrepreneur .—(1) Subject 
to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), every Developer and the entrepreneur shall be entitled to the 
following exemptions, dra wbacks and concessions, namely: — 
(a) exemption from any duty of customs, under the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962) or the 
Customs Tariff Act, 1975 (51 of 1975) or any other law for the time being in force, on goods 
imported into, or services provided in, a Special Economic Zone or a Unit, to carry on the authori sed 
operations by the Developer or entrepreneur;  
(b) exemption from any duty of customs, under the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962) or the 
Customs Tariff Act, 1975 (51 of 1975) or any other law for the time being in force, on goods exported 
from, or services  provided, from a Special Economic Zone or from a Unit, to any place outside India;  
(c) exemption from any duty of excise, under the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) or the 
Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 (5 of 1986) or any other law for the time being  in force, on goods 
brought from Domestic Tariff Area to a Special Economic Zone or Unit, to carry on the authorised 
operations by the Developer or entrepreneur;  
(d) drawback or such other benefits as may be admissible from time to time on goods brought or  
services provided from the Domestic Tariff Area into a Special Economic Zone or Unit or services 
provided in a Special Economic Zone or Unit by the service providers located outside India to carry 
on the authorised operations by the Developer or entrepren eur; 
(e) exemption from service tax under Chapter V of the Finance Act, 1994 (32 of 1994) on taxable 
services provided to a Developer or Unit to carry on the authorised operations in a Special Economic 
Zone;  
(f) exemption from the securities transaction ta x leviable under section 98 of the Finance (No. 2) 
Act, 2004 (23 of 2004) in case the taxable securities transactions are entered into by a non -resident 
through the International Financial Services Centre;  
(g) exemption from the levy of taxes on the sale o r purchase of goods other than newspapers 
under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) if such goods are meant to carry on the authorised 
operations by the Developer or entrepreneur.  
(2) The Central Government may prescribe, the manner in which, and,  the terms and conditions 
subject to which, the exemptions, concessions, drawback or other benefits shall be granted to the 
Developer or entrepreneur under sub -section ( 1). 
27. Provisions of Income -tax Act, 1961 to apply with certain modification in relati on t o 
Developers and entrepreneurs .—The provisions of the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), as in force 
for the time being, shall apply to, or in relation to, the Developer or entrepreneur for carrying on the 18 
 authorised operations in a Special Economic Zo ne or Unit subject to the modifications specified in the 
Second Schedule.  
28. Duration of goods or services in  Special Economic Zones .—The Central Government may 
prescribe the period during which any goods brought into, or services provided in, any Unit or  Special 
Economic Zone without payment of taxes, duties or cess shall remain or continue to be provided in such 
Unit or Special Economic Zone.  
29. Transfer of ownership and removal of goods .—The transfer of ownership in any goods brought 
into, or produced or manufactured in, any Unit or Special Economic Zone or removal thereof from such 
Unit or Zone shall be allowed, subject to such terms and conditions as the Central Government may 
prescribe.  
30. Domestic clearance by Units .—Subject to the conditions specified in the rules made by the 
Central Government in this behalf, — 
(a) any goods removed from a Special Economic Zone to the Domestic Tariff Area shall be 
chargeable to duties of customs including anti -dumping, countervailing and safeguard duties und er 
the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 (51 of 1975), where applicable, as leviable on such goods when 
imported; and  
(b) the rate of duty and tariff valuation, if any, applicable to goods removed from a Special 
Economic Zone shall be at the rate and tariff valuati on in force as on the date of such removal, and 
where such date is not ascertainable, on the date of payment of duty.  
CHAPTER VII  
SPECIAL  ECONOMIC  ZONE AUTHORITY  
31. Constitution of Authority .— (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute, for every Special Economic Zone established by it before the commencement of this 
Act or which may be established after such commencement by the Central Government, an Authority to 
be called the ...... (name of the Special Eco nomic Zone) Authority to exercise the powers conferred on, 
and discharge the functions assigned to, it under this Act:  
Provided that in respect of existing Special Economic Zones established by the Central Government, 
such Authority shall be constituted by  the Central Government within six months from the date of 
commencement of this Act:  
Provided further that until such Authority is constituted, the person or the authority (including the 
Development Commissioner) exercising control over such existing Speci al Economic Zones shall 
continue to exercise such control over the Special Economic Zone till the Authority is constituted.  
(2) Every Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and 
a common seal, with a power, su bject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of 
property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue and be sued.  
(3) The head office of every Authority shall be at such place as the Central Government  may specify 
in the notification referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
(4) Any Authority may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, establish branch 
offices at other places in India.  
(5) Every Authority shall consist of — 
(a) the Development Commi ssioner of the Special Economic Zone over which the Autho rity 
exercises its jurisdiction —Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(b) two officers of the Central Government to be nominated by that Government having 
knowledge of, or experience in, dealing with matters rel ating to Special Economic Zones —Members, 
ex officio ; 
(c) an officer of the Government of India in the Ministry or Department dealing with commerce 
on matters re lating to Special Economic Zone —Member, ex officio ; 19 
 (d) not more than two persons, being entrepr eneurs or their nominee, to be nomi nated by the 
Central Government —Members, ex officio ; 
(6) The term of office of the Members of an Authority (other than ex officio  Members) and the 
manner of filling of vacancies shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(7) An Authority may associate with itself in such manner, subject to such conditions and for such 
purposes as may be prescribed, any person whose assistance or advice it requires in discharging its 
functions effectively and that person shall be entitled to recei ve such allowances or fees as may be fixed 
by the Authority.  
(8) One -third of the total Members of the Authority shall form a quorum, and all the acts of the 
Authority shall be decided by a majority of the Members present.  
(9) No act or proceeding of an Authority shall be invalidated merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Authority; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the Authority; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of the case.  
(10) Every Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in 
regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including quor um at such meetings) as may be 
prescribed.  
32. Officer s of Authority and other staff .—(1) Every Development Commissioner of the Special 
Economic Zone, for which he is appointed as such, shall be the chief executive of the Authority 
concerned and exercise s uch powers and perform such functions as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every Authority may, in addition to the officers and employees transferred to it under section 33, 
appoint such other officers and employees, as it considers necessary for the efficient discha rge of its 
functions under this Act.  
(3) The method of appointment, the conditions of service and the scales of pay and allowances of 
such other officers and employees appointed under sub -section ( 2) shall be such as may be prescribed.  
33. Special provision for transfer of officers o r other employees to Authority .—(1) It shall be 
lawful for the Central Government to transfer to each Authority, by order, and with effect from such date 
or dates, as may be specified in the order, any officer or other e mployee holding office as such (except 
officers or other employees on deputation) in the existing Special Economic Zone concerned:  
Provided that the scale of pay of the post to which such officer or other employee is transferred shall 
not be lower than the  scale of pay of the post which he was holding immediately before such transfer and 
the other terms and conditions of service (including pension, leave, provident fund and medical benefits) 
of the post to which he is transferred shall not be less favourabl e than the terms and conditions of service 
in relation to the post held by him immediately before such transfer:  
Provided further that if, immediately before the date of his transfer, any such officer or other 
employee is officiating in a higher post under  the Central Government either in a leave vacancy or in any 
vacancy of a specified duration, his pay and other allowances, if any, on transfer, shall be protected for 
the unexpired period of such vacancy and thereafter he shall be entitled to the scale of pay applicable to 
the post under the Central Government to which he would have reverted but for his transfer to the 
Authority.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether the prescribed terms and conditions of service in respect of 
any matter, including remun eration, pension, leave, provident fund and medical benefits, are less 
favourable than those attached to the post held by an officer or other employee immediately before his 
transfer to the Authority, the decision of the Central Government in the matter sh all be final.  
34. Functions of Authority .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, it shall be the duty of each 
Authority to undertake such measures as it thinks fit for the development, operation and management of 
the Special Economic Zone for which it is constituted.  20 
 (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the measures referred to 
therein may provide for — 
(a) the development of infrastructure in the Special Economic Zone;  
(b) promoting exports from the Special Econo mic Zone;  
(c) reviewing the functioning and performanc e of the Special Economic Zone;  
(d) levy user or service charges or fees or rent for the use of properties belonging to the 
Authority;  
(e) performing such other functions as may be prescribed.  
35. Grants a nd loans by Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to every Authority by way of grants and 
loans or such sums of money as that Government may think fit for being utilis ed for the purposes of this 
Act. 
36. Constituti on of Fund and its application .—(1) There shall be established by every Authority a 
Fund to be called the.......... (the name of the Special Economic Zone concerned) Authority Fund and there 
shall be credited thereto— 
(a) all sums of money, which the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide to the Authority;  
(b) all grants or loans that may be made to the Authority under this Act;  
(c) all sums received on  account of user or service charges or fees or rent for the use of properties 
belonging to the Authority;  
(d) all sums received by the Authority from such other sources as may be decided upon by the 
Central Government.  
(2) The Fu nd shall be applied for mee ting— 
(a) the salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the members, officers and other employees 
of the Authority;  
(b) the expenses of the Authority in the discharge of its functions under section 34;  
(c) the repayment of any loan;  
(d) the expenses o n objects and for purposes authorised by this Act;  
(e) any other administrative expenses of the Authority.  
37. Accounts and audit .—(1) Every Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of every Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
at such intervals as may be sp ecified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any person appointed by him in connection with 
the audit of the accounts of the Authority shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India generally has in connection 
with the audit of the Government accounts and, in p articular, shall have the right to demand the 
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of 
the offices of the Authority.  
(4) The accounts of every Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Audit or-General of India or 
any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and the Central Government shall cause the same to be laid before 
each House of Parliament.  21 
 38. Di rections by Central Government .—Every Authority shall be bound to carry out such 
directions as may be issued to it from time to time by the Central Government for the efficient 
administration of this Act.  
39. Returns and reports .—(1) Every Authority  shall furnish to the Central Government at such time 
and in such form and manner as may be prescribed or as the Central Government may direct, such returns 
and statements and such particulars in regard to the promotion and development of exports and the 
operation and maintenance of the Special Economic Zone and Units as the Central Government may, 
from time to time, require.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), every Authority shall, as soon as possible, 
after the end of each financi al year, submit to the Central Government a report in such form and before 
such date, as may be prescribed, giving a true and full account of its activities, policy and programmes 
during the previous financial year.  
(3) A copy of every report received unde r sub -section ( 2) shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is 
received, before each House of Parliament.  
40. Power to supersede Authority .—(1) If at any time the Central Government is of the opinion that 
an Authority is unable to perform, or has persiste ntly made default in the performance of the duty 
imposed on it by or under this Act or has exceeded or abused its powers, or has wilfully or without 
sufficient cause, failed to comply with any direction issued by the Central Government under section 38, 
the Central Government may, by notification, supersede that Authority for such period not exceeding six 
months, as may be specified in the notification:  
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub -section, the Central Government shall give 
reasonable time to that Authority to make representation against the proposed supersession and shall 
consider the representations, if any, of the Authority.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section ( 1) superseding the Authority, — 
(a) the Chairperson and other Members of the Authority shall, notwithstanding that their term of 
office has not expired as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions o f this Act, be 
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Authority shall, during the period of supersession, be 
exercised and performed by such person or persons as the Central Government may direct;  
(c) all property vested in the Authority shall, dur ing the period of supersession, vest in the Central 
Government.  
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under  
sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may — 
(a) extend the period of supersession for such further period not exceeding six months; or  
(b) reconstitute the Authority in the manner provided in section 31.  
41 Members, officers and other employees of Authority to be public servants .—All Members, 
officers and other employees of every Authority, shal l, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of 
any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, be deemed to be public servants within the 
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
42. Refer ence of dispute .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, if — 
(a) any dispute of civil nature arises among two or more entrepreneurs or two or more Developers 
or between an entrepreneur and a Developer in the Special Economic Zone; and  22 
 (b) the court or the courts to try suits in respect of such dispute had not been designated under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 23,  
such dispute shall be referred to arbitration:  
Provided that no dispute shall be referred to the arb itration on or after the date of the designation 
of the court or courts under sub -section ( 1) of section 23.  
(2) Where a dispute has been referred to arbitration under sub -section ( 1), the same shall be settled or 
decided by the arbitrator to be appointed by the Central Government.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided under this Act, the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996  (26 of 1996 ) shall apply to all arbitration under this Act as if the proceedings for arbitration were 
referred in settlement or decision under the provisions of the Arbitration and Con ciliation Act, 1996 . 
43. Limitation .—(1) The period of limitation in the case of any dispute which is required to be 
referred to arbitration shall be regulated by the provisions of the L imitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), as if 
the dispute was a suit and the arbitrator is civil court.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the arbitrator may admit a dispute after the 
expiry of the period of limitation, if the applicant satisfies the arbitrator that he had sufficient cause for 
not referring the dispute within such period.  
44. Applicability of provisions of this Act to e xisting Special Economic Zones .—All the 
provisions of this Act (except sections 3 and 4) shall, as far a s may be, apply to every existing Special 
Economic Zone.  
45. Person to whom a communicat ion may be sent under this Act .—A communication by any 
competent authority or person under this Act may be sent to the person who has the ultimate control over 
the affa irs of the Special Economic Zone or Unit or where the said affairs are entrusted to a manager, 
director, chairperson, or managing director, or to any other officer, by whatever name called, such 
communication may be sent to such manager, director, chairper son, or managing director or any other 
officer.  
46. Identity Card.—Every person, whether employed or residing or required to be present in a 
Special Economic Zone, shall be provided an identity card by every Development Commissioner of such 
Special Economi c Zone, in such form and containing such particulars as may be prescribed.  
47. Authorities responsible for administration .—Any authority which has been conferred upon any 
power, or, is, required to discharge any function under any Central or State Act, may , subject to the 
provisions of this Act, exercise such power or discharge such functions in any Special Economic Zone 
under that Act.  
48. Protection  of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central  Government or any Chairperson, Member, officer or other employee of the Board 
or the Approval Committee or the Authority or Development Commissioner for anything done or 
intended to be done in good faith under this Act.  
49. Power to modify provisions of t his Act or other enactments in rela tion to Special Economic 
Zones .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that any of the provision of this Act 
(other than sections 54 to 56) or any other Central Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder or any 
notification or order issued or direction given thereunder (other than the provisions relating to making of 
the rules or regulations ) specified in the notification — 
(a) shall not apply to a Special Economic Zone or a class of Special Econ omic Zones or all 
Special Economic Zones; or  
(b) shall apply to a Special Economic Zone or a class of Special Economic Zones or all Special 
Economic Zones only with such exceptions, modification and adaptation, as may be specified in the 
notification:  
Prov ided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to any modifications of any Central 
Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder or any notification or order issued or direction given or 
scheme made thereunder so far as such modification, rule, re gulation, notification, order or direction 23 
 or scheme relates to the matters relating to trade unions, industrial and labour disputes, welfare of 
labour including conditions of work, provident funds, employers' liability, workmen's compensation, 
invalidity and old age pensions and maternity benefits applicable in any Special Economic Zones.  
(2) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub -section ( 1), shall be laid in draft 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
disapproving the issue of the notification or both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
notification, the notification shall not be issued or, as the case may be, shall be issued only in such 
modified form as may be agreed upon by both the Houses.  
50. Power of State Go vernment to grant exemption .—The State Government may, for the 
purposes of giving effect to the provisions of this Act, notify policies for Developers and Units and take 
suitable  steps for enactment of any law — 
(a) granting exemption from the State taxes, levies and duties to the Developer or the 
entrepreneur;  
(b) delegating the powers conferred upon any person or authority under any State Act to the 
Development Commissioner in relation to the Developer or the entrepreneur.  
51. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.  
52. C ertain provisions not to  apply .—(1) The provisions contained in the Chapter XA of the 
Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962) and the Special Economic Zones Rules, 2003 and the Special Economic 
Zones (Customs Procedure) Regulations, 2003 made thereunder shall not, with effect from such da te as 
the Central Government by notification appoint, apply to the Special Economic Zones.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), all offences committed, before the 
commencement of this Act, under any provisions of the Customs Act, 1962  (52 of 1962) and the Special 
Economic Zones Rules, 2003 and the Special Economic Zones (Customs Procedure) Regulations, 2003 
made thereunder, shall continue to be governed by the said Act or rules, as the case may be.  
(3) Anything done or any action taken  or purported to have been done or taken including any rule, 
notification, inspection, order or notice made or issued or any permission or authorisation or exemption 
granted or any document or instrument executed under the said provisions of the Act, rules  and 
regulations referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken or made or issued or granted under the corresponding 
provisions of the Act or rules or regulations referred to in that sub -section.  
53. Special Economic Zones to be ports, airports, inland container depots, land st ations, etc., in 
certain cases .—A Special Economic Zone shall, on and from the appointed day, be deemed to be a 
territory outside  the customs territory of India for the purposes of undertaking the authorised operations.  
(2) A Special Economic Zone shall, with effect from such date as the Central Government may 
notify, be deemed to be a port, airport, inland container depot, land sta tion and land customs stations, as 
the case may be, under section 7 of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962):  
Provided that for the purposes of this section, the Central Government may notify different dates for 
different Special Economic Zones.  
54. Amendment  to First Schedule .—(1) The Central Government may, having regard to the objects 
of this Act, and if it considers necessary or expedient so to do, by notification add to, or as the case may 
be, omit from the First Schedule any enactment specified therein.  
(2) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub -section ( 1), shall be laid in draft 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successi ve sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 24 
 disapproving the issue of the notification or both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
notificatio n, the notification shall not be issued or, as the case may be, shall be issued only in such 
modified form as may be agreed upon by both the Houses.  
55. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the p rovisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the infrastructure facilities necessary for the development of the Specia l Economic Zones 
under clause ( p) and services in the Special Economic Zones under clause ( z) of section 2;  
(b) the period within which the person concerned shall obtain the concurrence of the State 
Government under sub -section ( 3) of section 3;  
(c) the form and the manner in which a proposal may be made and the particulars to be contained 
therein under sub -section ( 5) of section 3;  
(d) the period within which the State Government may forward the proposal together with its 
recommendation under sub -section  (6) of section 3;  
(e) the requirements subject to which the Board may approve, modify or reject the proposal under 
sub-section ( 8) of section 3;  
(f) the period within which the grant of letter of approval shall be communicated to the State 
Government or D eveloper or entrepreneur under sub -section ( 10) of section 3;  
(g) the other requirements for notifying the specifically identified area in a State as a Special 
Economic Zone under sub -section ( 1) of section 4;  
(h) the terms, conditions and limitations subj ect to which the goods or services exported out of, or 
imported into, or procured from the Domestic Tariff Area to, a Special Economic Zone, be exempt 
from payment of taxes, duties, or cess under section 7;  
(i) the procedure for transfer of letter of appro val in case of suspension of letter of approval of a 
Developer under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 9) of section 10;  
(j) the form and the manner in which a proposal may be submitted and the particulars to be 
contained therein under sub -section ( 1) of section 15; 
(k) the time within which a person aggrieved by the order of the Approval Committee may prefer 
an appeal under sub -section ( 4) of section 15;  
(l) the form in which the appeal shall be made and the fees for making such appeal under  
sub-section ( 6) of s ection 15;  
(m) the procedure for disposing of an appeal under sub -section ( 7) of section 15;  
(n) the requirements (including the period for which a Unit may be set up) subject to which the 
proposal may be approved, modified or rejected under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 8) of section 15;  
(o) the terms and conditions for the Unit subject to which it shall undertake authorised operations 
under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 8) of section 15 and the obligations and entitlements of the Unit;  
(p) the time within which  a person aggrieved by the order of the Approval Committee may prefer 
an appeal under sub -section ( 4) of section 16;  
(q) the form in which the appeal shall be made and the fees for making such appeal under  
sub-section ( 6) of section 16;  
(r) the procedure for disposing of an appeal under sub -section ( 7) of section 16;  
(s) the form and the manner in which an application may be made for setting up of an Offshore 
Banking Unit in a Special Economic Zone under sub -section ( 1) of section 17;  25 
 (t) the requirements for setting up and operation of an International Financial Services Centre in a 
Special Economic Zone under sub -section ( 1) of section 18 ; 
(u) the requirements and terms and conditions subject to which a Unit in the International 
Financial Services Centre may be set up and operated in a Special Economic Zone under sub -section 
(2) of section 18;  
(v) the form of single application for obtaining any licence, permission or registration or approval 
under clause ( a) of section 19;  
(w) the form of single return or  information to be furnished by an entrepreneur or Developer 
under clause ( c) of section 19;  
(x) the manner in which and the terms and conditions subject to which the exemptions, 
concessions, draw back or other benefits shall be granted to every Developer and entrepreneur under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 26;  
(y) the period during which any goods brought into, or services provided in, any Special 
Economic Zone shall remain or continue to be provided in such Unit or Special Economic Zone under 
section 28;  
(z) the terms and conditions subject to which transfer of ownership in any goods brought into, or 
produced or manufactured in, any Unit or Special Economic Zone, or removal thereof from such Unit 
or Zone, shall be allowed under section 29;  
(za) the conditions  subject to which the Units shall be entitled to sell the goods manufactured in a 
Special Economic Zone to the Domestic Tariff Area under section 30;  
(zb) the term of office of the Members, other than  ex officio Members, of every Authority and the 
manner o f filling of vacancies under sub -section ( 6) of section 31;  
(zc) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which and the purposes for which any 
person may be associated under sub -section ( 7) of section 31;  
(zd) the times and the places of meetings and the procedure to be followed in the transaction of 
business at the meetings under sub -section ( 10) of section 31;  
(ze) the powers and the functions of every Development Commissioner under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 32;  
(zf) the method of appointment of  officers and other employees of every Authority, conditions of 
their service and the scale of pay and allowances under sub -section ( 3) of section 32;  
(zg) the other functions to be performed by the Authority under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 34; 
(zh) the form in which the accounts and other relevant records of every Authority shall be 
maintained and annual statement of accounts shall be prepared under sub -section ( 1) of section 37;  
(zi) the form and the manner in which and the time at which ev ery Authority shall furnish returns 
and statements and other particulars to the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 39;  
(zj) the form in which and the date before which every Authority shall furnish to the Central 
Government the report of i ts activities, policy and programmes under sub -section ( 2) of section 39;  
(zk) the form in which and the particulars to be contained in the identity cards under section 46;  
(zl) any other matter which, is to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made b y the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive session s, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter ha ve effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 26 
 any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
56. Po wer to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or e xpedient for 
removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiration of two years from the 
date of commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
57. A mendment of certain enactments .—With effect from such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification, appoint, the enactments specified in the Third Schedule shall be amended in the 
manner specified th erein:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed on which the amendments specified in the Third 
Schedule shall apply to a particular Special Economic Zone or a class of Special Economic Zones or all 
Special Economic Zones.  
58. Savings .—All rules made or purporting to have been made or all notifications issued or 
purporting to have been issued under any Central Act relating to the Special Economic Zones shall, in so 
far as they relate to matters for which provision is made in this Act or rules made or n otification issued 
thereunder and are not inconsistent therewith, be deemed to have been made or issued under this Act as if 
this Act had been in force on the date on which such rules were made or notifications were issued and 
shall continue to be in force  unless and until they are superseded by any rules made or notifications issued 
under this Act.   27 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See sections 7 and 54)  
ENACTMENTS   
1. The Agricultural Produce Cess Act, 1940 (27 of 1940).  
2. The Coffee Act, 1942 (7 of 1942).  
3. The Mica Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1946 (22 of 1946).  
4. The Rubber Act, 1947 (24 of 1947).  
5. The Tea Act, 1953 (29 of 1953).  
6. The Salt Cess Act, 1953 (49 of 1953).  
7. The Medicinal and Toilet Preparations (Excise Duties) Act, 1955 (16 of 19 55).  
8. The Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 (58 of 1957).  
9. The Sugar (Regulation of Production) Act, 1961 (55 of 1961).  
10. The Textiles Committee Act, 1963 (41 of 1963).  
11. The Produce Cess Act, 1966 (15 of 1966) .  
12. The Marine Products Export Development Authority Act, 1972 (13 of 1972).  
13. The Coal Mines (Conservation and Development ) Act, 1974 (28 of 1974).  
14. The Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974 (47 of 1974).  
15. The Tobacco Cess Act, 1975 (26 of 19 75).  
16. The Additional Duties of Excise (Textile and Textile Articles) Act, 1978 (40 of 1978).  
17. The Sugar Cess Act, 1982 (3 of 1982).  
18. The Jute Manufactures Cess Act, 1983 (28 of 1983).  
19. The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Cess Act, 1985 (3 of 1986).  
20. The Spices Cess Act, 1986 (11 of 1986).  
21. The Research and Development Cess Act, 1986 (32 of 1986).   28 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 27)  
MODIFICATIONS TO THE INCOME -TAX ACT, 1961  
(43 OF 1961)  
(a) in section 10, —  
(A) in clause ( 15), after sub -clause ( vii), the following clause shall be inserted at the end, n amely:—  
“(viii) any income by way of interest received by a non -resident or a person who is not  ordinarily  
resident, in India on a deposit made on or after the 1st d ay of April, 2005 in an Offshore Banking Unit 
referred to in clause ( u) of section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005; ”; 
(B) in clause ( 23G), after the words, brackets, figures and letters “sub-section ( 4) of section 80 -IA”, 
the words brackets, figu res and letters “or sub -section ( 3) of se ction 80 -IAB” shall be inserted;  
(C) in clause ( 34), the following Explana tion shall be inserted, namely: —  
“Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the dividend referred to in 
section 115-O shall not be included in the total income of the assessee, being a Developer or 
entrepreneur. ”; 
(b) in section 10A,  after sub-section ( 7A), the following sub -section shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(7B) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any undertaking, being a Unit referred to in 
clause ( zc) of section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005, which has begun or begins to 
manufacture or produce articles or things or computer software during the previous year relevant to the 
assessment y ear commencing on or after the 1st day of April, 2006 in any Special Economic Zone. ”; 
(c) after section 10A, the following sec tion shall be inserted, namely: — 
„10AA. Special provisions in respect of newly established Units in Special Economic Zones .—(1) 
Subject to the provisions of this section, in computing the total income of an assessee, being an 
entrepreneur as referred to in clause ( j) of section ( 2) of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005, from his 
Unit, who begins  to manufacture or produce articles  or things or provide any services during the  previous 
year relevant to  any assessment year commencing on or after the 1st day o f April, 2006, a deduction of — 
 (i) hundred per cent. of profits and gains derived from the export, of such articles or things o r 
from services for a period of five consecutive assessment years beginning with the assessment year 
relevant to the previous year in which the Unit begins to manufacture or produce such articles or 
things or provide services, as the case may be, and fifty  per cent. of such profits and gains for further 
five assessment years and thereafter;  
(ii) for the next five consecutive assessment years, so much of the amount not exceeding fifty per 
cent. of the profit as is debited to the profit and loss account of th e previous year in respect of which 
the deduction is to be allowed and credited to a reserve account (to be called the “Special Economic 
Zone Re -investment Reserve Account ”) to be created and utilised for the purposes of the business of 
the assessee in the  manner laid down in sub -section ( 2). 
(2) The deduction under clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 1) shall be allowed only if the following con ditions 
are fulfilled, namely: — 
(a) the amount credited to the Special Economic Zone Re -investment Res erve Account is to be 
utilised— 
(i) for the purposes of acquiring machinery or plant which is first put to use before the expiry 
of a period of three years following the previous year in which the reserve was created; and  
(ii) until the acquisition of the machinery or plant as aforesaid, for the purposes of the 
business of the undertaking other than for distribution by way of dividends or profits or for 
remittance outside India as profits or for the creation of any asset outside India;  29 
 (b) the particulars, as may be specified  by the Central Board of Direct Taxes in this behalf, under 
clause ( b) of sub -section ( IB) of section 10A have been furnished by the assessee in respect of 
machinery or plant along with the return of income for the assessment year relevant to the previous 
year in which such plant or machinery was first put to use.  
(3) Where any amount credited to the Special Economic Zone Re -investment Reserve Account under 
clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) has been utilised for any purpose other than those referred to in sub -section ( 2), the amount so 
utilised; or  
(b) has not been utilised before the expiry of the period specified in sub -clause ( i) of clause ( a) of 
sub-section ( 2), the amount not so utilised,  
shall be deemed to be the profits, — 
(i) in a case referred to  in clause ( a), in the year in which  the amount was so utilised; or  
(ii) in a case referred to in clause ( b), in the year immediately following the period of three years 
specified in sub -clause ( i) of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2), 
and shall be charged to tax accordingly:  
Provided that where in computing the total income of the Unit for any assessment year, its profits and 
gains had not been included by application of the provisions of sub -section ( 7B) of section 10A, the 
undertaking being the Unit shall be  entitled to deduction referred to in this sub -section only for the 
unexpired period of ten consecutive assessment years and thereafter it shall be eligible for deduction from 
income as provided in clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 1): 
Explanation .—For the remov al of doubts, it is hereby declared that an undertaking being the Unit, 
which had already availed before the commencement of the Special Economic Zone Act, 2005, the 
deductions referred to in section 10A for ten consecutive assessment years, such Unit shal l not be eligible 
for deduction  from income under this section:  
Provided further that where a Unit initially located in any free trade zone or export processing zone is 
subsequently located in a Special Economic Zone by reason of conversion of such free trade zone or 
export processing zone into a Special Economic Zone, the period of ten consecutive assessment years 
referred to above shall be reckoned from the assessment year relevant to the previous year in which the 
Unit began to manufacture, or produce or process such articles or things or services in such free trade 
zone or export processing zone:  
Provided also that where a Unit initially located in any free trade zone or export processing zone is 
subsequently located in a Special Economic Zone by reaso n of conversion of such free trade zone or 
export processing zone into a Special Economic Zone and has completed the period of ten consecutive 
assessment years referred to above, it shall not be eligible for deduction from income as provided in 
clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 1) with effect from the 1st day of April, 2006.  
(4) This section applies to any undertaking being the Unit, which has begun or begins to manufacture 
or produce articles or things or services during the previous year relevant to the assessm ent year 
commencing on or after the 1st day of April, 200 6, in any Special Economic Zone.  
(5) Where any undertaking being the Unit which is entitled to the deduction under this section is 
transferred, before the expiry of the period specified in this secti on, to another undertaking, being the Unit 
in a schem e of amalgamation or demerger, — 
(a) no deduction shall be admissible under this section to the amalgamating or the demerged Unit, 
being the company for the previous year in which the amalgamation or the demerger takes place; and  
(b) the provisions of this section shall, as they would have applied to the amalgamating or the 
demerged Unit being the company as if the amalgamation or demerger had not taken place.  30 
 (6) Loss referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 72 or sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3) of section 74, 
in so far as such loss relates to the business of the undertaking, being the Unit shall be allowed to be 
carried forward or set off.  
(7) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the profits derive d from the export of articles or things or 
services (including computer software) shall be the amount which bears to the profits of the business of 
the undertaking, being the Unit, the same proportion as the export turnover in respect of such articles or 
things or services bears to the total turnover of the business carried on by the assessee.  
(8) The provisions of sub -sections ( 5) and ( 6) of section 10A shall apply to the articles or things or 
services referred to in sub -section ( 1) as if— 
(a) for the figures, letters and word “1st April, 2001 ”, the figures, letters and word “1st April , 
2006 ” had been substituted;  
(b) for the word “undertaking ”, the words “undertaking, being the Unit ” had been substituted.  
(9) The provisions of sub -section ( 8) and sub-section ( 10) of section 80 -IA shall, so far as may be, 
apply in relation to the undertaking referred to in this section as they apply for the purposes of the 
undertaking referred to in section 80 -IA. 
Explanation 1. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(i) “export turnover ” means the consideration in respect of export by the undertaking, being the 
Unit of articles or things or services received in, or brought into, India by the assessee but does not 
include freight, telecommunication charges or insurance a ttributable to the delivery of the articles or 
things outside India or expenses, if any, incurred in foreign exchange in rendering of services 
(including computer software) outside India;  
(ii) “export  in relation to the Special Economic Zones ” means taking  goods or providing services 
out of India from a Special Economic Zone by land, sea, air, or by any other mode whether physical 
or otherwise;  
(iii) “manufacture ” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( r) of section 2 of the 
Special Econom ic Zones Act, 2005;  
(iv) “relevant assessment year ” means any assessment year falling within a period of fifteen 
consecutive assessment years referred to in this section;  
(v) “Special Economic Zone ” and “Unit” shall have the same meanings as assigned to th em under 
clause ( za) and ( zc) of section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005.  
Explanation 2 .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the profits and gains derived 
from on site development of computer software (including services for development of software) outside 
India shall be deemed to be the profits and gains derived from the export of computer software outside 
India;  
(d) after section 54G, the following sect ion shall be inserted, namely: — 
 “54GA. Exemption of capital gains on tr ansfer of assets in cases of shifting of industrial undertaking 
from urban ar ea to any Special Economic Zone. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 
54G, where the capital gain arises from the transfer of a capital asset, being machinery or plant or 
building or land or any rights in building or land used for the purposes of the business of an industrial 
undertaking situate in an urban area, effected in the course of, or in consequence of the shifting of such 
industrial undertaking to any Spec ial Economic Zone, whether developed  in any urban area or any other 
area and the assessee has within a period of one year before or three years after the date on which the 
transfer took place, — 
(a) purchased machinery or plant for the purposes of business of the industrial undertaking in the 
Special Economic Zone to which the said undertaking is shifted;  
(b) acquired building or land or constructed building for the purposes of his business in the 
Special Economic Zone;  31 
 (c) shifted the original asset and tra nsferred the establishment of such undertaking to the Special 
Economic Zone; and  
(d) incurred expenses on such other purposes as may be specified in a scheme framed by the 
Central Government for the purposes of this section,  
then, instead of the capital g ain being charged to income -tax as income of the previous year in which the 
transfer took place, it shall, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), be dealt with in accordance with 
the following provisions of  this section, that is to say, — 
(i) if the amount of the capital gain is greater than the cost and expenses incurred in relation to all 
or any of the purposes mentioned in clauses ( a) to ( d) (such cost and expenses being hereafter in this 
section referred to as the new asset), the difference betwee n the amount of the capital gain and the 
cost of the new asset shall be charged under section 45 as the income of the previous year; and for the 
purpose of computing in respect of the new asset any capital gain arising from its transfer within a 
period of three years of its being purchased, acquired, constructed or transferred, as the case may be, 
the cost shall be Nil; or  
(ii) if the amount of the capital gain is equal to, or less than, the cost of the new asset, the capital 
gain shall n ot be charged under  section 45, and for the purpose of computing in respect of the new 
asset any capital gain arising from its transfer within a period of three years of its being purchased, 
acquired, constructed or transferred, as the case may be, the cost shall be reduced by the amount of 
the capital gain.  
Explanation .—In this sub -section,— 
(a) “Special Economic Zone ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( za) of the Special 
Economic Zones Act, 2005;  
(b) “urban area ” means any such area within the limits  of a municipal corporation or municipality 
as the Central Government may, having regard to the population, concentration of industries, need for 
proper planning of the area and other relevant factors, by general or special order, declare to be an 
urban ar ea for the purposes of this sub -section.  
(2) The amount of capital gain which is not appropriated by the assessee towards the cost and 
expenses incurred in relation to all or any of the purposes mentioned in clauses ( a) to ( d) of sub -section 
(1) within one  year before the date on which the transfer of the original asset took place, or which is not 
utilised by him for all or any of the purposes aforesaid before the date of furnishing the return of income 
under section 139, shall be deposited by him before fu rnishing such return [such deposit being made in 
any case not later than the due date applicable in the case of the assessee for furnishing the return of 
income under sub -section ( 1) of section 139] in an account in any such bank or institution as may be 
specified in, and utilised in accordance with, any scheme which the Central Government may, by 
notification, frame in this behalf and such return shall be accompanied by proof of such deposit; and, for 
the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the amount, if any, al ready utilised by the assessee for all or any of the 
aforesaid purposes together with the amount so deposited shall be deemed to be the cost of the new asset:  
Provided that if the amount deposited under this sub -section is not utilised wholly or partly for  all or 
any of the purposes mentioned in clauses ( a) to ( d) of sub -section ( 1) within the period specif ied in that 
sub-section, then, — 
(i) the amount not so utilised shall be charged under section 45 as the income of the previous year 
in which the period of three years from the date of the transfer of the original asset expires; and  
(ii) the assessee shall be entitled to withdraw such amount in accordance with the scheme 
aforesaid. ”; 
(e) in section 80 -IA, after sub-section ( 12), the following sec tion shall  be inserted, namely: — 
“(13) nothing contained in this section shall apply to any Special Economic Zones notified on or 
after the 1st day of April, 2005 in accordance with the scheme referred to in sub -clause ( iii) of clause 
(c) of sub -section ( 4)”.  32 
 (f) after section 80 -IA, the following sec tion shall be inserted, namely: — 
 “80-I AB.  Deductions in respect of profits and gains by an undertaking or enterprise engaged in 
devel opment of Special Economic Zone. —(1) Where the gross total income of an assessee,  being a 
Developer, includes any profits and gains derived by an undertaking or an enterprise from any 
business of  developing a Special Economic Zone, notified on or after the 1 st day of April, 2005 under 
the Special Economic Zone Act, 2005, there shall, in  accordance with and subject to the provisions of 
this section, be allowed, in computing the total income of the assessee, a deduction of an amount 
equal to one hundred per cent. of the profits and gains derived from such business for ten consecutive 
asses sment years.  
(2) The deduction specified in sub -section ( 1) may, at the option of the assessee, be claimed by 
him for any ten consecutive assessment years out of fifteen years beginning from the year in which a 
Special Economic Zone has been notified by th e Central Government:  
Provided that where in computing the total income of any undertaking, being a Developer for any 
assessment year, its profits and gains had not been included by application of the provisions of  
sub-section ( 13) of section 80 -1A, the u ndertaking being the Developer shall be entitled to deduction 
referred to in this section only for the unexpired period of ten consecutive assessment years and 
thereafter it shall be eligible for deduction from income as provided in sub -section ( 1) or  
sub-section ( 2), as the case may be:  
Provided further that in a case where an undertaking, being a Developer who develops a Special  
Economic Zone on or after the 1st day of April, 2005 and transfers the operation and maintenance of 
such Special Economic Zone to another Developer (hereafter in this section referred to as the 
transferee Developer), the deduction under sub -section ( 1) shall be allowed to such transferee 
Developer for the remaining period in the ten consecutive assessment years as if the operation  and 
maintenance were not so transferred to the transferee Developer.  
(3) The provisions of sub -sections ( 5) and sub -sections ( 7) to ( 12) of section 80 -IA shall apply to 
the Special Economic Zones for the purpose of allowing deductions under sub -section ( 1). 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “Developer ” and “Special Economic Zone ” shall 
have the same meanings respectively as assigned to them in clauses ( g) and ( za) of section 2 of the 
Special Economic Zones Act, 2005 ”;  
(g) for section 80LA, the following sectio n shall be substituted, namely: —  
„80LA. Deduction in respect of certain incomes of Offshore Banking Units and International 
Financial Services Centre .—(1) Where the gross total income of an assessee, — 
(i) being a scheduled bank, or, any bank incorporated by or under the laws of a country 
outside India; and having an Offshore Banking Unit in a Special Economic Zone; or  
(ii) being a Unit of an Internati onal Financial Services Centre,  
includes any income referred to in sub -section ( 2), there shall be allowed, in accordance with and 
subject to the provisions of this section, a deduction from such income, of an amount equal to —  
(a) one hundred per cent of such income for five consecutive assessment years beginning 
with the assessment year relevant to the previous year in which the permission, under clause ( a) 
of sub -section ( 1) of section 23 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949  (10 of 1949)  or permission 
or registration under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992  (15 of 1992)  or any 
other relevant law was obtained, and thereafter;  
(b) fifty per cent. of such income for five consecutive assessment years.  
(2) The income referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be the in come — 
(a) from an Offshore Banking Unit in a Special Economic Zone; or  
(b) from the business referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of the Banking Regulation 
Act, 1949  (10 of 1949)  with an undertaking located in a Special Economic Zone or any other 33 
 undertaking which develops, develops and operates or develops, o perates and maintains a Special 
Economic Zone; or  
(c) from any Unit of the International Financial Services Centre from its business for which it 
has been approved for setting up in such a Centre in a Special Economic Zone.  
(3) No deduction under this section shall be allowed unless the assessee furnishes along with the 
return of income, —  
(i) the report, in the form specified by the Central Board of Direct Taxes under clause ( i) of 
sub-section ( 2) of section 80LA, as it stood immediately before its substitution by this section, of 
an accountant as defined in the Explanation  below sub -section ( 2) of section 288, certifying that 
the deduction has been correctly claimed in accordance with the provisions of this section; and  
(ii) a copy of the permission obtained under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 23 of the 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949  (10 of 1949) . 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “International Financial Services Centre ” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in 
clause ( q) of section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005;  
(b) “scheduled bank ” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( e) of section 2 of 
the Reserve Bank of India Act,  1934 (2 of 19 34); 
(c) “Special Economic Zone ” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( za) of 
section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005;  
(d) “Unit” shall have the same meaning as assigned t o it in clause ( zc) of section 2 of the Sp ecial 
Economic  Zones Act, 2005;  
(h) in section 115JB, after sub -section ( 5), the following sub -section shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(6) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the income accrued or arising on or after the 
1st 
day of April, 2005 from any business carried on, or services rendered, by an entrepreneur or a 
Developer, in a Unit or Special Economic Zone, as the case may be. ”. 
(i) in section 115 -0, after sub -section ( 5), the following sub -section shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no tax on distributed profits shall be 
chargeable in respect of the total income of an undertaking or enterprise engaged in developing or 
developing and operating or developing, operating and maintaining a Special Econom ic Zone for any 
assessment year on any amount declared, distributed or paid by such Developer or enterprise, by way 
of dividends (whether  interim or otherwise) on or after the 1 st 
day of April, 2005 out of its current 
income either in the hands of the Developer or enterprise or the person receiving such dividend not 
falling under clause (23 G) of section 10. ”;  
(j) in section 197A, after sub -section ( 1C), the following sub -section shall be inserted, namely: — 
(1D) Notwithstanding anything contained in thi s section, no deduction of tax shall be made by the 
Offshore Banking Unit from the interest paid — 
(a) on deposit made on or after the 1 st 
day of April, 2005, by a non -resident or a person not 
ordinarily resident in India; or  
(b) on borrowings, on or after the 1 st 
day of April, 2005, from a non -resident or a person not 
ordinarily resident in India.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section “Offshore Banking Unit ” shall have the same 
meaning as assigned to it in clause ( u) of section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005.‟.  
 
 
 34 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 57)  
AMENDMENT TO CERTAIN ENACTMENTS  
PART I  
AMENDMENTS TO THE INSURANCE  ACT, 1938  
(4 OF 1938)  
1. In section 2C, in sub -section ( 1), after the third proviso, insert:— 
“Provided also an insurer, being an Indian Insurance Company, insurance co -operative society or 
a body corporate referred to in clause ( c) of this sub -section carrying on the business of insurance, 
may carry on any business of insurance in any Special Economic Zone as defined in clause ( za) of 
section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005. ”. 
2. After section 2C, insert — 
“2CA . Power of Central Gov ernment to apply provisions of this Act to Special Economic 
Zones .— The Central Government may, b y notification, direct that any of the pr ovisions of this 
Act,— 
(a) shall not apply to insurer, being an Indian Insurance Company, insurance co -operative 
society or a body corporate referred to in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2C, carrying on 
the business of insurance, in any Special Economic Zone as defined in clause ( za) of section 2 of 
the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005; or  
(b) shall apply to any insurer, being an Indian Insurance Company, insurance co -operative 
society or a body corporate  referred to in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2C, carrying on 
the business of insurance, in any Special Economic Zone as defined in clause ( za) of section 2 of 
the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005 only with such exceptions, modifications and ada ptations 
as may be specified in the notification. ”. 
PART II  
AMENDMENTS  TO THE BANKING  REGULATION  ACT, 1949  
(10 OF 1949)  
1. Section 53 shall be renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof and in sub -section ( 1) as so re -numbered, 
for “banking company or institution or to any class of banking companies ”, substit ute,— 
“banking company or institution or to any class of banking companies or any of their branches 
functioning or located in any Special Economic Zone established under the Special Economic 
Zones Act, 2005. ”. 
2. After sub -section ( 1) as so numbered, the following sub -section shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(2) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub -section ( 1), shall be laid in 
draft before each House of Parliament, while it is i n session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 
in disapproving the issue of the notification or both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
notification, the notification shall not be issued or, as the case may be, shall be issued only in such 
modified form as may be agreed upon by both the Houses .”. 
  35 
 PART III  
AMENDMENT TO THE  INDIAN  STAMP  ACT, 1899  
(2 OF1899)  
In section 3, in the provis o, after clause ( 2), insert,— 
'(3) any instrument executed, by, or, on behalf of, or, in favour of, the Developer, or Unit or in 
connection with the carrying out of purposes of the Spe cial Economic Zone.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, the expressions “Developer ”, “Special Economic 
Zone ” and “Unit” shall have meanings respectively assigned to them in clause ( g), (za) and ( zc) of 
section 2 of the Speci al Economic Zones Act, 2005.'.  
 
 
 
--------------------------The State Emblem of India (Prohibition of Improper Use) Act, 2005--------------------------
1 
 THE STATE EMBLEM OF INDIA (PROHIBITION OF IMPROPER USE) ACT, 2005  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Prohibition of improper use of emblem . 
4. Prohibition of use of emblem for wrongful gain . 
5. Prohibition of registration of certain companies, etc . 
6. General powers of Central Government to regulate use of emblem . 
7. Penalty . 
8. Previous sanction for prosecution . 
9. Savings . 
10. Act to have overriding effect . 
11. Power to make rules . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
APPENDIX I . 
APPENDIX II . 
 
  2 
 THE STATE EMBLEM OF INDIA (PROHIBITION OF IMPROPER USE) ACT, 2005  
ACT NO. 50 OF 2005  
[20th December , 2005 .] 
An Act to prohibit the improper use of State Emblem of India for professional  and commercial 
purpose and for matters connected therewith or incidental  thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as  follows:— 
1. Short title,  extent,  application and  commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the State 
Emblem of India (Prohibition of  Improper Use) Act, 2005.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India, and also applies to citizens of India out  side India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by  notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “competent authority ” means any authority competent under any law for the  time being in 
force to register any company, firm, other body of persons or any  trade mark or design or to grant a 
patent;  
(b) “emblem” means the State Emblem of India as described and specified in the  Schedule to be 
used as an official seal of the Government.  
3. Prohibition of improper use of emblem .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law 
for the time being in  force, no person shall use the emblem or any colourable imitation thereof in any  
manner which tends to create an impression that it relates to the Government or  that it is an official 
document of the Central Government, or as the case may be,  the State Gov ernment, without the previous 
permission of the Central  Government or of such officer of that Government as may be authorised by it in  
this behalf.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “person” includes a former  functionary of the Central 
Government or the State Governments.  
4. Prohibition of use of emblem for wrongful gain .—No person shall use the emblem for the 
purpose of any trade, business, calling  or profession or in the title of any patent, or in any trade mark or 
design, except  in su ch cases and under such conditions as may be prescribed.  
5. Prohibition of registration of certain companies, etc .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained 
in any other law for the time being in  force, no co mpetent authority shall, — 
(a) register  a trade mark or design which bears the emblem, or  
(b) grant patent in respect of an invention which bears a title containing the  emblem.  
(2) If any question arises before a competent authority whether any emblem is an  emblem specified in 
the Schedule or a  colourable imitation thereof, the  competent authority shall refer the question to the 
Central Government and the  decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final.  
6. General powers of Central Government to regulate use of emblem .—(1) The Central 
Government may make such provision by rules as appears to  it to be necessary, to regulate the use of the 
emblem in official seal that is used in  offices of the Central Government and  the State Governments and 
their organisations including diplomatic missio ns abroad, subject to such restrictions  and conditions as 
may be prescribed.  
 
 
                                                           
1. 12th September, 2007 , vide notification No. S.O. 1526(E) dated 12th September, 2007 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part 
II sec.3( ii). 3 
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government shall have  powers— 
(a) to notify the use of emblem on stationery, the method of printing or embossing  it on demi -
official stationery by the constitutional authorities,  Ministers, Members of Parliament, Members of 
Legislative Assemblies, officers  of the Central Government and the State Government s; 
(b) to specify the design of the official seal consisting of the emblem;  
(c) to restrict the display of emblem on vehicles of constitutional authorities, foreign  dignitaries, 
Ministers of the Central Government and the State  Government s; 
(d) to provide for guidelines for display of emblem on public buildings in India,  the diplomatic 
missions and on the buildings occupied by India's consulatesa  broad;  
(e) to specify conditions for the use of emblem for various other purposes  including the use for  
educational purposes and the armed forces personnel;  
(f) to do all such things (including the specification of design of the emblem and  its use in the 
manner whatsoever) as the Central Government considers  necessary or expedient for the exercise of 
the fo regoing powers.  
7. Penalty .—(1) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall be punishable  with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which  may extend to five thousand 
rupees, or with both , or if having been previously  convicted of an offence under this section, is again 
convicted of any such  offence, he shall be punishable for the second and for every subsequent offence  
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months, which  may extend to two years and 
with fine which may extend to five thousand  rupees.  
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 4 for any wrongful gain  shall be punishable 
for such offence with imprisonment for a term which  shall not be less than six months, wh ich may extend 
to two years and with fine  which may extend to five thousand rupees.  
8. Previous sanction for prosecution .—No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act 
shall be instituted,  except with the previous sanction of the Central Governm ent or of any officer  
authoris ed in this behalf by general or special order of the Central Government.  
9. Saving s.—Nothing in this Act shall exempt any person from any suit or other  proceedings which 
might be brought against him under any other law for the  time being in force.  
10. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder shall 
have effect  notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other  enactment or 
instrument having effect by virtue of such  enactment.  
11. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,  
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers,  such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) cases and conditions regulating the use of emblem under section 4;  
(b) making rules to regulate the use of the emblem in official seal of the  Government and 
specifying restrictions and conditions relating thereto under  sub-section ( 1) of section 6;  
(c) the use of emblem on stationery, design of official seal consisting of  emblem and other 
matters under sub -section ( 2) of section 6;  
(d) authorising officer by general or special order for giving previous sanction  for instituting 
prosecution under section 8; and  
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is  made, before each 
House of Pa rliament, while it is in session, for a total period  of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more  successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately  4 
 following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid , both House agree in  making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not  be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of  no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modificatio n or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done  under that rule.  
  5 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 2( b)] 
STATE EMBLEM OF INDIA  
DESCRIPTIONAND  DESIGN  
The State Emblem of India is an adaptation from the Sarnath  Lion Capital of Asoka which is  
preserved in the Sarnath Museum. The Lion Capital has four lions mounted back to back on a 
circularabacus. The frieze of the abacus is adorned with sculptures in high relief of an elephant, a gallopin  
ghorse, a bull and a li on separated by intervening Dharma Chakras. The abacus rests on a   bell-shaped  
lotus.  
The profile of the Lion Capital showing three lions mounted on the abacus with a Dharma Chakra in 
the cent re, a bull on the right and a galloping horse on the left, and o utlines of Dharma Chakras on the  
extreme right and left has been adopted as the State Emblem of India. The b ell-shaped lotus has been  
omitted.  
The motto “Satyameva  Jayate” – Truth alone triumphs – written in Devanagari script below the  
profile of the Lion Capital is part of the State Emblem of India.  
The State Emblem of India shall conform to the designs as set out in Appendix I or Appendix II.  
  6 
 APPENDIX I  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note.– This design is in simplified from and meant for reproduction in small sizes, such as for 
use in stationery, seals and die -printing.   
7 
 APPENDIX I I 
 
 
 
 
 
Note.– This design is more detailed and meant for reproduction in bigger  sizes . 
 

--------------------------The University of Allahabad Act, 2005--------------------------
1 
  THE UNIVERSITY OF ALLAHABAD ACT, 2005  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____________  
SECTIONS   
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration of University of Allahabad  as Institution of national importance.  
3. Definitions.  
4. Incorporation of University  of Allahabad . 
5. Effect of incorporation  of Allahabad  University.  
6. Objects of University.  
7. Powers of University.  
8. Jurisdiction.  
9. University open to all persons  irrespective of gender, class or creed . 
10. The Visitor.  
11. The Chief Rector.  
12. Officers of University.  
13. The Cha ncellor.  
14. The Vice -Chancellor.  
15. The Pro -Vice -Chancellor.  
16. The Deans of Faculties.  
17. The Registrar.  
18. The Finance Officer.  
19. Other officers.  
20. Authorities of University.  
21. The Court.  
22. The Executive Council.  
23. The Academic Council.  
24. The Finance Committee.  
25. Other authorities.  
26. The Faculties and Departments.  
27. Power to make Statutes.  
28. Statutes , how to be made.  
29. Power to make Ordinances.  
30. Regulations.  
31. Annual report.  
32. Accounts and audit.  
33. Furnishing returns, etc.  
34. Conditions of service of employees.  
35. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in d isciplinary cases against students.  
36. Right to appeal.  
37. Provident and pension funds.  
38. Disputes as to constitution of University authorities and bodies.  
39. Filling of casual vacancies.  
40. Proceedings of University authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.  
41. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
42. Mode of proof of University record.  
43. Power to remove difficulties.  
44. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before 
Parliament.  
45. Transitional provisions.  
46. Amendment of President’s Act 10 of 1973.  
THE SCHEDULE  2 
  THE UNIVERSITY OF ALLAHABAD ACT, 2005  
ACT NO. 26 OF 2005  
[23rd June , 2005.]  
An Act to declare the University of Allahabad to be an institution of  national importance and to 
provide for its incorporation and matters  connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -sixth Year of the Republic of  India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the  University of Allahabad Act, 
2005.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government  may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint and different  dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.  
2. Declaration of University of Allahabad as Institution of national  importance .—Whereas the 
objects of the University of Allahabad in the  State of Uttar Pradesh are such as to make it an Institution of  
national importance, it is hereby declared that the said University is  an Institution of national importance.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless  the context otherwise 
requires,— 
(a) “Academic Council ” means the Academic Council of the University;  
(b) “academic staff ” means such categories of staff as are designated  as academic staff by the 
Statu tes; 
(c) “appointed day ” means the date of establishment of the University  of Allahabad under               
sub-section ( 1) of section 4;  
(d) “Centre ” means a unit of the University or of a University  Institute providing teaching, 
consultancy and research facilities;  
(e) “Chancellor ” means the Chancellor of the University appointed under  section 13;  
(f) “Constituent College ” means a college prescribed as such by the  Statutes;  
(g) “Constituent Institute ” means an Institute prescribed as such by  the Statutes;  
(h) “Court ” means the Court of the University;  
(i) “Department ” means a Department of a Faculty;  
(j) “Director ” means the head of a University Institute or Constituent  Institute;  
(k) “employee ” means any person appointed by the University and  includes teachers and other 
staff of the University;  
(l) “Executive Council ” means the Executive Council of the University;  
(m) “Faculty ” means a Faculty of the University;  
(n) “Finance Officer ” means the Finance Officer of the University  appointed under section 18; 
(o) “Ordinances ” means the Ordinances of the University;  
(p) “Principal ” means the head of a University College or a Constituent  College;  
(q) “Pro-Vice -Chancellor ” means the Pro -Vice -Chancellor of the  University appointed under 
section 15;  
(r) “Registr ar” means the Registrar of the University appointed under  section 17;  
(s) “Regulations ” means the Regulations of the University;  
(t) “Statutes ” means the Statutes of the University;  
                                                           
1. 14th July, 2005, vide notification No. S.O. 978(E), dated 11th July, 2005 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 3 
  (u) “teacher ” means Professors, Readers and Lecturers appointed or  recognised by the University;  
(v) “University ” means the University of Allahabad established and  incorporated under section 4;  
(w) “University appointed teacher ” means a teacher appointed by the  University for imparting 
instruction and conducting research in the  University or any college or institution maintained by the 
University;  
(x) “University College ” means a college or an institution maintained  by the University or 
admitted to the privileges of the University as a  Faculty;  
(y) “University Institute ” means an Institute, established and  maintained by the University;  
(z) “University recognised  teacher ” means a teacher recognised  by the  University for imparting 
instruction and conducting research in a  college or institution admitted to the privileges of the 
University;  and 
(za) “Vice -Chancellor ” means the Vice -Chancellor of the University  appointed under section 14.  
4. Incorporation of University of Allahabad .—(1) The University of  Allahabad in the State of Uttar 
Pradesh, established under the Uttar  Prade sh State Universities Act, 1973 (President's Act 10 of 1973),  
shall be established as a body corporate under this Act having  perpetual succession and a common seal 
and shall sue and be sued by the  said name.  
(2) The first Chancellor, the first Vice -Chancel lor and the first  members of the Court, the Executive 
Council and the Academic Council,  and all persons who may hereafter become such officers or members, 
so long as they continue to hold such office or membership, shall  constitute the University.  
(3) The headquarters of the University shall be at Allahabad.  
5. Effect of incorporation of Allahabad University .—On and from the  appointed day, — 
(a) any reference to the University of Allahabad in any law (other than  this Act) or in any contract 
or other instrume nt shall be deemed as a  reference to the University;  
(b) all properties, movable and immovable, of or belonging to the  University of Allahabad shall 
vest in the University;  
(c) all rights and liabilities of the University of Allahabad shall be  transferred to, and be the rights 
and liabilities of, the University;  
(d) every person employed by the University of Allahabad immediately  before the appointed day 
shall hold his office or service in the  University by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and 
upon  the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to  pension, leave, 
gratuity, provident fund and other matters as he would  have held the same if this Act had not been 
passed, and shall continue  to do so unless and until his employment is terminated or until such  tenure, 
remuneration and terms and conditions are duly altered by the  Statutes:  
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such  employee, his employment may 
be terminated by the University in  accorda nce with the term of the contract with the employee or, if 
no provision is made therein in this behalf, on payment to him by the  University of compensation 
equivalent to three months' remuneration in  case of permanent employees and one month's 
remuneration  in the case of  other employees:  
Provided further that every person employed before the appointed day,  pending the execution of a 
contract under section 34, shall be deemed  to have been appointed in accordance with the provisions 
of a contract  consistent w ith the provisions of this Act and the Statutes:  
Provided also that any reference, by whatever form of words, to the  Vice -Chancellor and Pro -
Vice -Chancellor of the University of Allahabad  in any law for the time being in force, or in any 
instrument or other  document, shall be construed as a reference respectively to the Vice -Chancellor 
and the Pro -Vice -Chancellor of the University;  
(e) the Vice -Chancellor of the University, appointed under the  provisions of the Uttar Pradesh 
State Universities Act, 1973  (President's Act 10 of 1973) shall be deemed to have been appointed as  4 
  the Vice -Chancellor under this Act, and shall hold office for a period  of three months or till such time 
the Vice -Chancellor is appointed,  whichever is earlier.  
6. Objects of Universit y.—The objects of the University shall be to  disseminate and advance 
knowledge by providing instructional and  research facilities in such branches of learning as it may deem 
fit; to  make provisions for integrated courses in the humanities, the social  sciences, the basic and applied 
science and technology in the  educational programmes of the University; to take appropriate measures  for 
promoting innovations in teaching -learning process, interdisciplinary  and professional studies and 
research, removal of  gender  disparities and the digital divide, and the application of knowledge to  social 
advancement, national progress and human welfare; and to educate  and train human resource for the 
development of the country.  
7. Powers of University .—The University sha ll have the following  powers, namely: — 
(i) to provide for instruction in such branches of learning as the  University may, from time to 
time, determine and to make provisions for  research and for the advancement and dissemination of 
knowledge;  
(ii) to grant , subject to such conditions as the University may  determine, diplomas or certificates 
and confer degrees or other  academic distinctions on the basis of examinations, evaluation or any  
other method of testing and to withdraw any such diplomas,  certificates , degrees or other academic 
distinctions for good and  sufficient cause;  
(iii) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner  prescribed by the Statutes;  
(iv) to organise and to undertake open learning programmes, extramural  studies, training and 
extension services;  
(v) to institute Chairs, Principalships, Professorships, Readerships  and Lecturerships and other 
teaching and academic positions, required  by the University and to appoint persons to such Chairs,  
Principalships, Professorsh ips, Readerships and Lecturerships and other  teaching and academic 
positions;  
(vi) to recogni se persons as University recognised  teachers;  
(vii) to declare persons working in any other University or  organisation, as teachers of the 
University;  
(viii) to ap point, on contract or otherwise, visiting Professors,  Emeritus Professors, Consultants, 
Scholars and such other persons who  may contribute to the advancement of the objects of the 
University;  
(ix) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and t o make  appointments thereto;  
(x) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees,  including their code of 
conduct;  
(xi) to establish and maintain University Colleges and University  Institutes for imparting 
instruction and conducting resear ch; 
(xii) to admit to its privileges colleges and institutions situated  within the territorial jurisdiction of 
the University, as University  Colleges, Constituent Institutes and Constituent Colleges, and to  
withdraw all or any of those privileges in accord ance with such  conditions as may be prescribed by 
the Statutes;  
(xiii) to confer autonomous status on a college or an institution or a  Department, as the case may 
be, and to withdraw such status, in  accordance with the Statutes;  
(xiv) to co-operate or collaborate or associate with any other  University or authority or institution 
of higher learning in such  manner as may be prescribed and for such purposes as the University may  
determine;  
(xv) to determine standards of admission, including examination,  evaluation or any other method 
of testing, to the University, and the  institutions maintained by or admitted to the privileges of the  
University;  5 
  (xvi) to demand and receive payment of fees and other charges;  
(xvii) to establish and recognise hostels and supervise the residence  of the students of the 
University, make arrangements for promoting  their health and general welfare and guide the 
Constituent Colleges  and the Constituent Institutes to like ends in respect of the students  enrolled 
there at; 
(xviii) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the  employees, and to take such 
disciplinary measures in this regard as may  be deemed by the University to be necessary;  
(xix) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentsh ips, medals and prizes;  
(xx) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold,  manage and dispose of  any 
property, movable or immovable, including  trust and endowment properties, for the purposes of the 
University:  
Provided that no immovab le property shall be disposed off except with  the prior approval of the 
Central Government;  
(xxi) to borrow, with the approval of the Central Government, on the  security of the property of 
the University, money for the purposes of  the University; and  
(xxii) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary,  incidental or conducive to the 
attainment of all or any of the objects  of the University.  
8. Jurisdiction .—(1) Save as otherwise provided by this Act, the powers  conferred on the University 
shall be exercisable in respect of the area  within a radius of sixteen kilometres from the Convocation Hall 
of the  University, without prejudice to the territorial jurisdiction over the  said area that may be assigned to 
any other University.  
(2) On and from the appointed day, all institutions admitted to the  privileges of, or maintained by, the 
University of Allahabad as  incorporated under the Uttar Pradesh State Universities Act, 1973  (President's 
Act 10 of 1973) shall stand admitted to the privileges of,  or mai ntained by, the University and shall be 
governed by such  conditions as may be prescribed by Statutes.  
9. University open to all persons irrespective of gender, class or  creed .—The University shall be 
open to all persons of either sex and of  whatever caste,  creed, race or class and it shall not be lawful for 
the University to adopt or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of  religious belief or profession in 
order to entitle him to be appointed  as a teacher of the University or to hold any office therein  or be  
admitted as a student in the University or to graduate thereat or to  enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the  University from making special 
provisions for the employment or  admiss ion of women, physically handicapped or of persons belonging 
to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled  Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.  
10. The Visitor .—(1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the  University.  
(2) The Visitor may, from time to time, appoint one or more persons to  review the work and progress 
of the University, including the colleges  and institutions maintained by it, and to submit a report thereon; 
and upon receipt of such report, the Visitor may, after obtaining the views  of the Executive Council 
thereon through the Vice -Chancellor, take such  action and issue such directions as he considers necessary 
in respect  of any of the matters dealt with in the report and the University shall  be bound to comp ly with 
such directions.  
(3) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made,  by such person or persons as he 
may direct, of the University, its  buildings, libraries, laboratories and equipment, and of any college or  
institution maintained by the University or admitted to its privileges;  and also of the examinations, 
teaching and other work conducted or done  by the University and to cause an inquiry to be made in like 
manner in  respect of any matter connected with the administrati on or finances of  the University, and the 
said colleges and institutions.  
  6 
  (4) The Visitor shall, in every matter referred to in sub -section ( 3), give notice of his intention to 
cause an inspection or inquiry to be  made— 
(a) to the University, if such ins pection or inquiry is to be made in  respect of the University or 
any college or institution maintained by  it, or  
(b) to the Management of the college or institution, if the inspection  or inquiry is to be made in 
respect of a college or institution  admitted  to the privileges of the University, and the University or 
the Management, as the case may be, shall have the right to make such  representations to the Visitor, 
as it may consider necessary.  
(5) After considering the representations, if any, made by the  University or the Management, as the 
case may be, the Visitor may cause  to be made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in sub -section  
(3). 
(6) Where any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the  Visitor, the University or the 
Management shall be entitled to appoint  a representative, who shall have the right to be present and be 
heard  at such inspection or inquiry.  
(7) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of  the University or any college or 
institutio n maintained by it, address  the Vice -Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or  
inquiry together with such views and advice with regard to the action  to be taken thereon, as the Visitor 
may be pleased to offer, and on  receipt of address made by the Visitor, the Vice -Chancellor shall  
communicate to the Executive Council, the views of the Visitor with  such advice as the Visitor may offer 
upon the action to be taken  thereon.  
(8) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respec t of any college or institution 
admitted to the privileges of the  University, address the Management concerned through the Vice -
Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or inquiry,  his views thereon and such advice as 
he may be pleased to  offer upon  the action to be taken thereon.  
(9) The Executive Council or the Management, as the case may be,  communicate, through the Vice -
Chancellor to the Visitor such action, if  any, as it proposes to take or has been taken upon the result of 
such inspe ction or inquiry.  
(10) Where, the Executive Council or the Management, as the case may  be, does not, within a 
reasonable time, take action to the satisfaction  of the Visitor, the Visitor may, after considering any 
explanation  furnished or representation ma de by the Executive Council or the  Management, issue such 
directions as he may think fit and the Executive  Council or the Management, as the case may be, shall 
comply with such  directions.  
(11) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section,  the Visitor may, by order in 
writing, annul any proceeding of the  University which is not in conformity with the Act or the Statutes or  
the Ordinances:  
Provided that before making any such order, the Visitor shall call upon  the Registrar to show cause  
why such an order should not be made, and,  if any cause is shown within a reasonable time, he shall 
consider the  same.  
(12) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be prescribed by  the Statutes.  
11. The Chief Rector .—The Governor of the State of U ttar Pradesh shall  be the Chief Rector of the 
University.  
12. Officers of University .—The following shall be the officers of the  University, — 
(1) the Chancellor;  
(2) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(3) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(4) the Deans of Faculties;  
(5) the Registrar;  7 
  (6) the Finance Officer; and  
(7) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be  officers of the University.  
13. The Chancellor .—(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the  Visitor in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the Statut es. 
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the head of the  University and shall, if present, 
preside at the Convocations of the  University held for conferring degrees and meetings of the Court.  
14. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancello r shall be appointed by  the Visitor in such 
manner and on such terms and conditions of service  as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic  officer of the University and 
shall exercise general supervision and  control over the affairs of the University and give effect to the  
decisions of all the authorities of the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may, if he is of the opinion that immediate  action is necessary on any matter, 
exercise any power conferred on any  authority of the University by or under this Act and shall report to  
such authority at its next meeting the action taken by him on such  matter:  
Provided that such exercise of power shall be made only in emergent  situations and in no case i n 
respect of creation, and upgradation of  posts and appointments thereto:  
Provided further that if the authority concerned is of the opinion that  such action ought not to have 
been taken, it may refer the matter to  the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final:  
Provided also that any person in the service of the University who is  aggrieved by the action taken by 
the Vice -Chancellor under this subsection  shall have the right to appeal against such action to the  
Executive Council within three months from the date on which decision  on such action is communicated 
to him and thereupon the Executive  Council may confirm, modify or reverse the action taken by the Vice -
Chancellor.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that any decision of  any authority  of the University is 
beyond the powers of the authority  conferred by the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances  
or that any decision taken is not in the interest of the University,  may ask the authority concerned to 
review its decision wit hin sixty  days of such decision and if the authority refuses to review the  decision 
either in whole or in part or no decision is taken by it  within the said period of sixty days, the matter shall 
be referred to  the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be f inal. 
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform  such other duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes or the  Ordinances.  
15. The Pro -Vice-Chancellor .—The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed  in such manner and on 
such terms and conditions of service, and shall  exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be 
prescribed by  the Statutes.  
16. The Deans of Faculties .—Every Dean of Faculty shall be appointed in  such manner and shall 
exercise such powers and perform such dut ies as  may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
17. The Registrar .—(1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner  and on such terms and 
conditions of service as may be prescribed by the  Statutes.  
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreemen ts, sign  documents and authenticate 
records on behalf of the University and  shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be 
prescribed  by the Statutes.  
18. The Finance Officer .—The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such  manner and on such terms 
and conditions of service, and shall exercise  such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed 
by the  Statutes.  
19. Other officers .—The manner of appointment and powers and duties of  other officers of the 
University shall be prescribed by th e Statutes.  
  8 
  20. Authorities of University .—The following shall be the authorities  of the University, — 
(1) the Court;  
(2) the Executive Council;  
(3) the Academic Council;  
(4) the Boards of Faculties;  
(5) the Finance Committee; and  
(6) such  other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be  authorities of the University.  
21. The Court .—(1) The constitution of the Court and the term of office  of its members shall be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall have the  followin g powers and functions, 
namely:— 
(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of  the University and to 
suggest measures for the improvement and  development of the University;  
(b) to consider and pass resolutions on the annual report and annual  accounts of the University 
and the audit report on such accounts;  
(c) to advise the Visitor in respect of any matter which may be  referred to it for advice; and  
(d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the  Statutes.  
22. The Executive Council .—(1) The Executive Council shall be the  principal executive body of the 
University.  
(2) The constitution of the Executive Council, the term of office of  its members and its powers and 
functions shall be  prescribed by the  Statutes.  
23. The Academic Council .—(1) The Academic Council shall be the  principal academic body of the 
University and shall, subject to the  provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, co -ordinate  
and exercise general super vision over the academic policies of the  University.  
(2) The constitution of the Academic Council, the term of office of its  members and its powers and 
functions shall be prescribed by the  Statutes.  
24. The Finance Committee .—The constitution, powers and f unctions of  the Finance Committee 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
25. Other authorities .—The constitution, powers and functions of the  Boards of Faculties and such 
other authorities as may be declared by  the Statutes to be authorities of the Universit y shall be prescribed 
by the Statutes.  
26. The Faculties and Departments .—(1) The University shall have such  Faculties as are prescribed 
by the Statutes.  
(2) Each Faculty shall have such Departments as are prescribed by the  Statutes, and each Department 
shall have such subjects of study as may  be assigned to it by the Ordinances.  
27. Power to make Statutes .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the  Statutes may provide for all 
or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the constitution, powers and fun ctions of the authorities and other  bodies of the University as 
may be constituted from time to time;  
(b) the appointment and continuance in office of the members of the  said authorities and bodies, 
the filling up of vacancies of members,  and all other mat ters relating to those authorities and other 
bodies  for which it may be necessary or desirable to provide;  
(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the  University and their emoluments and 
conditions of service;  9 
  (d) the appointment of teach ers, academic staff and other employees of  the University, their 
emoluments and conditions of service;  
(e) the recognition of persons as  University recognised teachers;  
(f) the declaration of persons working in other Universities or other  organisations as teachers of 
the University for a specified period;  
(g) the conditions of service of employees of the University including  provisions for pension, 
insurance and provident fund, the manner of  termination of service and disciplinary action relating to 
such employees;  
(h) the principles governing the seniority of service of the employees  of the University;  
(i) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees  or students and the 
University;  
(j) the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council  by any employee  or student against the 
action of any officer or authority of the  University;  
(k) the conditions under which colleges and institutions may be  admitted to the privileges of the 
University and the withdrawal of such  privileges;  
(l) the establ ishment and abolition of Faculties, Departments,  University Institutes, Centres and 
University Colleges;  
(m) the conferment of autonomous status on a college or institution or  a Department and the 
withdrawal of such status;  
(n) the conferment of honorary d egrees;  
(o) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other  academic distinctions;  
(p) the registration of graduates;  
(q) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of  the University;  
(r) the maintenance of discipline among the employees and students; and  
(s) all other matters which by this Act are to be or may be provided  for by the Statutes.  
28. Statutes, how to be made .—(1) The First Statutes are those set out  in the Schedule.  
(2) The Execu tive Council may, from time to time, make new or  additional Statutes or may amend or 
repeal the Statutes referred to in  sub-section ( 1): 
Provided that the Executive Council shall not make, amend or repeal any  Statute affecting the status, 
powers or constit ution of any authority  of the University until such authority has been given an 
opportunity of  expressing an opinion in writing on the proposed changes, and any  opinion so expressed 
shall be considered by the Executive Council.  
(3) Every new Statute or add ition to the Statutes or any amendment or  repeal of a Statute shall require 
the assent of the Visitor who may  assent thereto or withhold assent or remit to the Executive Council for  
re-consideration.  
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing  Statute shall have no validity unless 
it has been assented to by the  Visitor.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections,  the Visitor may make new or 
additional Statutes, or amend or repeal the  Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1), during the period of 
three  years immediately after the commencement of this Act:  
Provided that the Visitor may, on the expiry of the said period of  three years, make, within one year 
from the date of such expiry, such  detailed Statutes as he may consider necessary and such detailed  
Statutes shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Visitor may  direct the University to make 
provisions in the Statutes in respect of  any matter spec ified by him and if the Executive Council is unable 
to implement such direction within sixty days of its receipt, the Visitor  may, after considering the reasons, 10 
  if any, communicated by the  Executive Council for its inability to comply with such direction,  make  or 
amend the Statutes suitably.  
29. Power to make Ordinances .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act  and the Statutes, the 
Ordinances may provide for all or any of the  following matters, namely: — 
(a) the  admission and enrolment of students to the University and  institutions maintained by or 
admitted to the privileges of the  University;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas  and certificates of the 
University;  
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;  
(d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic  distinctions, the qualifications 
for the same and the means to be  taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the same;  
(e) the fees to be charg ed for courses of study in the University and  for admission to the 
examinations, degrees and diplomas of the  University;  
(f) the institution of, and conditions for award of fellowships,  scholarships, studentships, medals 
and prizes;  
(g) the conduct of exam inations, including the term of office and  manner of appointment and the 
duties of examining bodies, examiners and  moderators;  
(h) the conditions of residence of students of the University;  
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the  residence, discipline and teaching 
of women students and the  prescribing of special courses of studies for them;  
(j) the establishment of Centres, University Institutes, Boards of  Studies, Specialised Laboratories 
and Committees;  
(k) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is  considered necessary for 
improving the academic life of the University;  
(l) the manner of co -operation and collaboration with other  Universities, Institutions and other 
Agencies including lear ned bodies  or associations;  
(m) the setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances of  employees; and  
(n) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes, are to be or  may be, provided for by the 
Ordinances.  
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made  by the Vice -Chancellor with the  previous approval of the 
Central Government and the Ordinances so made  may be amended, repealed or added to at any time by 
the Executive  Council in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.  
30. Regulations .—The authorities of the University may make Regulations  consistent with this Act, 
the Statutes and the Ordinances for the  conduct of their own business and that of the Committees, if any,  
appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the  Ordinances and f or such matters as 
may be prescribed by the Statutes or  the Ordinances.  
31. Annual report .—(1) The annual report of the University shall be  prepared under the direction of 
the Executive Council, which shall  include, among other matters, the steps taken by the University 
towards  the fulfilment of its objects and shall be submitted to the Court on or  after such date as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes and the Court  shall consider the report in its annual meeting.  
(2) The Court shall submit the annual report to the Visitor along with  its comments, if any.  
(3) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub -section ( 1), shall also be submitted to the 
Central Government, which shall, as soon  as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of 
Parliamen t. 
32. Accounts and audit .—(1) The annual accounts and balance sheet of  the University shall be 
prepared under the directions of the Executive  Council and shall once at least every year, and at intervals 11 
  of not  more than fifteen months, be audited by the C omptroller and Auditor -General of India or by such 
persons as he may authorise in this behalf.  
(2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report  thereon shall be submitted to the 
Court and the Visitor along with the  observations of the Executive Council.  
(3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall  be brought to the notice of the 
Court and the observations of the  Court, if any, shall, after being considered by the Executive Council,  be 
submitted to the Visitor.  
(4) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report as  submitted to the Visitor, shall also 
be submitted to the Central  Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid  before 
both Houses of Parliament.  
(5) The audited annu al accounts after having been laid before both  Houses of Parliament shall be 
published in the Gazette of India.  
33. Furnishing returns, etc .—The University shall furnish to the  Central Government such returns 
or other information with respect to  its proper ty or activities as the Central Government may, from time to  
time, require.  
34. Conditions of service of employees .—(1) Every employee of the  University shall be appointed 
under a written contract, which shall be  lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be furnished 
to the employee concerned.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and  any employee shall, at the 
request of the employee, be referred to a  Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by 
the Executive Council, one member nominated by the employee concerned and  an umpire appointed by 
the Visitor.  
(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final and no suit shall lie  in any civil court in respect of the 
matters decided by the Tribunal.  
(4) Every request made by the employee under sub -section ( 2), shall be  deemed to be a submission to 
arbitration upon the terms of this section  within the meaning of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 
(26 of  1996).  
(5) The procedure for regulating the w ork of the Tribunal shall be  prescribed by the Statutes.  
35. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against  students .—(1) Any student 
or candidate for an examination whose name  has been removed from the rolls of the University by the 
orders or  resolution of the Vice -Chancellor, Discipline Committee or Examination  Committee, as the case 
may be, and who has been debarred from appearing  at the examinations of the University for more than 
one year, may,  within ten days of the date of recei pt of such orders or copy of such  resolution by him, 
appeal to the Executive Council and the Executive  Council may confirm, modify or reverse the decision 
of the Vice -Chancellor or the Committee, as the case may be.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disci plinary action taken by the  University against a student shall, 
at the request of such student, be  referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of sub -sections  
(2), (3), (4) and ( 5) of section 34 shall, as far as may be,  apply to a reference ma de under this sub -section.  
36. Right to appeal .—Every employee or student of the University or of  an Institution maintained by 
the University or admitted to its  privileges shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, have  a 
right to appeal within  such time as may be prescribed by the  Statutes, to the Executive Council against the 
decision of any officer  or authority of the University, and thereupon the Executive Council may  confirm, 
modify or reverse the decision appealed against.  
37. Provident an d pension funds .—(1) The University shall constitute  for the benefit of its 
employees such provident fund or pension fund or  provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit in 
such manner and  subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statute s. 
(2) Where such provident fund or pension fund has been so constituted,  the Central Government may 
declare that the provisions of the Provident  Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925), shall apply to such fund as if it 
were a  Government provident fund.  12 
  38. Disputes  as to constitution of University authorities and bodies .—If any question arises as to 
whether any person has been duly appointed  or elected as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority 
or other  body of the University, the matter shall be referred t o the Visitor  whose decision thereon shall be 
final.  
39. Filling of casual vacancies .—All casual vacancies among the  members, other than ex officio  
members, of any authority or other body  of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the person 
or body who appoints, elects or co -opts the member whose place has become  vacant and person 
appointed, elected or co -opted to a casual vacancy  shall be a member of such authority or body for the 
residue of the term  for which the person whose place he fills  would have been member.  
40. Proceedings of University authorities or bodies not invalidated by  vacancies .—No act or 
proceedings of any authority or other body of the  University shall be invalid merely by reason of the 
existence of a  vacancy or vacancies a mong its members.  
41. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal  proceeding shall lie against any 
officer or other employee of the  University for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be  
done in pursuance of any of the p rovisions of this Act, the Statutes or  the Ordinances.  
42. Mode of proof of University record .—Notwithstanding anything  contained in the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) or in any other law for the  time being in force, a copy of any receipt, 
applicati on, notice, order,  proceeding or resolution of any authority or other body of the  University, or 
any other document in possession of the University, or  any entry in any register duly maintained by the 
University, if  certified by the Registrar, shall be rec eived as prima facie  evidence  of such receipt, 
application, notice, order, proceeding, resolution or  document or the existence of entry in the register and 
shall be  admitted as evidence of the matters and transactions therein where the  original thereof would, if 
produced, have been admissible in evidence.  
43. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in  giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government  may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provision s, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be  necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the  expiry of three years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as  may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament while it is in  session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessio ns, and if, before the  expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the  successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any  modification 
in the order or both Houses agree that the order should  not be made, the order shall thereafte r have effect 
only in such  modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that  any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the  validity of anything previously done under that order.  
44. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the  Official Gazette and to be laid 
before Parliament .—(1) Every Statute,  Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be published 
in the  Official Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall  be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of  Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days  which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive  sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately  following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses  agree in 
making any modification in the Statute, Ordinance or  Regulation or both Houses agree that the Statute, 
Ordinance or  Regulation should not be made, the Statute,  Ordinance or Regulation  shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no  effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or  annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything  previously done under 
that Statute, Ordinance or Regulation.  
(3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shall include  the power to give 
retrospective effect, from a date not earlier than  the date of commencement of this Act, to the Statute, 
Ordinance or  Regulation  or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given  to any Statute, 13 
  Ordinance or Regulation so as to prejudicially affect  the interests of any person to whom such Statute, 
Ordinance or  Regulation may be applicable.  
45. Transitional provisions .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in  this Act and the Statutes, — 
(a) the first Chancellor and the first Vice -Chancellor shall be  appointed by the Central 
Government in such manner and on such  conditions as may be deemed fit and each of the said 
officers sh all hold office for such term, not exceeding five years, as may be  specified by the Central 
Government;  
(b) the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer shall be  appointed by the Central Government 
and each of the said officers shall  hold office for a  term of three years;  
(c) the first Court and the first Executive Council shall consist of  not more than thirty -one 
members and fifteen members, respectively, who  shall be nominated by the Central Government and 
shall hold office for  a term of three years;  
(d) the first Academic Council shall consist of not more than thirty -one members, who shall be 
nominated by the Central Government and shall  hold office for a term of three years:  
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above -mentioned offices or  autho rities, the same shall be 
filled by appointment or nomination, as  the case may be, by the Central Government, and the person so 
appointed  or nominated shall hold office for so long as the officer or member in  whose place he is 
appointed or nominated would have held office if such  vacancy had not occurred.  
(2) Till such time as the first Ordinances are not made under sub -section  (2) of section 29, in respect 
of the matters that are to be  provided for by the Ordinances under this Act and Statutes, the  relevan t 
provisions of the Statutes and the Ordinances made immediately  before the commencement of this Act 
under the provisions of the Uttar  Pradesh State Universities Act, 1973 (President's Act 10 of 1973) shall  
be applicable insofar as they are not inconsisten t with the provisions  of this Act and the Statutes.  
46. Amendment of President's Act 10 of 1973 .—(1) In the Uttar Pradesh  State Universities Act, 
1973,— 
(a) the word “Allahabad ”, except in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 12, sub -section ( 1) of 
section 31B, clause ( b) of sub -section  (1) of section 74, clause ( j) of sub -section ( 3) of section 74, and  
entries relating to Serial No. 5 in the Schedule, wherever it  occurs, shall be omitted;  
(b) in the Schedule, Serial No. 2 and the entries relating th ereto  shall be omitted.  
(2) Notwithstanding such omission, — 
(a) all appointments made, orders issued, degrees and other academic  distinctions conferred, 
diplomas and certificates awarded, privileges  granted, or other things done (including the registration  
of graduates)  under the Uttar Pradesh State Universities Act, 1973 (President's Act  10 of 1973), shall 
be deemed to have been respectively made, issued,  conferred, awarded, granted or done under the 
corresponding provisions  of this Act and, except as otherwise provided by or this Act or the  Statutes, 
continue in force unless and until they are superseded by any  order made under this Act or the 
Statutes; and  
(b) all proceedings of Selection Committees for the appointment or  promotion of teachers that 
took place before the commencement of this  Act and all actions of the Executive Council in respect of 
the recommendations of such Selection Committees where no orders of  appointment on the basis 
thereof were passed before the commencement of  this Act shall, notwithstanding that the procedure 
for selection has  been modified by this Act, be deemed to have been valid but further  proceeding in 
connection with such pending selections shall be taken in  accordance with the provisions of this Act 
and be continued fro m the  stage where they stood immediately before such commencement, except if  
the concerned authorities take, with the approval of the Visitor, a  decision to the contrary.  
  14 
  THE SCHEDULE  
(see section 28)  
THE STATUTES OF THE UNIVERSITY  
1. The Chancellor .—(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor  from a panel of not less 
than three persons recommended by the  Executive Council from amongst persons of eminence in the 
academic or  public life of the country:  
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve  of any of the persons so  recommended, he may call for 
fresh recommendations from the Executive  Council.  
(2) The Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years and shall  not be eligible for re -
appointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of  his term of office the  Chancellor shall continue to hold 
office until his successor enters  upon his office.  
2. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by  the Visitor from a panel of 
not less than three persons who shall be recommen ded by a Committee as  constituted under clause ( 2): 
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons  included in the panel, he may call 
for an extended or a fresh panel.  
(2) The Committee referred to in clause ( 1) shall consist of three  persons, out of whom two shall be 
nominated by the Executive Council  and one by the Visitor and the nominee of the Visitor shall be the  
convener of the Committee:  
Provided that none of the members of the Committee shall be an employee  of the University or an 
institution maintained by, or admitted to the  privileges of, the University or a member of any authority of 
the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the  University.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall hold office for a  term of five years from  the date on which he enters 
upon his office, or until he attains the  age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier, and he shall not be  
eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of fiv e years, he shall continue in office 
until his successor is appointed and  enters upon his office:  
Provided further that the Visitor may direct any Vice -Chancellor after  his term has expired, to 
continue in office for such period, not  exceeding a total peri od of one year, as may be specified by him or  
till his successor is appointed and enters upon his office, whichever  is earlier.  
(5) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Vice -Chancellor shall be as follows: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor shall be  paid a monthly salary and allowances,  other than house rent 
allowance, at the rates fixed by the Central  Government from time to time and he shall be entitled, 
without payment  of rent, to use a furnished residence throughout his term of office and  no char ge 
shall fall on the Vice -Chancellor in respect of the  maintenance of such residence;  
(ii) the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to such terminal benefits  and allowances as may be fixed 
by the Central Government from time to  time:  
Provided that where an employee of the University, or a college or an  institution maintained by, or 
admitted to the privileges of, the  University, or of any other University or any college or institution  
maintained by or admitted to the privileges of, such other University,  is appointed as the Vice -Chancellor, 
he may be allowed to continue to  contribute to any provident fund of which he is a member and the  
University shall contribute to the account of such person in that  provident fund at the same rate at which 
the person had bee n contributing immediately before his appointment as the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that where such employee had been member of any  pension scheme, the University 
shall make the necessary contribution to  such scheme;  15 
  (iii) the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to travelling allowance at  such rates as may be fixed by 
the Executive Council;  
(iv) the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full pay at the  rate of thirty days in a 
calendar year and the leave shall be credited  to his account in adva nce in two half -yearly instalments 
of fifteen  days each on the first day of January and July every year:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor assumes or relinquishes charge of  the office of the Vice -
Chancellor during the currency of a half year,  the leave shall be credited proportionately at the rate of 
two and -a-half days for each completed month of service;  
(v) in addition to the leave referred to in sub -clause ( iv), the Vice -Chancellor shall also be entitled 
to half -pay leave at the rate of  twenty days f or each completed year of service, and half -pay leave 
may also be availed of as commuted leave on full pay on medical  certificate:  
Provided that when such commuted leave is availed of, twice the amount  of half -pay leave shall 
be debited against half -pay le ave due.  
(6) If the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant due to death,  resignation or otherwise, or if he 
is unable to perform his duties due  to ill -health or any other cause, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall perform  
the duties of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the Pro -Vice -Chancellor is not available, the senior  most Professor shall perform the 
duties of the Vice -Chancellor until a  new Vice -Chancellor assumes office or until the existing Vice -
Chancellor resumes the duties of his office, as the case may be.  
3. Powers and duties of the Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor  shall be ex officio  
Chairman of the Executive Council, the Academic  Council and the Finance Committee and shall, in the 
absence of the  Chancellor, preside at the Convocations  held for conferring degrees and  at meetings of the 
Court.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and  address, any meeting of any authority 
or other body of the University,  but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he is a membe r of such  
authority or body.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice -Chancellor to see that this Act,  the Statutes, the Ordinances and the 
Regulations are duly observed and  he shall have all the powers necessary to ensure such observance.  
(4) The Vice -Chancel lor shall have all the powers necessary for the  proper maintenance of discipline 
in the University and he may delegate  any such powers to such person or persons as he deems fit.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall have the power to convene or cause to be  convened the meetings of the 
Executive Council, the Academic Council  and the Finance Committee.  
4. Pro -Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed  by the Executive Council 
on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that wher e the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor is not  accepted by the Executive 
Council, the matter shall be referred to the  Visitor who may either appoint the person recommended by 
the Vice -Chancellor or ask the Vice -Chancellor to recommend another person to  the Executive Council:  
Provided further that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation  of the Vice -Chancellor, 
appoint a Professor to discharge the duties of  a Pro -Vice -Chancellor in addition to his own duties as a 
Professor.  
(2) The term of office  of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be such as may be  decided by the Executive 
Council but it shall not in any case exceed  five years or until the expiration of the term of offic e of the 
Vice -Chancellor, which ever is earlier:  
Provided that a Pro -Vice -Chancello r whose term of office has expired  shall be eligible for                          
re-appointment:  
Provided further that, in any case, a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall retire  on attaining the age of sixty -five 
years:  16 
  Provided also that a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall, while discharging the  duties of the Vice -Chancellor 
under clause ( 6) of Statute 1, continue  in office notwithstanding the expiration of his term of office as 
Pro-Vice -Chancellor, until the Vice -Chancellor resumes office or a new  Vice -Chancellor assu mes office, 
as the case may be.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be such 
as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall assist the Vice -Chancellor in respect  of such matt ers as may be 
specified by the Vice -Chancellor in this  behalf, from time to time, and shall also exercise such powers 
and perform such duties as may be assigned or delegated to him by the Vice -Chancellor.  
5. Deans of Faculties .—(1) Every Dean of Faculty sh all be appointed by  the Vice -Chancellor from 
amongst the Professors in the Faculty by  rotation in the order of seniority for a period of three years:  
Provided that in case there is only one Professor or no Professor in a  Faculty, the Dean shall be 
appointe d, for the time being, from amongst  the Professor, if any, and the Readers in the Faculty by 
rotation in  the order of seniority:  
Provided further that in the case of a Faculty comprising a University  College, the Principal of such 
University College shall be the ex officio  Dean of the Faculty.  
(2) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by  reason of illness, absence or any 
other cause, unable to perform duties  of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by the  
senior -most Professor or Reader, as the case may be, in the Faculty.  
(3) The Dean shall be the ex officio  Chairman of the Board of the  Faculty and shall be responsible for 
the conduct and maintenance of the  standards of teaching and research in the Faculty and shall h ave such  
other functions as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at any  meeting of the Boards of Studies 
or Committees of the Faculty, but  shall not have the right to vote thereat unless he is a member thereof.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( 1), every teacher  serving as Dean of a Faculty 
immediately before the appointed day,  shall continue as such up to the date on which he would have 
continued  as Dean if the Act had not been en acted and thereafter the Dean of the  concerned Faculty shall 
be appointed in accordance with the provisions  of clause ( 1) above.  
6. The Registrar .—(1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Executive  Council on the 
recommendation of a Selection Committee constituted for  the purpose and shall be a whole -time salaried 
officer of the  University.  
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be  eligible for re -appointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the  Regis trar shall be such as may 
be prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that the Registrar shall retire on attaining the age of sixty -two years:  
Provided further that a Registrar shall, notwithstanding his attaining  the age of sixty -two years, 
continue in offi ce until his successor is  appointed and enters upon his office or until the expiry of a period 
of one year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar  is, by reason of illness, absence or 
any other cause, una ble to perform  the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed  by 
such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) (a) The Registrar shall have power to take disciplinary action  against such of the employees, 
exclud ing teachers and other academic  staff, as may be specified in the order of the Executive Council 
and to  suspend them pending inquiry, to administer warnings to them or to  impose on them the penalty of 
censure or the withholding of increment:  
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person has  been given a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against the action  proposed to be taken in regard to him.  17 
  (b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice -Chancellor against any order of the  Registrar imposing  any of the 
penalties specified in sub -clause ( a). 
(c) In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the  power of the Registrar is called 
for, the Registrar shall, upon the  concluding of the inquiry, make a report to the Vice -Chancellor al ong 
with his recommendations:  
Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Executive Council against an  order of the Vice -Chancellor 
imposing any penalty.  
(6) The Registrar shall be ex officio  Secretary of the Court, the  Executive Council and the Academic 
Coun cil, but shall not be deemed to  be a member of any of these authorities.  
(7) It sha ll be the duty of the Registrar — 
(a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such other  property of the University 
as the Executive Council shall commit to h is charge;  
(b) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Court, the Executive  Council, and the Academic 
Council, the college development council and  of any Committees appointed by those authorities;  
(c) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Court, the Executive  Council and the Academic 
Council and of any Committees appointed by  those authorities;  
(d) to conduct the official correspondence of the Court, the Executive  Council and the Academic 
Council;  
(e) to arrange for and superintend the exam inations of the University  in the manner prescribed by 
the Ordinances;  
(f) to supply to the Visitor copies of the agenda of the meetings of  the authorities of the 
University as soon as they are issued and the  minutes of such meetings;  
(g) to represent the University in suits or proceedings by or against  the University, sign powers of 
attorney and verify pleadings or depute  his representative for the purpose; and  
(h) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes,  the Ordinances or the 
Regu lations or as may be required from time to  time by the Executive Council or the                              
Vice -Chancellor.  
7. The Finance Officer .—(1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed by  the Executive Council on 
the recommendations of a Selection Committee  constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time 
salaried  officer of the University.  
(2) The Finance Officer shall be appointed for a term of five years and  shall be eligible for                      
re-appointment.  
(3) The emoluments and  other terms and conditions of service of the  Finance Officer shall be such as 
may be prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that the Finance Officer shall retire on attaining the age of  sixty years:  
Provided further that the Finance Officer shall, notwith standing his  attaining the age of sixty years, 
continue in office until his  successor is appointed and enters upon his office or until the expiry  of a period 
of one year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Finance Officer is vacant or when th e Finance Officer is, by reason of 
illness, absence or any other cause,  unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office  shall 
be performed by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint  for the purpose.  
(5) The Finance Officer shall  be ex officio  Secretary of the Finance  Committee, but shall not be 
deemed to be a member of such Committee.  
(6) The Finance Officer shall — 
(a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the University and  shall advise it as regards its 
financial policy; and  18 
  (b) perform such other financial functions as may be assigned to him by  the Executive Council or 
as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the  Ordinances.  
(7) Subject to the control of the Executive Council, the Finance  Officer shall — 
(a) hold an d manage the property and investments of the University  including trust and endowed 
property;  
(b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Executive Council for recurring  and non -recurring 
expenditure for a year are not exceeded and that all  moneys are expended  on the purpose for which 
they are granted or  allotted;  
(c) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the  budget of the University and for 
their presentation to the Executive  Council;  
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and b ank balances  and on the state of 
investments;  
(e) watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advise on the  methods of collection 
employed;  
(f) ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture and  equipment are maintained up -to-date 
and that  stock -checking is  conducted, of equipment and other consumable materials in all offices,  
Departments, University Institutes, Centres and Specialised  Laboratories;  
(g) bring to the notice of the Vice -Chancellor unauthorised expenditure  and other financial 
irregularities and suggest disciplinary action  against persons at fault; and  
(h) call for from any office, Department, University Institute,  independent Centre, Specialised 
Laboratory or User Facility maintained  by the University any information or returns  that he may 
consider  necessary for the performance of his duties.  
(8) Any receipt given by the Finance Officer or the person or persons  duly authorised in this behalf by 
the Executive Council for any money  payable to the University shall be sufficient dis charge for payment 
of such money.  
8. The Court .—(1) The Court shall consist of the following members,  namely:— 
(a) Ex officio  Members  
(i) the Chancellor;  
(ii) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(iii) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor, if any;  
(iv) the  members of the Executive Council other than the Vice -Chancellor, the Pro -Vice -
Chancellor and the Deans of Faculties;  
(v) the Deans of Faculties;  
(vi) the Finance Officer;  
(vii) the Dean of Research and Development, in case he is not a member  under any oth er 
provision of this sub -clause;  
(viii) the Dean of College Development, in case he is not a member  under any other provision 
of this sub -clause;  
(ix) the Librarian;  
(x) such Heads of Departments, Directors of University Institutes,  Directors of Constituen t 
Institutes and Heads of Centres which are not  comprised in any University Institute, as are not 
members under any  other provision of this sub -clause; and  
(xi) two Principals of Constituent Colleges, to be selected by rotation  in the order of length of 
substantive service as Principals.  
  19 
  (b) Representatives of the academic staff  
(i) five Professors, three Readers and three Lecturers from among the  University appointed 
teachers of the Faculties, to be selected by  rotation in the order of seniority;  
(ii) one Professor, one Reader and one Lecturer from among the  University recognised 
teachers of the University Colleges, to be  selected by rotation in the order of seniority;  
(iii) two Professors, two Readers and two Lecturers from among the  teachers of the 
University Institutes, to be selected by rotation in  the order of seniority;  
(iv) two Professors, one Reader and one Lecturer from among the  University recognised 
teachers of the Constituent Institutes, to be  selected by rotation in the order of seniority; a nd 
(v) six persons from among the University recognised teachers of the  Constituent Colleges, to 
be selected by rotation in the order of  seniority, of whom at least two shall be Lecturers.  
(c) Representatives of Students  
one student from each group of subj ects assigned to the Faculties who,  having secured the 
highest marks in that group of subjects at the  preceding degree examination of the University, is 
pursuing a course of  study for a Post -graduate degree in the same group of subjects in the  
University o r in a college or institution maintained by the University  or admitted to the privileges 
of the University:  
Provided that a representative of students shall no longer continue as  such representative on 
the termination of his enrolment as a student.  
(d) Representatives of Registered Graduates  
ten representatives of the registered Graduates, not being persons in  the service or students of 
the University or an institution maintained  by or admitted to the privileges of the University or a 
member of the  manageme nt of such institution, to be co -opted by the Court in  accordance with 
the procedure laid down in the Regulations.  
(e) Representatives of Parliament  
(i) three representatives of Parliament, two to be elected by the Lok  Sabha  from amongst its 
own members, in such manner as the Speaker may  direct, and one to be elected by the Rajya 
Sabha from amongst its own  members, in such manner as the Chairman may direct:  
Provided that consequent upon a Member of Parliament becoming a  Minis ter or 
Speaker/Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha or Deputy Chairman, Rajya  Sabha, his election to the Court 
shall be deemed to have been  terminated.  
(f) Nominees of the Visitor, the Chief Rector and the Chancellor  
(i) seven persons representing learned professions  and special  interests, including 
representatives of Industry, Commerce, Labour and  Agriculture, to be nominated by the Visitor;  
(ii) two eminent educationists, to be nominated by the Chief Rector;  and 
(iii) three  persons of distinction in public life, to be nominated by  the Chancellor.  
(2) The term of office of the members of the Court under sub -clauses  (a), (b), (e) and ( f) of clause ( 1) 
shall be three years and under sub -clauses  (c) and ( d) thereof shall be one year.  
(3) An annual meeting of the Court shall be held on a date to be fixed  by the Executive Council 
unless some other date has been fixed by the  Court in respect of any year.  
(4) At the annual meeting of the Court, a report on the working of the  Universi ty during the previous 
year, together with a statement of the  receipts and expenditure, the balance sheet as audited, and the  
financial estimates for the next year shall be presented.  
(5) A copy of the statement of receipts and expenditure, the balance  sheet and the financial estimates 
referred to in clause ( 4) shall be  sent to every member of the Court at least seven days before the date  of 
the annual meeting.  20 
  (6) Special meetings of the Court may be convened by the Executive  Council or the Vice -Chancellor  
or if there is no Vice -Chancellor, the  Pro-Vice -Chancellor or if there is no Pro -Vice -Chancellor, by the  
Registrar.  
(7) Twenty -five members of the Court shall form a quorum for a meeting  of the Court.  
9. The Executive Council .—(1) The Executive Council shall consist of  the following members, 
namely:— 
(a) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(b) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor, if any;  
(c) three Deans of Faculties, to be selected by rotation in the order  in which the Faculties are 
enumerated in clause ( 1) to Statute 14;  
(d) one Director of a Constituent Institute, to be selected by rotation  in the order of length of 
substantive service as such Director;  
(e) one Principal of a Constituent College, to be selected by rotation  in the order of length of 
substantive service as such Pri ncipal;  
(f) two Professors, two Readers and two Lecturers from among the  University appointed teachers, 
to be selected by rotation in the order  of seniority;  
(g) one person from among the University recognised teachers of  University Colleges, to be 
selecte d by rotation in the order of  seniority;  
(h) two persons from among the University recognised teachers of  Constituent Institutes, to be 
selected by rotation in the order of  seniority, of whom at least one shall be a Lecturer;  
(i) three  persons from among the University recognised teachers of  Constituent Colleges, to be 
selected by rotation in the order of  seniority, of whom at least one shall be a Lecturer;  
(j) four persons to be nominated by the Visitor;  
(k) one person of academic emin ence to be nominated by the Chief  Rector; and  
(l) one person of academic eminence to be nominated by the Chancellor.  
(2) The term of office of members of the Executive Council under sub -clauses  (c) to ( g) of clause ( 1) 
shall be two years, and of members  under sub -clauses ( h) to ( j) thereof shall be three years.  
(3) No person shall continue to be a member of the Executive Council in  more than one capacity, and 
whenever a person becomes such member in  more than one capacity, he shall within two weeks thereof 
intimate to  the Registrar in writing as to the capacity in which he desires to be  such member and vacate 
the other seat, failing which the seat held by  him earlier in point of time shall be deemed to have been 
vacated.  
(4) Seven members of the Executive Co uncil shall form a quorum for a  meeting of the Executive 
Council.  
10. Powers and functions of the Executive Council .—(1) The Executive  Council shall have the 
power of management and administration of the  revenues and property of the University and the conduct 
of all  administrative affairs of the University not otherwise provided for.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of the Act, the Statutes and the  Ordinances, the Executive Council shall, 
in addition to all other  powers vested in it, hav e the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to create teaching and other academic posts, to determine the  number and emoluments of such 
posts and to define the duties and  conditions of service of Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other  
academic staff:  
Provided that no action sh all be taken by the Executive Council in  respect of the number and 
qualifications of teachers and other academic  staff otherwise than after consideration of the 
recommendations of the  Academic Council;  21 
  (ii) to appoint such Professors, Readers, Lecturers an d other  academic staff, as may be necessary, 
and the Directors of University  Institutes and Heads of independent Centres on the recommendation 
of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and to fill up  temporary vacancies therein;  
(iii) to recog nise persons as University recognised teachers in the  manner prescribed by the 
Ordinances;  
(iv) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts  (including Chairs) and to make 
appointments thereto in the manner  prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(v) to grant leave of absence to any salaried officer of the University  other than the Vice -
Chancellor, and to make necessary arrangements for  the discharge of the functions of such officer 
during his absence;  
(vi) to regulate and enforce discipline among employees in accordance  with the Statutes and the 
Ordinances;  
(vii) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, investments,  property, business and all other 
administrative affairs of the  University and for that purpose to appoint such agents as it may think  fit; 
(viii) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non -recurring  expenditure for a year on the 
recommendation of the Finance Committee;  
(ix) to invest any money belonging to the University, including any  unapplied income, in such 
stocks, funds, share or securities, from time  to time as it may think fit or in the purchase of 
immovable property in  India, with the like powers of varying such investment from time to  time;  
(x) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immovable  property  on behalf of the 
University;  
(xi) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus and other  means needed for carrying 
on the work of the University;  
(xii) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on behalf of  the University;  
(xiii) to e ntertain, adjudicate upon, and if thought fit, to redress  any grievances of the employees 
and students of the University who may,  for any reason, feel aggrieved;  
(xiv) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if necessary, to remove  them, and to fix their fees, 
emoluments and travelling and other  allowances, after consulting the Academic Council;  
(xv) to select a common seal for the University and provide for the  custody and use of such seal;  
(xvi) to make such special arrangements as may be necessary for t he residence and discipline of 
women students;  
(xvii) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and  prizes;  
(xviii) to provide for the appointment of Visiting Professors, Emeritus  Professors, Consultants and 
Scholars and determine the te rms and  conditions of such appointments; and  
(xix) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as  may be conferred or imposed 
on it by the Act or the Statutes.  
11. The Academic Council .—(1) The Academic Council shall consist of the  following members, 
namely:— 
(a) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(b) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor, if any;  
(c) the Deans of the Faculties;  
(d) the Dean of Research and Development;  
(e) the Dean of Students Welfare;  
(f) the Dean of College Development;  
(g) the Librarian;  22 
  (h) such Heads of Departments, Directors of University Institutes and  Heads of Centres not 
comprised in any University Institute, as are not  members under sub -clauses ( b) to ( f): 
Provided that where a subject assigned to any Faculty is not placed  under any Department, the 
Chairman of the Board of Studies of the  subject shall be a member of the Academic Council in case 
he is not  already a member under sub -clauses ( b) to ( g); 
(i) one Professor, one Reader and one Lecturer from each Faculty,  selected by rotatio n in the 
order of seniority of Professors, Readers  or Lecturers, as the case may be, of the concerned Faculty;  
(j) the Directors of Constituent Institutes;  
(k) one Professor (not being Director) of each Constituent Institute,  selected by rotation in the 
order of seniority;  
(l) two Principals of Constituent Colleges, selected by rotation in the  order of length of 
substantive service as Principal;  
(m) two members of the academic staff (not being Principals) of  Constituent Colleges from each 
group of subject s assigned to a Faculty  of the University, selected by rotation in the order of seniority 
as such members of the academic staff of the concerned group of subjects;  and 
(n) five persons, not being persons of academic excellence in the  service of the Univers ity or a 
college or an institution admitted to  the privileges of the University, to be co -opted by the Academic  
Council.  
(2) The term of office of members (other than ex officio  members) of  the Academic Council shall be 
three years.  
(3) Twenty -five members  of the Academic Council shall form a quorum for  a meeting of the 
Academic Council.  
12. Powers and functions of the Academic Council .—Subject to the  provisions of the Act, the 
Statutes and the Ordinances, the Academic  Council shall, in addition to all othe r powers vested in it, have 
the following powers, namely: — 
(a) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the  University and to give 
directions regarding methods of instruction, coordination  of teaching among the Constituent Colleges, 
evaluation of  research and maintenance and improvement of academic standards;  
(b) to promote co -ordination between Faculties, Departments, University  Institutes and 
independent Centres, collaboration between the  University and Constituent Institutes and es tablish 
such committees,  boards or schools as may be deemed necessary for these purposes;  
(c) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own  initiative, or on a reference 
by a Faculty, University Institute,  independent Centre or Constit uent Institute or the Executive 
Council,  and to take appropriate action thereon;  
(d) to advise the Executive Council on all academic matters, including — 
(i) matters relating to the examinations conducted by the University;  
(ii) the qualifications required to be possessed by persons imparting  instruction in particular 
subjects for the degrees of the University;  and 
(iii) matters referred to it for advice by the Executive Council;  
(e) to consider and approve proposals submitted by the Boards of  Studies through the Boards of 
Faculties or by University Institutes or  independent Centres or Constituent Institutes in respect of 
courses of  study and research degree programmes;  
(f) to recommend for the consideration of the Executive Council the  principles and c riteria on 
which examiners and Inspectors for various  kinds of inspection of the University Colleges, 
Constituent Institutes  and Constituent Colleges may be appointed; and  23 
  (g) to frame such regulations and rules consistent with the Statutes  and the Ordinances regarding 
the academic functioning of the  University, discipline, residence, admissions, award of fellowships,  
scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes, fees, concessions,  corporate life and attendance.  
13. The Finance Committee .—(1) The Fi nance Committee shall consist of  the following members, 
namely:— 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(ii) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(iii) three persons to be nominated by the Executive Council, out of  whom at least one shall be a 
member of the Executive Council; and  
(iv) three persons to be nominated by the Visitor.  
(2) Five members of the Finance Committee shall form a quorum for a  meeting of the Finance 
Committee.  
(3) All the members of the Finance Committee, other than ex officio  members, shall hold office for a 
term of three years.  
(4) A member of the Finance Committee shall have the right to record a  minute of dissent if he does 
not agree with any decision of the Finance  Committee.  
(5) The Finance Committee shall meet at least thrice every year to  examine the accou nts and to 
scrutinise proposals for expenditure.  
(6) All proposals relating to creation of posts, and those items which  have not been included in the 
Budget, shall be examined by the Finance  Committee before they are considered by the Executive 
Council.  
(7) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University  prepared by the Finance Officer 
shall be laid before the Finance  Committee for consideration and comments and thereafter submitted to  
the Executive Council for approval.  
(8) The Finance Co mmittee shall recommend limits for the total  recurring expenditure and the total 
non-recurring expenditure for the  year, based on the income and resources of the University (which, in  the 
case of productive works, may include the proceeds of loans).  
14. Fa culties and Departments .—(1) The University shall have the  following Faculties, namely: — 
(i) the Faculty of Arts;  
(ii) the Faculty of Commerce;  
(iii) the Faculty of Law;  
(iv) the Faculty of Medicine; and  
(v) the Faculty of Science.  
(2) The constitution and  term of office of members of the Board of each  Faculty, its powers and 
functions and the provisions in respect of the  meetings thereof shall be prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that the first Board of each Faculty shall be nominated by the  Executive  Council and shall 
hold office for a period of one year.  
(3) The Faculty of Arts shall consist of the following Departments,  namely:— 
(i) Ancient History, Culture and Archaeology;  
(ii) Anthropology;  
(iii) Arabic and Persian;  
(iv) Education;  
(v) English and  Modern European Languages;  
(vi) Geography;  24 
  (vii) Hindi and Modern Indian Languages;  
(viii) Journalism and Mass Communication;  
(ix) Medieval and Modern History;  
(x) Music and Performing Arts;  
(xi) Philosophy;  
(xii) Physical Education;  
(xiii) Political Science;  
(xiv) Psychology;  
(xv) Sanskrit; Pali, Prakrit and Oriental Languages;  
(xvi) Urdu; and  
(xvii) Visual Arts.  
(4) The Faculty of Commerce shall consist of the following Departments,  namely:— 
(i) Commerce and Business Administration; and  
(ii) Economics.  
(5) The Faculty of Law shall consist of the following Department,  namely:— 
Law.  
(6) The Faculty of Medicine shall consist of the following Departments,  namely:— 
(i) Anaesthesia;  
(ii) Anatomy;  
(iii) Cardiology;  
(iv) Ear, Nose and Throat;  
(v) Fore nsic Medicine;  
(vi) Medicine;  
(vii) Microbiology;  
(viii) Obstetrics and Gynaecology;  
(ix) Ophthalmology;  
(x) Orthopaedics;  
(xi) Paediatrics;  
(xii) Pathology and Bacteriology;  
(xiii) Pharmacy;  
(xiv) Pharmacology;  
(xv) Physiology;  
(xvi) Radiology;  
(xvii) Social and Preventive Medicine;  
(xviii) Surgery; and  
(xix) Tuberculosis.  
(7) The Faculty of Science shall consist of the following Departments,  namely:— 
(i) Botany;  25 
  (ii) Bio -Chemistry;  
(iii) Chemistry;  
(iv) Defence and Strategic Studies;  
(v) Earth and Planetary Sciences;  
(vi) Electronics and Communication;  
(vii) Home Science;  
(viii) Mathematics;  
(ix) Physics;  
(x) Statistics; and  
(xi) Zoology.  
(8) Each Department shall be headed by a Head of the Department, whose  manner of appointment, 
term of office and  functions shall be prescribed  by the Ordinances.  
(9) Each Department shall have a Departmental Committee, the  constitution, term of office of 
members and functions whereof shall be  prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(10) There shall be a Board of Studies for e ach subject, the  constitution, term of office of members 
and functions whereof shall be  prescribed by the Ordinances.  
15. Selection Committees .—(1) There shall be Selection Committees for  making recommendations 
to the Executive Council for appointment to the posts of Professor, Reader, Lecturer, Registrar, Finance 
Officer,  Librarian and Directors of University Institutes and Heads of  independent Centres maintained by 
the University.  
(2) The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts specified in  column 1 of the Table below 
shall consist of the Vice -Chancellor, a  nominee of the Visitor and the persons specified in the 
corresponding  entry in column 2 of the said Table:  
TABLE  
1 2 
Professor/Reader  (i) The Dean of the Faculty.  
(ii) The Head of the Department.  
(iii) Thre e experts in the concerned subject/field, to be appointed 
by the Executive Council, out of the panel recommended by 
the Academic Council.  
 
Lecturer  (i) The Dean of the Faculty/Head of the Department.  
(ii) Three experts in the concerned subject/field, to be appointed  
by the Executive Council, out of the  panel recommended by 
the Academic Council.  
 
Registrar/Finance  Officer  (i) Two members of the Executive  Council nominated by it.  
(ii) One person not in the service of the University or an 
institution maintained by, or admitted to, the privileges of the 
University, nominated by the Executive Council.  
 
Librarian  (i) Three persons not in the service  of the University  or an 
institution maintained by,  or admitted to,  the privileges of the 
University,  who have special  knowledge of the subject of the  
Library Science/  Library Administration to be  nominated by 
the Executive Council.  
(ii) One person not in the service of  the University or  an 
institution maintained by, or  admitted to, the  privileges of the 
University,  nominated by the  Exec utive Council.  26 
  1 2 
Director of University  Institute  
or Head of  independent   
Centre maintained by  
the University.  Three experts in the concerned subject/field, to  be appointed by 
the Executive Council, out  of the panel Centre recommended by 
the Academic  Council.  
Note : 1.  
 Where the appointment is being made for an interdisciplinary  project, the head of the 
project shall be deemed to be the Head of the Department concerned.  
 
Note  : 2.  
 In the case of a University Institute, the Director and  in the case of an independent 
Centre, the Head thereof shall be deemed to be the Head of the Department 
concerned.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor, or in his absence the Pro -Vice -Chancellor,  shall convene and preside at the 
meeting of the Selection Committee:  
Provided that the meeting of the Selection Committee shall be fixed  after prior consultation with, and 
subject to the convenience of  Visitor's nominee and the experts approved by the Executive Council.  
(4) Four members, including at least two experts, must be prese nt to form the quorum for a meeting 
of the Selection Committee.  
(5) The procedure to be followed by the Selection Committee shall be  laid down in the Ordinances.  
(6) If the Executive Council is unable to accept the recommendations  made by the Selection 
Com mittee, it shall record its reasons and submit  the case to the Visitor for final orders.  
(7) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made in the manner  indicated below — 
(i) If the temporary vacancy is for duration longer than one academic  session, it shal l be filled on 
the advice of the Selection Committee in  accordance with the procedure indicated in the foregoing 
clauses:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor is satisfied that in the interests  of work it is necessary to fill 
the vacancy, the appointment m ay be  made on a purely temporary basis on the advice of a local 
Selection  Committee referred to in sub -clause ( ii) for a period not exceeding six  months.  
(ii) If the temporary vacancy is for a period less than a year, an  appointment to such vacancy shall 
be made on the recommendation of a  local Selection Committee consisting of the Dean of the Faculty  
concerned, the Head of the Department and a nominee of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and the  Head of the  Department, 
the Selection Committee may contain two  nominees of the Vice -Chancellor.  
(iii) No teacher appointed temporarily on the advice of a local  Selection Committee shall be 
continued in service on such temporary  employment, unless he is subsequently selected by a regular 
Selection  Committee, for temporary or permanent appointment.  
(iv) Where a teacher has been appointed to a Department on the  recommendation of a regular 
Selection Committee on a temporary post,  and such post subsequently becomes perman ently vacant 
or another  permanent post of the same rank and grade becomes available in the same  Department, the 
Executive Council may appoint such teacher on permanent  basis in such Department without further 
reference to a regular  Selection Committee.  
16. Special mode of appointment .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained  in Statute 15, the 
Executive Council may invite a person of high  academic distinction and professional attainments to 
accept a post of  Professor or any other equivalent academic post in t he University, on  such terms and 
conditions as it deems fit and on the person agreeing to  do so appoint him to the post.  
(2) The Executive Council may declare a person working in any other  University or organisation as 
teacher of the University for a speci fied period.  
(3) Appointments to Chairs and of Emeritus Professors shall be made by  the Executive Council in 
accordance with the procedure laid down in the  Ordinances for such tenure and on such terms and 
conditions as it deems  fit. 27 
  (4) The Executive Council may appoint a person selected in accordance  with the procedure laid down 
in Statute 15 for a fixed tenure on such  terms and conditions as it deems fit.  
17. Academic staff .—(1) The academic staff shall consist of teachers  and staff employed for 
impa rting instruction or for conducting, or  assisting in the conduct of, research.  
(2) The manner of appointment of the academic staff, other than  teachers, shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the Ordinances.  
18. Recognition of teachers .—(1) The qualificatio ns of University  recognised teachers shall be such 
as may be determined by the  Ordinances.  
(2) All applications for the recognition of teachers shall be made in  such manner as may be laid down 
by the Regulations made by the  Executive Council in that behalf . 
(3) The Executive Council may, on a reference from the Vice -Chancellor,  withdraw recognition from 
a teacher:  
Provided that the teacher or the college or institution concerned may,  within a period of thirty days 
from the date of the order of  withdrawal, appeal against the order to the Visitor whose decision  shall be 
final.  
19. Committees .—(1) Any authority of the University may appoint as many  standing or special 
Committees as it may deem fit, and may appoint to  such Committees persons who are not members  of 
such authority.  
(2) Any Committee appointed under clause ( 1) may deal with any subject  delegated to it subject to 
subsequent confirmation by the authority  appointing it.  
20. Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of the  teachers, etc .—(1) All the 
teachers and other academic staff of the  University shall, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, 
be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as  are specified in the Statutes, 
the Ordinances and the Regulations.  
(2) The emoluments of members of the academic staff shall be such as  may be prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(3) Every teacher and other member of the academic staff of the  University shall be appointed on a 
written contract, the form of which  shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) A copy of every contract referred to in clause ( 3) shall be  deposited with the Registrar.  
21. Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of other  employees .—(1) All the 
employees of the University, other than the  academic staff, shall, in the absence of any contract to the 
contrary,  be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct  as are specified in the 
Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations.  
(2) The manner of appointment and emoluments  of employees, other than  the academic staff, shall be 
such as may be prescribed by the  Ordinances.  
22. Seniority list .—(1) Whenever, in accordance with the Statutes, any  person is to hold an office or 
be a member of an authority of the  University by rotat ion according to seniority, such seniority shall be  
determined according to the length of continuous service of such person  in his grade and in accordance 
with such other principles as the  Executive Council may, from time to time, prescribe.  
(2) It shall b e the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain in  respect of each class of persons to 
whom the provisions of these  Statutes apply, a complete and up -to-date seniority list in accordance  with 
the provisions of clause ( 1). 
(3) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous service in a  particular grade or the relative 
seniority of any person or persons is  otherwise in doubt, the Registrar may, on his own motion and shall, 
at the request of any such person, submit the matter to the Executive  Council whose decision thereon shall 
be final.  
(4) The provisions of this Statute shall not affect the inter se  seniority of the employees working in 
the University before the  appointed day.  28 
  23. Removal of employees of the University .—(1) Where there is an  allegation of misconduct 
against a member of the academic staff or  other employee of the University, the Vice -Chancellor, in the 
case of  such member of the academic staff, and the authority competent to  appoint (hereinafter referred to 
as the appointing aut hority) in the  case of other employee may, by order in writing, place such member of  
the academic staff or other employee, as the case may be, under  suspension and shall forthwith report to 
the Executive Council the  circumstances in which the order was mad e: 
Provided that the Executive Council may, if it is of the opinion, that  the circumstances of the case do 
not warrant the suspension of the  member of the academic staff, revoke such order.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of the contract of  appointment or of any other 
terms and conditions of service of the  employees, the Executive Council in respect of the academic staff, 
and the appointing authority in respect of other employees, shall have the  power to remove such member 
of the academic staff or other employee, as  the case may be, on grounds of misconduct.  
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Executive Council, or as the case may be,  the appointing authority, shall not 
be entitled to remove any member of  the academic staff or other employe e except for a good cause and 
after giving three months' notice or on payment of three months' salary in  lieu thereof.  
(4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall be  removed under clause ( 2) or 
clause ( 3) unless he has been given a  reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed 
to be taken in regard to him.  
(5) The removal of a member of the academic staff or other employee  shall take effect from the date 
on which the order of removal is made:  
Provided that wher e the teacher, member of the academic staff or other  employee is under suspension 
at the time of his removal, such removal  shall take effect from the date on which he was placed under  
suspension.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing prov isions of  this Statute, a teacher, member 
of the academic staff or other employee  may resign, — 
(a) if he is a permanent employee, only after giving three months'  notice in writing to the 
Executive Council or the appointing authority,  as the case may be, or  by paying three months' salary 
in lieu thereof;  
(b) if he is not a permanent employee, only after giving one month's  notice in writing to the 
Executive Council or, as the case may be, the  appointing authority or by paying one month's salary in 
lieu thereo f: 
Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date on  which the resignation is accepted 
by the Executive Council or the  appointing authority, as the case may be.  
24. The Librarian .—There shall be a Librarian of the University, who  shall b e appointed by the 
Executive Council on the recommendations of  the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and 
shall exercise  such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by Ordinances.  
25. Promotion of research, development and consult ancy and extension  services .—There shall be 
a Dean of Research and Development to assist  the Vice -Chancellor in the planning and co -ordination of 
research,  development and consultancy and extension services in the University,  who shall be appointed 
from am ongst the Professors in the manner  prescribed by the Ordinances.  
26. Honorary degrees .—(1) The Executive Council may, on the  recommendation of the Academic 
Council and by a resolution passed by a  majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and 
voting,  make proposals to the Visitor for the conferment of honorary degrees:  
Provided that in case of emergency, the Executive Council may, on its  own motion, make such 
proposals.  
(2) The Executive Council may, by a resolution passed by a majority of  not less than two -thirds of the 
members present and voting, withdraw,  with the previous sanction of the Visitor, any honorary degree  
conferred by the University.  29 
  27. Withdrawal of degrees, etc .—The Executive Council may, by a special  resolution passed by a  
majority of not less than two -thirds of the  members present and voting, withdraw a degree or academic 
distinction  conferred on, or any certificate or diploma granted to, any person by  the University for good 
and sufficient cause:  
Provided that no such res olution shall be passed until a notice in  writing has been given to that person 
calling upon him to show cause  within such time as may be specified in the notice why such a  resolution 
should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and  any evidence he may produce in support of 
them, have been considered by  the Executive Council.  
28. Maintenance of discipline amongst students of the University .—(1) All powers relating to the 
maintenance of discipline and disciplinary  action in relation to the students  of the University shall vest in 
the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) There shall be a Proctor of the University to assist the Vice -Chancellor in the exercise of the 
powers referred to in clause ( 1), who  shall be appointed by the Executive Council from amongst the 
Professors  and Readers in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may delegate all or any of the powers referred  to in clause ( 1), as he deems 
proper, to the Proctor and to such other  officers as he may specify in this behalf.  
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers referred to in  clause ( 1), the Vice -Chancellor 
may, in exercise of such powers, by  order, direct that any student or students be expelled or rusticated,  for 
a specified period, or be not admitted for a stat ed period to a  course or courses of study in the University 
or an institution  maintained by or admitted to the privileges of the University, or be  punished with fine for 
an amount to be specified in the order, or be  debarred from taking an examination or e xaminations 
conducted by the  University, for one or more years, or that the results of the student  or students concerned 
in the examination or examinations in which he or  they have appeared be cancelled.  
(5) The Deans of Faculties, Heads of Departments and  Centres, Directors  of University Institutes and 
Constituent Institutes and Principals of  University Colleges and Constituent Colleges shall have the 
authority  to exercise all such disciplinary powers over the students in their  respective Faculties, 
Depart ments, independent Centres, University  Institutes, Constituent Institutes, University Colleges and 
Constituent  Colleges, as may be necessary for the proper conduct of the work  thereof.  
(6) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice -Chancellor and the  Dean s, Heads, Directors and 
Principals specified in clause ( 5), detailed rules of discipline and proper conduct shall be made by the  
University, and such Deans, Heads, Directors and Principals may also  make such supplementary rules as 
they deem necessary for t he purposes  stated therein.  
(7) At the time of admission, every student shall be required to sign a  declaration to the effect that he 
submits himself to the disciplinary  jurisdiction of the Vice -Chancellor and other authorities of the  
University.  
29. Maintenance of discipline among Students of institutions admitted  to the privileges of the 
University .—All powers relating to discipline  and disciplinary action in relation to students of an 
institution  admitted to the privileges of the University, shall v est in the  Director or Principal, as the case 
may be, of the institution, in  accordance with the procedure prescribed by the Ordinances.  
30. University Institutes, independent Centres, University Colleges and  Constituent 
Institutes .—(1) The Institutes of t he University  immediately before the c ommencement of the Act, 
namely:— 
(i) The Institute of Inter -Disciplinary Studies;  
(ii) The Institute of Professional Studies; and  
(iii) The National Centre of Experimental Mineralogy and Petrology,   
shall  continue as University Institutes and the Centre of Behavioural  and Cognitive Sciences shall 
continue as an independent Centre of the  University, and all matters relating thereto shall be provided for 
by the Ordinances.  30 
  (2) The Institute of Correspondence  Courses and Continuing Education  shall continue as a temporary 
self-financing University Institute, and  all matters relating thereto shall be provided for by the 
Ordinances.  
(3) The manner of establishing University Institutes, Centres and  University Coll eges maintained by 
the University and other matters  relating to them shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The following shall be t he University Colleges, namely: — 
The Motilal Nehru Medical College and Swarup Rani Nehru Hospital,  Allahabad.  
(5) The following shall be the Constituent Institutes, namely: — 
(i) The Govind Ballabh Pant Social Science Institute, Allahabad;  
(ii) The Harish Chandra Research Institute of Mathematics and  Mathematical Physics, Allahabad; 
and 
(iii) The Kamala Nehru Post -graduate Medical Institute, Allahabad.  
(6) The admission of institutions to the privileges of the University  as Constituent Institutes and 
University Colleges and other matters  relating to Constituent Institutes and University Colleges shall be  
prescribed by  the Ordinances.  
31. Constituent Colleges .—(1) The following shall be the Constituent  Colleges, namely: — 
(i) Allahabad Degree College, Allahabad;  
(ii) Arya Kanya Degree College, Allahabad;  
(iii) Chaudhary Mahadeo Prasad Degree College, Allahabad;  
(iv) Ewing Christian College, Allahabad;  
(v) Iswar Saran Degree College, Allahabad;  
(vi) Hamidia Girls Degree College, Allahabad;  
(vii) Jagat Taran Girls Degree College, Allahabad;  
(viii) K. P. Training College, Allahabad;  
(ix) Rajarshi Tandon  Girls Degree College, Allahabad;  
(x) Sanwal Dass Sadan Lal Khanna Girls Degree College, Allahabad;  and 
(xi) Shyama Prasad Mukherji Government Degree College, Allahabad.  
(2) Matters relating to the constitution of the management, the powers  of the Vice -Chancellor to issue 
directions to, and to enforce his  orders against, the management, the conditions for the continuance,  
enlargement and withdrawal of the privileges of Constituent Colleges  and the grant to and withdrawal 
from them of the autonomous status  shall be prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that every Constituent College shall be required to undergo  the process of assessment by a 
visiting Peer Team of the National  Assessment and Accreditation Council, set up under section 12 (ccc) 
of the Universi ty Grants Commission Act, 1956 (3 of 1956), and  accreditation by the said Council within 
a period of three years from  the date of the commencement of the Act.  
(3) Where under the provisions of the Uttar Pradesh State Universities  Act, 1973 (President's Act  10 
of 1973) a Constituent College had been  granted permission by the predecessor University to impart 
instruction  for a Post -graduate degree other than the degree of Bachelor of Laws or  to exercise the 
privileges of an Autonomous College, such permission  shall cease to have effect upon the expiry of the 
academic year  immediately following the academic year during which the Act has  commenced or of the 
period for which such permission had been granted  by the predecessor University, whichever is earlier, 
without prejudice  to the right of the Constituent College concerned to apply afresh for  such permission in 
accordance with the provisions of the Statutes and  the Ordinances.  
(4) There shall be constituted, by Ordinances, a College Development  Council to monitor and 
promote the academic functioning and development  of the Constituent  Colleges.  31 
  (5) The College Development Council shall be headed by the Dean of  College Development, who 
shall be appointed by the Executive Council  from among the Professors of t he University in the manner 
prescribed by  the Ordinances.  
32. Convocations .—Convocations of the University for the conferring of  degrees or for other 
purposes shall be held in such manner as may be  prescribed by the Ordinances.  
33. Acting Chairman of meeti ngs.—Where no provision is made for a  President or Chairman to 
preside over a meeting of any authority of the  University or any Committee of such authority or when the 
President or  Chairman so provided for is absent, the members present shall elect one  from among 
themselves to preside at such meeting.  
34. Resignation .—Any member, other than an ex officio  member, of the  Court, the Executive 
Council, the Academic Council or any other  authority of the University or any Committee of such 
authority may  resign by  letter addressed to the Registrar and the resignation shall  take effect as soon as 
such letter is received by the Registrar.  
35. Disqualifications .—(1) A person shall be disqualified for being  chosen as, and for being, a 
member of any of the authorities o f the University, — 
(i) if he is of unsound mind;  
(ii) if he is an undischarged insolvent;  
(iii) if he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence  involving moral turpitude and 
sentenced in respect thereof to  imprisonment for not less than six months . 
(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been  subjected to any of the 
disqualifications mentioned in clause ( 1), the  question shall be referred to the Visitor and his decision 
shall be  final and no suit or other proceeding shall lie in  any civil court  against such decision.  
36. Residence condition for membership and office .—Notwithstanding  anything contained in the 
Statutes, a person who is not ordinarily  resident in India shall not be eligible to be an officer of the  
University or a member of any authority of the University.  
37. Membership of authorities by virtue of membership of other bodies .—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Statutes, a person who holds  any post in the University or is a member of any 
authority or body of  the University in his capacity as a member of a particular authority or  body or as the 
holder of a particular appointment shall hold such  office or membership only for so long as he continues 
to be a member of  that particular authority or body or the holder  of that particular  appointment, as the 
case may be.  
38. Registered Graduates .—The provisions in respect of the registration  of graduates and the 
maintenance of the register of Registered  Graduates shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
39. Dean and Board of Students Welfare .—(1) There shall be a Dean of  Students Welfare to co -
ordinate the measures for promoting the welfare  of the students of the University, who shall be appointed 
by the  Executive Council from among the Professors and Readers of the  Univers ity in the manner 
prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(2) There shall be constituted in the University, a Board of Students  Welfare, the constitution, term of 
office of members and functions  whereof shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
40. Ordinances, how made .—(1) The first Ordinances made under sub -section  (2) of section 29 may 
be amended, repealed or added to at any  time by the Executive Council in the manner specified in the 
following  sub-sections.  
(2) No Ordinance in respect of the matters enumerated in sub-section  (1) of section 29 shall be made 
by the Executive Council unless a  draft of such Ordinance has been proposed by the Academic Council.  
(3) The Executive Council shall not have power to amend any draft of  any Ordinance proposed by the 
Academic Cou ncil under clause ( 2), but  may reject the proposal or return the draft to the Academic 
Council for  re-consideration, either in whole or in part, together with any  amendment which the 
Executive Council may suggest.  32 
  (4) Where the Executive Council has reject ed or returned the draft of  an Ordinance proposed by the 
Academic Council, the Academic Council may  consider the question afresh and in case the original draft 
is reaffirmed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members  present and voting and mo re than 
half the total number of members of  the Academic Council, the draft may be sent back to the Executive  
Council which shall either adopt it or refer it to the Visitor whose  decision shall be final.  
(5) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council sh all come into  effect immediately.  
(6) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall be submitted to  the Visitor within two 
weeks from the date of its adoption.  
(7) The Visitor shall have the power to direct the University to  suspend the operation of any 
Ordinance.  
(8) The Visitor shall inform the Executive Council about his objection  to the Ordinance referred to in 
clause ( 7) and may, after receiving the  comments of the University, either withdraw the order suspending 
the Ordinance or disallow the Ord inance, and his decision shall be final.  
41. Regulations .—(1) The authorities of the University may make  Regulations consistent with the 
Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances  for the following matters, namely: — 
(i) laying down the procedure to be observed a t their meetings and the  number of members 
required to form a quorum;  
(ii) providing for all matters which are required by the Act, the  Statutes or the Ordinances to be 
prescribed by Regulations;  
(iii) providing for all other matters solely concerning such  authorities or committees appointed by 
them and not provided for by the  Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing  for the giving of notice to the 
members of such authority of the dates  of meeting and of the business to be considered at meetings and 
for the  keeping of a record of the proceedings of meetings.  
(3) The Executive Council may direct the amendment in such manner as it  may specify of any 
Regulation made under the Statutes or the an nulment  of any such Regulation.  
42. Delegation of Powers .—Subject to the provisions of the Act and the  Statutes, any officer or 
authority of the University may delegate his  or its powers to any other officer or authority or person under 
his or  its respecti ve control and subject to the condition that overall  responsibility for the exercise of the 
powers so delegated shall  continue to vest in the officer or authority delegating such powers.  
 
________________  
--------------------------The Weapons of Mass Destruction and their Delivery Systems (Prohibition of Unlawful Activities) Act, 2005--------------------------
1 
 THE WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION AND THEIR DELIVERY SYSTEMS  
(PROHIBITION OF UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES) ACT, 2005  
______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Act in addition to other laws.  
3. Extent and application.  
4. Definitions.  
5. Power to identify, designate, categorise or regulate certain activities.  
6. Power to appoint Advisory Committees.  
7. Delegation of powers.  
8. Prohibition relating to weapons of mass destruction.  
9. Prohibition relating to non -State actor or terrorist.  
10. Prohibition as regards intimidating acts.  
11. Prohibition on export.  
12. Prohibition on brokering.  
13. Regulation of export, transfer, re -transfer , transit and tran sshipment.  
14. Offences and penalties.  
15. Punishment for aiding non -State actor or terrorist.  
16. Punishment for unauthorised export.  
17. Punishment for violation of other provisions of the Act.  
18. Penalty for using false or making forged documents, etc.  
19. Punishment for offences with respect to which no provision has been made.  
20. Offences by companies.  
21. Cognizance of offences.  
22. Bar of jurisdiction of civil courts.  
23. Effect of other laws.  
24. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
25. Special prov isions as to Central Government . 
26. Power to make rules.  
27. Power to remove difficulties.  
  2 
 THE WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION AND THEIR DELIVERY SYSTEM S  
(PROHIBITION OF UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES) ACT, 2005  
ACT NO. 21 OF 2005  
[6th June , 2005.]  
An Act to prohibit unlawful activities, in relation to weapons of mass destruction and their 
delivery systems and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS India is determined to safeguard its national security as a  Nuclear Weapon Sta te; 
AND WHEREAS India is committed not to transfer nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, 
or to transfer control over such weapons or explosive devices, and not in any way to assist, encourage, or 
induce any other country to manufacture nuclear weapons or o ther nuclear explosive devices;  
AND WHEREAS India is committed to prevent a non -State actor and a terrorist from acquiring weapons 
of mass destruct ion and their delivery systems;  
AND WHEREAS India is committed to the objective  of global  nuclear disarmament;  
AND WHEREAS India is committed to its obligations as a State Party to the Convention on the 
Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their 
Destruction and the Convention on the Prohibi tion of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of 
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin We apons and on their Destruction;  
AND WHEREAS India is exercising controls over the export of chemicals, organisms, materials, 
equipment and technologies in relat ion to weapons of mass destruction and their delivery sys tems under 
other relevant Acts;  
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to provide for integrated legal measures to exercise controls 
over the export of materials, equipment and technologies and to prohibit unlawful activities in relation to 
weapons of mass destructi on and their means of delivery.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -sixth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Weapons of Mass Destruction 
and their Delivery Systems (Prohibition of Unlawful Activities) Act, 2005.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Act in addition to other laws .—Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the provisions 
of this Act shall be in addition to any other relevant Act for the time being in force in relation to any  
matter covered under this Act.  
3. Extent and applic ation .—(1) It extends to the whole of India includi ng its Exclusive Economic 
Zone.  
(2) Every person shall be liable to punishment under this Act for every act or omission contrary to the 
provisions thereof, of wh ich he is held guilty in India.  
(3) Any person who commits an offence beyond India, which is punishable under this Act, shall be 
dealt with according to the provisions of this Act in the same manner as if such act had been committed in 
India.  
(4) The provisions of  this Act shall also apply to — 
(a) citiz ens of India outside India;  
(b) companies or bodies corporate, registered or incorporated in India or having their associates, 
branches or subsidiaries, outside India;  
(c) any ship, aircraft or other means of transport registered in India or outsid e Indi a, wherever it 
may be;  
                                                           
1. 17th November, 2006, vide notification No. S.O. 1990(E), dated 17th November, 2006, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 3 
 (d) foreigners while in India;  
(e) persons in the service of the Government of India, within and beyond India.  
(5) Notwithstanding the applicability of the provisions of any other Central Act relating to any 
activity provided h erein, the provisions of this Act shall apply to export, transfer, re -transfer, transit and 
trans -shipment of material, equipment or technology of any description as are identified, designated, 
categorised or considered necessary by the Central Government,  as pertinent or relevant to India as a 
Nuclear Weapon State, or to the national security of India, or to the furtherance of its foreign policy or its 
international obligations under any bilateral, multilateral or international treaty, Covenant, Convention  or 
arrangement relating to weapons of mass destruction or their means of deliv ery, to which India is a Party.  
4. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “biological weapons ” are— 
(i) microbial  or other biological agents, or toxins whatever their origin or method of 
production, of types and in quantities that have no justification for prophylactic, protective or 
other peaceful purposes; and  
(ii) weapons, equipment or delivery systems specially designed to use such agents or toxins 
for hostile  purposes or in armed conflict;  
(b) “brought in transit ” means to bring goods from any country into India by land, air, or 
amphibious means of transportation, where the goods are to be taken out from India o n the same 
conveyance on which they are brought into India without any landing in India, but does not include a 
conveyance in innocent passage through Indian territory, Indian territorial waters or Indian airspace 
of a for eign conveyance carrying goods.  
Explanation I .—A conveyance is a foreign conveyance if  it is not registered in India.  
Explanation II .—A conveyance is in “innocent passage ” if it is not engaged in relevant 
activity and passes through or above Indian territorial waters or airspace without stopping or 
anchoring in India;  
(c) “chemical weapons ” means,— 
(i) the toxic chemicals and their precurs ors, except where intended for — 
(a) industrial, agricultural, research, medical, pharmaceutica l or other peaceful purposes;  
(b) protective  purposes, namely those purposes directly related to protection against toxic 
chemicals and to prote ction against chemical weapons;  
(c) military purposes not connected with the use of chemical weapons and not dependent 
on the use of the toxic properties of  chemi cals as a method of warfare; or  
(d) law enforcement including domestic riot control purposes;  
as long as the types and quantities are  consistent with such purposes;  
(ii) the munitions and devices, specifically designed to cause death or other harm th rough the 
toxic properties of those toxic chemicals specified in sub -clause ( i), which would be released as a 
result of the employment of such munitions and devices; and  
(iii) any equipment specifically designed for use directly in connection with the empl oyment 
of munitions and devices specified in sub -clause ( ii), 
together or separately;  
(d) “export” shall have the meaning assigned to this expression in the Foreign Trade 
(Development and Regulation) Act,  1992 (22 of 1992);  
(e) “fissile material ” and “radioactive material ” shall have the meanings assigned to these 
expressions in the Atomic  Energy Act, 1962 (33 of 1962);  4 
 (f) “item” means materials, equipment, and technology, of any description, notified under this Act 
or any other Ac t related to relevant act ivity;  
(g) “non-State actor ” is a person or entity not acting under the l awful authority of any country;  
(h) “nuclear weapon or other nuclear explosive device ” means any nuclear weapon or other 
nuclear explosive device as may be determined by the Central Government, whose determinatio n in 
the matter shall be final;  
(i) “public domain ” means domain that has no restrictions upon dissemination of information 
within  or from it; the existence of any legal rights to intellectual property in that information does not 
remove such informati on from being in public domain;  
(j) “relevant activity ” means,— 
(i) the development, production, handling, operation, maintenance, sto rage or dissemination 
of a nuclear, ch emical or biological weapon; or  
(ii) the development, production, maintenance, storage or dissemination of missiles specially 
designed for delivering any such weapon;  
(k) “re-transfer” means transfer of any item notifi ed under this Act from any country or entity to 
which it has been exported from India, to  yet another country or entity;  
(l) “technology ” means any information (including information embodied in software) other than 
information in the public domain, th at is capable of being used in — 
(i) the development, production o r use of any goods or software;  
(ii) the development of, or the carrying out of, an industrial or commercial activity or the 
provision of a service of any kind.  
Explanation .—When technology is described wholly or partly by reference to the uses to which it 
(or the goods to which it relates) may be put, it shall include services which are provided or used, or 
which are capable of being used, in the development, production or use of such technolog y or goods;  
(m) “terrorist” shall have the meaning assigned to this expression in the Unlawful Activities 
(Prev ention) Act, 1967 (37 of 1967);  
(n) “trans -shipment” means to remove goods from the conveyance on which they were brought 
into India and to place  the goods on the same or another conveyance for the purpose of taking them 
out of India, where these acts are carried out on a “through bill of lading ”, “through airw ay bill” or 
“through manifest ”. 
Explanation .—”through bill of lading ”, “through airway bi ll” and “through manifest ” means 
respectively a bill of lading, airway bill and manifest, for the consignment of goods from a place 
outside India to a destination which is also outside Indi a without a consignee in India;  
(o) “unlawful” means without the authority of the Central Government and the expression 
“unlawfully ” shall be construed accordingly;  
(p) “weapons of mass destruction ” means any biologica l, chemical or nuclear weapons.  
5. Power to identify, designate, categorise or regul ate certain activities .—(1) The Central 
Government may identify, designate, categorise or regulate, the export, transfer, re -transfer, trans -
shipment, or transit of any item related to relevant activity in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, designate or notify any 
item related to relevant activit y for the purposes of this Act.  
6. Power to appoint Advisory Committees .—For the purposes of this Act, the Central Government 
may appoint su ch Advisory Committees as it deems fit, and may appoint to them persons to exercise such 
powers and perform such duties as the Central Government may, by rule s, prescribe.  5 
 7. Delegation of powers .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and any other law  for the time 
being in force, related to relevant activity, the Central Government shall have the power to direct or 
assign to any authority, in such manner as it may deem appropriate, such powers as may be necessary to 
implem ent the provisions of this Act . 
(2) The Central Government may appoint a Licensing Authority and an Appellate Authority and 
make provisions relating to such authority and for licensing in such manner and in such form, as the 
Central Gover nment may, by rules, prescribe.  
(3) Without prej udice to the generality of the provisions contained in this Act, the authorities and 
mechanisms provided under other relevant Acts shall continue to deal with ma tters covered under those 
Acts:  
Provided that in case of any doubt as to whether a matter falls  within the scope of such relevant Acts 
or under this Act, the decision of the Central Gov ernment thereon shall be final.  
8. Prohibition relating to weapons of mass destruction .—(1) No person shall unlawfully 
manufacture, acquire, possess, develop or trans port a nuclear weapon or other nuclear explosive devi ce 
and their means of delivery.  
(2) No person shall unlawfully transfer, directly or indirectly, to any one a nuclear weapon or other 
nuclear explosive device, or transfer control over such a weapon, kno wing it to be a nuclear weapon or 
other nuclear explosive device.  
(3) No person shall unlawfully manufacture, acquire, possess, develop or transport a biological or 
chemical wea pon or their means of delivery.  
(4) No person shall unlawfully transfer, direct ly or indirectly, to any one biological or chemical 
weapons.  
(5) No person shall unlawfully transfer, directly or indirectly, to any one missiles specially designed 
for the delivery of weapons of mass destruction.  
9. Prohibition relating to non -State actor  or terrorist .—No person shall, directly or indirectly, 
transfer to a non -State actor or terrorist, any material, equipment and technology notified under this Act or 
any other Ac t related to relevant activity:  
Provided that such transfer made to a non -State actor shall not include a transfer made as such to any 
person acting u nder lawful authority in India.  
10. Prohibition as regards intimidating acts .—No person shall transfer, acquire, possess, or 
transport fissile or radioactive material, which is intende d to be used to cause, or in a threat to cause, 
death or serious injury or damage to property for the purpose of intimidating people or a section of the 
people in India or in any foreign country, or compelling the Government of India or the Government of a  
foreign country or an international organisation or any other person to do so  or abstain from doing any 
act. 
11. Prohibition on export .—No person shall export any material, equipment or technology knowing 
that such material, equipment or technology is intended to be used in the design or manufacture of a 
biological weapon, chemical weapon, nuclear weapon or other nuclear explosive device, or in th eir 
missile delivery systems.  
12. Prohibition on brokering .—No person who is a resident in India shall, for a consideration under 
the terms of an actual or implied contract, knowingly facilitate the execution of any transaction which is 
prohibited or regu lated under this Act:  
Provided that a mere carriage, without knowledge, of persons, goods or technology, or p rovision of 
services, including by a public or private carrier of goods, courier, telecommunication, postal service 
provider or financial service provider, shall not be an offence fo r the purposes of this section.  
13. Regulation of export, transfer, retran sfer, transit and transshipment .—(1) No item notified 
under this Act shall be exported, transferred, re -transferred, brought in transit or transhipped except in 
accordance with the provisions of this  Act or any other relevant Act.  6 
 (2) Any transfer of techn ology of an item whose export is prohibited under this Act or any other 
relevant Act relating to relevan t activity shall be prohibited.  
(3) When any technology is notified under this Act or any other relevant Act, as being subject to 
transfer controls, the  transfer of such technology shall be restricted to the extent notified thereunder.  
Explanation .—The transfer of technology may take place through either or both of the follow ing 
modes of transfer, namely: — 
(a) by a person or from a place within India to a  person or place outside India;  
(b) by a person or from a place outside India to a person, or a place, which is also outside India 
(but only where the transfer is by, or within the control of, person, who is a citizen of India, or any 
person who is a resid ent in India).  
(4) The Central Government may notify any item as being subject to the provisions of this Act, 
whether or not it is covered under any other relevant Act; and when such item is exhibited, sold, supplied 
or transferred to any foreign entity or  a foreigner who is resident, operating, visiting, studying, or 
conducting research or business within the territorial limits of India, or in its airspace or Exclusive 
Economic Zone, it shall constitute an offence.  
14. Offences and penalties .—Any person who contravenes, or attempts to contravene or abets, the 
provisions of section 8 or section 10 of this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, an d shall al so be liable to 
fine. 
15. Punishment for aiding non -State actor or terrorist .—(1) Any person who, with intent to aid 
any non -State actor or terrorist, contravenes the provisions of section 9 of this Act, shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term whi ch shall not be less than five years but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life, an d shall also be liable to fine.  
(2) Any person who, with intent to aid any non -State actor or terrorist, attempts to contravene or 
abets, or does any act preparatory to c ontravention of sub -section ( 1), shall be deemed to have 
contravened that provision and the provision of sub -section ( 1) shall apply subject to the modification that 
the reference to “imprisonment for life ” therein shall be construed as a reference t o “imprisonment for ten 
years”. 
(3) While determining the punishment under this section, the court shall take into consideration 
whether the accused had the knowledge about the transferee being a non -State actor or not.  
16. Punishment for unauthori sed export .—(1) Any person who knowingly contravenes, abets or 
attempts to contravene, the provisions of sub -section ( 4) of section 13 of this Act, shall be punishable 
with fine which shall not be less than three lakh rupees and which ma y extend to twenty lakh rupees.  
(2) If any person is again convicted of the same offence under sub -section ( 1), then he shall be 
punishable for the second and every subsequent offence with imprisonment for a term which shall not be 
less than six months but which may extend to five years a nd shall also be liable to fine.  
17. Punishment for violation of other provisions of the Act .—(1) Where any person contravenes, 
or abets or attempts to contravene, any provision of this Act other than the provisions under sections 8, 9, 
10 and sub -section (4) of section 13 of this Act, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to five years an d shall also be liable to fine.  
(2) If any person is again convicted of the same offence under s ub-section ( 1), then he shall be 
punishable for the second and every subsequent offence with imprisonment for a term which shall not be 
less than one year but which may extend to seven years an d shall also be liable to fine.  
18. Penalty for using false or making forged documents, etc .—Where any person signs or uses, or 
causes to be signed or used, any declaration, statement or document submitted to the competent authority 
knowing or having reason to believe that such declaration, statement or document is fo rged or tampered 
with or is false in any material particular, and relates to items notified under this Act or any other relevant 
Act, including those related to relevant activity, he shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less 7 
 than five lakh rupe es or five times the value of the materials, equipment, technology or services, 
whichever is more.  
19. Punishment for offences with respect to which no provision has been made .—Whoever 
contravenes any other provision of this Act or any rule or order made t hereunder for which no specific 
punishment is provided, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one ye ar, 
or with fine, or with both.  
20. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
compan y, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be pro ceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence  to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst  and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm and other association of 
individuals; and  
(b) “director”, in relation to a fir m, means a partner in the firm.  
21. Cognizanc e of offences .—No Court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act without 
the previous sanction of the Central Government or any officer authorised by the Cen tral Government in 
this behalf.  
22. Bar of jurisdiction of civil courts .—No action or pr oceedings taken under section 5 and sub -
sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 7 of this Act by the Central Government or any officer authorised by it in 
this behalf shall be called in question in any civil court in any suit or application or by way of appeal or 
revision, and no injunction shall be granted by any civil court or other authority in respect of any action 
taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power co nferred under those provisions.  
23. Effect of other laws .—(1) The provisions of this Act shall have  effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act or any other instrument having 
effect by virtue of any  enactment other than this Act.  
(2) Where any act or omission constitutes an offence punishable und er this Act and also under any 
other relevant Act, then the offender found guilty of such offence shall be liable to be punished under that 
Act whic h imposes a greater punishment.  
24. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or any officer or authority of the Central Government or any other 
authority on whom powers have been conferred pursuant to this Act, for anything which is in good faith 
done or purported to be done  in pursuance of this Act or any  rule or order made thereunder.  
25. Special provisions as to Central Government .—Nothing in this Act shall affect the activities of 
the Central Government in the discharge of its functions relating to the se curity or the def ence of India.  
26. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry 
out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or  any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) manner of regulating any item related to relevant activity under sub -section ( 1) of section 5;  8 
 (b) appointment of Advisory Committees, their pow ers and duties under section 6;  
(c) appointment of Licensing and App ellate Authority and the manner of licensing under sub -
section ( 2) of section 7; and  
(d) any other matter which ha s to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesai d, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modificat ion or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything p reviously done under that rule.  
27. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order pub lished in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary for removing t he difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of the period of two  years 
from the da te of commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, befor e each 
House of Parliament.  
 
____________  
