--------------------------The Actuaries Act, 2006--------------------------
1 
 THE ACTUARIES  ACT, 2006  
__________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
INSTITUTE  OF ACTUARIES  OF INDIA  
3. Incorporation of Institute.  
4. Transfer of assets, liabilities, etc., of Actuarial Society.  
5. Objects of Institute.  
6. Entry of names in register.  
7. Associates and fellows.  
8. Honorary, affiliate and student members.  
9. Certificate of practice.  
10. Members to be known as Actuaries.  
11. Disqualifications.  
12. Composition of  Council of Institute.  
13. Annual general meetings.  
14. Re-election to Council.  
15. Settlement of dispute regarding election.  
16. Establishment of Tribunal.  
17. President, Vice -President and Hono rary Secretary.  
18. Resignation from membership and filling up to casual vacancies.  
19. Functions of Council.  
20. Staff, remuneration and allowances.  
21. Committees of Council.  
22. Finances of Council.  
 
CHAPTER III  
REGISTER OF MEMBERS  
23. Register.  
24. Removal of name from register.  
25. Re-entry in register.  
 
  2 
 CHAPTER IV  
MISCONDUCT  
SECTIONS  
26. Disciplinary Committee.  
27. Appointment of Prosecution Director.  
28. Authority, Council, Disciplinary Committee and Prosecution Director to have powers of civil 
court.  
29. Action by Council on disciplinary Committee’s report.  
30. Member to be afforded opportunity of being heard.  
31. Professional or other misconduct defined.  
 
CHAPTER V  
APPEALS  
32. Constitution of Appellate Authority.  
33. Term of Office of Members of Authority.  
34. Allowances, conditions of service of Members and procedure, etc., of Authority.  
35. Officers and other staff of Authority.  
36. Appeal to Autho rity. 
 
CHAPTER VI  
PENALTIES  
37. Penalty for falsely claiming to be a member, etc.  
38. Penalty for using name of Institution, awarding degrees of actuarial science, etc.  
39. Companies not to engage in actuarial practice.  
40. Unqualified person not to sign documents.  
41. Offences by companies.  
42. Sanction to prosecute.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
QUALITY  REVIEW BOARD  
43. Establishment of Quality Review Board.  
44. Functions of Board.  
45. Procedure of Board.  
46. Terms and conditions of Chairperson and Members of Board.  
47. Expenditure of Board.  
 
  3 
 CHAPT ER VIII  
DISSOLUTION OF THE  ACTUARIAL  SOCIETY  OF INDIA  REGISTERED UNDER  
THE SOCIETIES  REGISTRATION  ACT 
SECTIONS  
48. Dissolution of Actuarial Society of India.  
49. Provisions respecting employees of dissolved society.  
 
CHAPTER IX  
MISCELLANEOUS  
50. Maintenance of more than one offices by Actuary.  
51. Reciprocity.  
52. Power of Central Government to issue directions.  
53. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
54. Members, etc., to be public servants.  
55. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
56. Power to make regulations.  
57. Power of Central Governme nt to issue directions for making or amending regulations.  
58. Laying of rules and regulations.  
59. Power to remove difficulties.  
THE SCHEDULE.  
 
  4 
 THE ACTUARIES ACT , 2006  
ACT NO. 35 OF 2006  
[27th August , 2006.]  
An Act to provide for regulating and developing the profession of Actuaries and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -seventh Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short t itle, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Actuaries Act, 2006.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for differen t provisions of this Act and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the 
commencement of that provision.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) "Actuary" means a person skilled in determining the present effects of future contingent 
events or in finance modelling and risk analysis in different areas of insurance, or calculating the 
value of life interests and insurance risks, or designing and pr icing of policies, working out the 
benefits, recommending rates relating to insurance business, annuities, insurance and pension rates on 
the basis of empirically based tables and includes a statistician engaged in such technology, taxation, 
employees' ben efits and such other risk management and investments and who is a fellow member of 
the Institute; and the expression "actuarial science" shall be construed accordingly;  
(b) "Actuarial Society" means the Actuarial Society of India registered under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860  (21 of 1860)  and the Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950  (Bombay Act No 
XXXIX of 1950) ; 
(c) "appointed day" means the date on which the Institute is constituted under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 3;  
(d) "Authority" means the Appel late Authority referred to in section 32;  
(e) "Board" means the Quality Review Board constituted under  sub-section ( 1) of section 43;  
(f) "Council" means the Council of the Institute as referred to in section 12;  
(g) "fellow" means a fellow member of the I nstitute;  
(h) "Institute" means the Institute of Actuaries of India constituted under section 3;  
(i) "member" means an individual whose name appears in the register of members maintained by 
the Institute;  
(j) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made und er this Act;  
(k) "President" means the President of the Council;  
(l) "register" means the register of members maintained by the Institute under this Act;  
(m) "specified" means specified by regulations made under this Act;  
                                                           
1. 10th November, 2006, vide notification  No. S.O. 1912(E) dated 28th November, 2006, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary , 
Part II , sec. 3(ii) 
 5 
 (n) "Tribunal" means a Tribunal es tablished under sub -section ( 1) of section 16;  
(o) ''Vice -President'' means the Vice -President of the Council;  
(p) "year" means the period commencing on the 1st day of April of any year and ending on the 
31st day of March of the succeeding year.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, a member of the Institute shall be deemed "to be in 
practice" when individually or in partnership with Actuaries in practice as a member or an employee of a 
company, he, whether or not in consideration of remunerat ion rec eived or to be received, — 
(i) engages hims elf in actuarial profession; or  
(ii) offers to perform or performs services involving the application of actuarial techniques in the 
fields of insurance, pension, investment, finance and management; or  
(iii) renders such other services as, in the opinion of the Council, are or may be rendere d by an 
actuary in practice; or  
(iv) is in employment of a person engaged in one or more of the activities mentioned in clauses 
(i), (ii) and ( iii) above,  
and the words "to  be in practice" with their grammatical variations and cognate expressions shall be 
construed accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression "company" includes a public 
financial institution as defined in section 4A of the C ompanies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) . 
CHAPTER II  
INSTITUTE  OF ACTUARIES  OF INDIA  
3. Incorporation of Institute .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, all persons whose names are entered in  the register of the 
Actuarial Society at the commencement of this Act and all persons who may thereafter have their names 
entered in the register to be maintained under this Act, so long as they continue to have their names borne 
on the register, are here by constituted a body corporate by the name of the Institute of Actuaries of India 
and all such persons shall be known as members of the Institute.  
(2) The Institute shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall have power to acquire, 
hold an d dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and shall by its name sue or be sued.  
(3) The head office of the Institute shall be situated at such place as may be decided by the Central 
Government.  
4. Transfer of assets, liabilities , etc., of Actuarial Society .—On the appointed day ,— 
(a) all the assets and liabilities of the Actuarial Society shall stand transferred to, and vested in, 
the Institute.  
Explanation .—The assets of the Actuarial Society shall be deemed to include all rights and 
power s and all properties, whether movable or immovable, including, in particular, cash balances, 
deposits and all other interests and rights in, or arising out of, such properties as may be in the 
possession of the said Society and all books of account and oth er documents relating to the same; and 
liabilities shall be deemed to include all debts, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind;  
(b) without prejudice to the provisions of clause ( a), all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, 
all contracts en tered into and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for the Actuarial 
Society immediately before that day, for or in connection with the purpose of the said Society, shall 
be deemed to have been incurred, entered into or engaged to be done  by, with or for, the Institute;  
(c) all sums of money due to the Actuarial Society immediately before that day shall be deemed 
to be due to the Institute; and  6 
 (d) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or 
against the Actuarial Society immediately before that day may be continued or may be instituted by 
or against the Institute.  
5. Objects of Institute .—The obj ects of the Institute shall be — 
(a) to promote, uphold and develop the standards of professional ed ucation, training, knowledge, 
practice and conduct amongst Actuaries;  
(b) to promote the status of the Actuarial profession;  
(c) to regulate the practice by the members of the profession of Actuary;  
(d) to promote, in the public interest, knowledge and res earch in all matters relevant to Actuarial 
science and its application; and  
(e) to do all such other things as may be incidental or conducive to the above objects or any of 
them.  
6. Entry of names in re gister .—(1) Any of the following persons shall be entitled to have his name 
entered in the register, namely: — 
(a) any person who immediately before the appointed day was an associate or a fellow (including 
an honorary fe llow) of the Actuarial Society;  
(b) any person who has passed the examination conducte d by the Actuarial Society and has 
completed training either as specified by the said Society or as specified by the Council, except any 
such person who is not a permanent resident of India;  
(c) any person who has passed such examination and completed such  training, as may be 
specified for membership of the Institute;  
(d) any person who has passed such other examination and completed such other training outside 
India as is specified as being equivalent to the examination and training specified under this Ac t for 
membership of the Institute:  
Provided that in the case of any person belonging to any of the classes mentioned in this sub -section 
who is not permanently residing in India, the Central Government or the Council may impose such further 
conditions as it may deem necessary or expedient in the public interest.  
(2) Every person mentioned in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) may have his name entered in the register 
without the payment of any entrance fee.  
(3) Every person belonging to any of the classes mentioned in clauses ( b), (c) and ( d) of sub -section 
(1) shall have his name entered in the register on an application being made and granted in the specified 
manner and on payment of such fees, as may be specified.  
(4) The Council shall take such steps as  may be necessary for the purpose of having the names of all 
persons belonging to the class mentioned in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) entered in the register before the 
appointed day.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Council may  confer on any person 
honorary fellow membership, if the Council is of the opinion that such person has made a significant 
contribution to the profession of Actuary and thereupon the Council shall enter the name of such person 
in the register but such pers on shall not have any voting rights in any election or meetings of the Institute 
and shall not also be required to pay any fee to the Institute.  
7. Associates and fellows .—(1) The members of the Institute shall be divided into two classes 
designated respec tively as associates and fellows.  
(2) Any person other than a person to whom the provisions of sub -section ( 3) apply, shall, on his 
name being entered in the register, be deemed to have become an associate and as long as his name 
remains so entered, shall be entitled to use the letters "AIAI" after his name to indicate that he is an 
associate.  7 
 (3) Any person who was a fellow of the Actuarial Society and who is entitled to have his name 
entered in the register under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 6  shall be entered in the register as a 
fellow.  
(4) Any person whose name is entered in the register as fellow shall, so long as his name remains so 
entered, be entitled to use the letters "FIAI" after his name to indicate that he is a fellow.  
8. Honorary, affiliate and student members .—(1) The Council may choose, in such manner as may 
be specified, any person of eminence in matters relating to and of interest to the profession of Actuary as 
an honorary member of the Institute provided that he is not practic ing as an Actuary.  
(2) Any person, who is a fellow member, or is a holder of membership considered equivalent to the 
fellow membership of the Institute, of any other institution similar to the Institute, whether within or 
outside India, may be admitted as an affiliate member for such period, and on such terms and conditions 
as may be specified.  
(3) Any person who enrolls himself for examination of the Institute, and possesses such academic 
qualifications as may be specified, may be admitted as a student mem ber of the Institute on such terms 
and conditions as may be specified.  
(4) An honorary member or an affiliate member or a student member shall have no right to vote on 
any matter or resolution in any meeting of the Institute.  
9. Certificate of practice .—(1) No member of the Institute shall be entitled to practice unless he 
fulfils the qualifications as may be specified and obtains from the Council a certificate of practice.  
(2) A member who desires to be entitled to practice shall make an application in such form and pay 
such annual fee for certificate of practice as may be specified and such fee shall be payable on or before 
the first day of April in each year.  
(3) The certificate of practice obtained under sub -section ( 1) may be cancelled by the Council  under 
such circumstances as may be specified.  
10. Memb ers to be known as Actuaries .—Every member of the Institute in practice shall, and any 
other member may, use the designation of an Actuary and no member using such designation shall use 
any other descr iption whether in addition thereto or in substitution therefor:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to prohibit any such member from 
adding any other description or letters to his name, if entitled thereto, to indicate membership of such 
other Institute, whether in India or elsewhere, as may be recognised in this behalf by the Council, or any 
other qualification that he may possess, or to prohibit a firm, all the partners of which are members of the 
Institute and in prac tice, from being known by its firm name as Actuaries.  
11. Disqualifications .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 6, a person shall not be 
entitled to have his name entered in, or borne on, the register if he — 
(a) has not attained the age of twenty -one years at the time of his application for the entry of his 
name in the register; or  
(b) is of unsound mind and stands so adjudged by a competent court; or  
(c) is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(d) being a discharged insolvent, has not obtained fro m the court a certificate stating that his 
insolvency was caused by misfortune and without any misconduct on his part; or  
(e) has been convicted by a competent court whether within or outside India, of an offence 
involving moral turpitude and punishable wi th imprisonment or of an offence, not of a technical 
nature, committed by him in his professional capacity unless in respect of the offence committed he 
has either been granted a pardon or, on an application made by him in this behalf, the Central 
Governme nt has, by an order in writing, removed the disqualification; or  
(f) has been removed from the membership of the Institute on being found on inquiry to have 
been guilty of a professional or other misconduct:  8 
 Provided that a person who has been removed from  the membership for a specified period shall not be 
entitled to have his name entered in the Register until the expiry of such period.  
12. Composit ion of Council of Institute .—(1)There shall be a Council of the Institute for the 
management of the affairs o f the Institute and for discharging the functions assig ned to it by or under this 
Act. 
(2) The Council shall be composed of  the following persons, namely: — 
(a) a minimum of nine and not more than twelve persons from amongst fellow members to be 
elected by the fellow and the associate members of the Institute in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that a fellow of the Institute, who has been found guilty of any professional or other 
misconduct and whose name is removed from the Register or has been aw arded penalty of fine, shall 
not b e eligible to contest election, — 
(i) in case of misconduct falling under the Schedule of this Act [except Part IV( B)], for a 
period of three years; or  
(ii) in case of misconduct falling under Part IV( B) of the Schedule of this Act, for a period of 
six years,  
after the completion of the period of removal of name of the fellow from the Register or the payment 
of fine is made, as the case may be; and  
(b) (i) an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of  India, to be 
nominated by the Central Government to represent the Ministry of Finance;  
(ii) one person from the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority constituted under the 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999  (41 of 1999) nomi nated by the Central 
Government; and  
(iii) not more than two persons having knowledge in the field of life insurance, general insurance, 
finance, economics, law, accountancy or any other discipline which in the opinion of the Central 
Government, would be u seful to the Council, to be nominated in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that till such time as the Council is constituted under this Act, the Executive Committee of 
the Actuarial Society shall discharge all the functions and shall have all the powers of the Council.  
(3) No person holding a post under the Central Government or a State Government, as the case may 
be, shall be eligible for election to the Council under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2). 
(4) One -third of the members of the Council refer red to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) shall retire as 
soon as may be on the expiration of every second year by rotation but shall be eligible for re -election.  
(5) Any person nominated under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) shall hold office for a period of six 
years from the date of his nomination unless he is removed earlier by the Central Government and shall 
be eligible for re -nomination:  
Provided that he shall be given an opportunity of being heard before such removal.  
13. Annual general meetings .—The Council shall every year hold an annual general meeting of the 
Institute to elect its members under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 12, or to discuss any matter 
which it deems fit, and not more than fifteen months shall elapse between the date of one annual general 
meeting of the Institute and that of the next:  
Provided that from the appointed day the Institute may hold its first annual general meeting within a 
period of not more than eighteen months and if such general meeting is held within that period, it shall 
not be necessary for the Institute to hold any general meeting in that year:  
Provided further that the Central Government may, for sufficient reasons, extend the time within 
which any general meeting shall be held.  9 
 14. Re -election to Counc il.—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), a member of the 
Council elected under clause ( a) of sub - section ( 2) of section 12 shall be eligible for re -election but not 
for more than two consecutive terms.  
(2) A member of the Council, who is or has been elected, as the President under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 17, shall not be eligible for election or nomination as a member of the Council.  
15. Settlement of  disputes regarding election .—In case of any dispute regarding any election under 
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 12, the aggrieved person may make an application within thirty 
days from the date of the declaration of the result of the election to the Council which shall forward the 
same forthwith to the Central Government.  
16. Establi shment of Tribunal .—(1) On receipt of any application under section 15, the Central 
Government shall, by notification, establish a Tribunal consisting of a Presiding Officer and two other 
Members to decide such dispute and the decision of such Tribunal sha ll be final.  
(2) A person shall no t be qualified for appointment, — 
(a) as a Presiding Officer of the Tribunal unless he has been a member of the Indian Legal 
Service and has held a post in Grade I of the service for at least three years;  
(b) as a Member un less he has been a member of the Council for at least one full term and who is 
not a sitting Member of the Council or who has not been a candidate in the election under dispute; 
and 
(c) as a Member unless he holds the post of a Joint Secretary to the Gover nment of India or any 
other post under the Central Government carrying a scale of pay which is not less than that of a Joint 
Secretary to the Government of India.  
(3) The terms and conditions of service of the Presiding Officer and Members of the Tribunal,  their 
place of meetings, remuneration and allowances shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(4) The expenses of the Tribunal shall be borne by the Council.  
17. President, Vice -Pres ident and Honorary Secretary .—(1) The Council shall, at its first meeting, 
elect three of its members from amongst persons referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 12, 
to be respectively the President, Vice -President and Honorary Secretary thereof, and as often as the office 
of the President, Vice -President and Hon orary Secretary falls vacant, the Council shall choose one of the 
member in the same manner:  
Provided that the Chairperson of the Council of the Actuarial Society shall continue to hold such 
office as President after the commencement of this Act, until suc h time as a President is elected under the 
provisions of this sub -section.  
(2) The President shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Council.  
(3) The President, the Vice -President or the Honorary Secretary shall hold office for a period of two 
years fr om the date on which he is chosen provided that he continues to be a member of the Council.  
(4) The President and the Vice -President shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term, continue to 
hold office until his successor enters upon his office.  
(5) In the event of occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the President, the Vice -President shall 
act as the President until a new President is elected in accordance with the provisions of this section to fill 
such vacancy and enters upon his office.  
(6) When the President is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness or any other 
cause, the Vice -President shall discharge his functions until the President resumes his duties.  
18. Resignation from membership and fi lling up of casual vacancie s.—(1) Any member of the 
Council may at any time resign his membership by writing under his hand addressed to the President, and 
the seat of such member shall become vacant when such resignation is accepted and notified by the 
Council.  10 
 (2) A member of the Council, other than a member nominated under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 12 shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is declared by the Council to have been absent 
without sufficient reason from three consecutive meetings of the Council,  or of any of the Committees 
constituted by the Council, and of which he is a member or he has been found guilty of any professional 
or other misconduct and awarded penalty of fine or if his name is, for any cause, removed from the 
register under the provi sions of sections 24 and 30.  
(3) A casual vacancy in the office of a member of the Council shall be filled by fresh election or by 
nomination by the Central Government, as the case may be, and the person elected or nominated to fill the 
vacancy shall hold office only for the remainder of the term for which the member in whose place he was 
elected or nominated would have held that office:  
Provided that no election shall be held to fill a casual vacancy occurring within one year prior to the 
date of the expir ation of the term of such member.  
(4) No act done by the Council shall be called in question on the ground merely of the existence of 
any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of the Council.  
19. Functions of Council .—(1) The duty of carrying out the f unctions under the provisions of this 
Act shall be vested in the Council.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the functio ns of the 
Council shall include — 
(a) the holding of examination of the candidates for enrolmen t and specifying fees therefor;  
(b) the specifying of qualifications for entry in the register;  
(c) the recognition of foreign qualifications and training for the purposes of enrolment;  
(d) the granting of or refusal to grant the certificate of pra ctice under this Act;  
(e) the maintenance and publication of a register of persons qualified to practice as Actuaries;  
(f) the levy and collection of fees from members, students, examinees and other persons;  
(g) the removal of names from the register and t he restoration to the register of names which have 
been removed;  
(h) the regulation and maintenance of the status and standard of professional qualifications of 
members of the Institute;  
(i) to issue guidelines for the observance of the members, including the student members;  
(j) to receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from the Central or State Governments and 
to receive bequests, donations and transfer of movable or immovable properties from testators, donors 
or transferors, as the case may be;  
(k) co-operating with educational or other institutions in any part of the world having objects 
wholly or partly similar to those of the Institute by exchange of members and generally in such 
manner as may be conducive to achievement of their common objec ts; 
(l) instituting and awarding fellowships, scho larships, prizes and medals;  
(m) giving gifts, grants, donations or benefactions to other institutions or bodies having objects 
similar to those of the Institute;  
(n) the carrying out, by granting financial  assistance to persons other than members of the 
Council, or in any other manner, of research in the actuarial science;  
(o) the maintenance of a library and publication of books, journals and periodicals relating to 
actuarial science;  
(p) the exercise of d isciplinary powers conferred by this Act;  11 
 (q) establishing such regional council or councils as may be decided from time to time and fixing 
their headquarters; and  
(r) doing all such things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment of all or 
any of the objects of the Institute.  
20. Staff,  remuneration and allowances .—(1) For the efficient performance of  its functions, the 
Council may — 
(a) appoint an Executive Director, a Treasurer and such other officers and employees as it deems 
necess ary and fix their salaries, fees, allowances and other conditions of service; and  
(b) fix the allowances of the President, the Vice -President, the Honorary Secretary and other 
members of the Council and its Committees, in s uch manner as may be specified.  
(2) The Executive Director of the Council shall be entitled to participate in the meetings of the 
Council but shall not be entitled to vote thereat.  
21. Committees of Council .—(1) The Council may constitute such committees from amongst its 
members, and co-opt therein persons who are not members of the Institute, as it deems necessary for the 
purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that the number of co -opted members shall not exceed one -third of the total membership of 
the committee.  
(2) Every committee constituted under this section shall  elect its own Chairman:  
Provided that — 
(i) where the President is a member of such committee, he shall be the Chairman of such 
committee, and in his absence, the Vice -President, if he is a member of  such committee, shall be its 
Chairman; and  
(ii) where the President is not a member of such committee but the Vice -President is a me mber, 
he shall be its Chairman.  
(3) The committees shall exercise such functions and be subject to such conditions as may b e 
specified.  
22. Finances of Council .—(1) There shall be established a fund under the management and control 
of the Council into which shall be paid all moneys (including donations and grants) received by the 
Council and out of which shall be met all expenses and liabilities incurred by the Council.  
(2) The Council may invest any money for the time being standing to the credit of the fund in any 
security as it may deem prudent consistent with the considerations of security of such investments and 
maxim um returns thereon.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression "securities" shall have the 
meaning assigned to it in section 2 of the Securities Co ntracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956) as 
amended from time to time.  
(3) The Council shall keep proper accounts of the fund distinguishing capital account from revenue 
account.  
(4) The annual accounts of the Institute shall be subject to audit by a Chartered Accountant in practice 
within the meaning of the Chartered Accountants Act , 1949  (38 of 1949) to be appointed annually by the 
Council:  
Provided that no member of the Council who is a Chartered Accountant or a person who is in 
partnership with such member shall be eligible for appointment as an auditor under this sub -section.  
(5) As soon as may be practicable at the end of each year, but not later than the 30th day of 
September of the year next following, the Council shall cause to be published in the Gazette of India, a 
copy of the audited accounts and the report of the Council f or that year and copies of the said accounts 
and report shall be forwarded to the Central Government and to all the members of the Institute.  12 
 (6) The Council may borrow from a scheduled bank, as defined in the R eserve Bank of India Act, 
1934 (2 of 1934) or from a ny public financial institution — 
(a) any money required for meeting its liabilities on capital account on the security of the fund or 
on the security of any other asset, for  the time being belonging to it ; or 
(b) for the purpose of meeting current l iabilities, pending the receipt of income, by way of 
temporary loan or overdraft.  
Explanation .—The expression "public financial institution" means a financial institution specified in 
section 4A of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) . 
CHAPTER III  
REGISTER OF MEMBERS  
23. Register .—(1) The Council shall maintain in the specified manner a register of the members of 
the Institute.  
(2) The register shall include the following particulars about every m ember of the Institute, namely: — 
(a) his full name, date of bi rth, domicile, residential and professional addresses;  
(b) the date on which his name is entered in the register;  
(c) his qualifications;  
(d) whether he holds a certificate of practice; and  
(e) any other particulars which may be specified.  
(3) The Council shall cause to be published in such manner as may be specified a list of members as 
on the 1st day of April each year, and shall, if requested to do so by any such member, send him a copy of 
such list, on payment of such amount as may be specified.  
(4) Eve ry member of the Institute shall, on his name being entered in the register, pay such annual 
membership fee as may be specified by the Council.  
24. R emoval of name from Register .—The Council may, by order, remove from the register the 
name  of any member of the Institute — 
(a) who is dead; or  
(b) from whom a request has been received to that effect; or  
(c) who has not paid any specified fee required to be paid by him; or  
(d) who is found to have been subject to, at the time when his name was entered in the register, or 
who at any time thereafter has become subject to, any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 
11; or  
(e) who for any other reason has ceased to be entitled to have his name borne on the register.  
25. Re -entry in register .—The Council may re -enter the name of a member whose name has been 
removed from the register for reasons mentioned in clauses ( b), (c), (d) and ( e) of section 24, by an order, 
and on paying such fees, and after satisfying such conditions and requirements as  may be specified.  
  13 
 CHAPTER IV  
MISCONDUCT  
26. Disciplinary Committee .—(1) The Council shall constitute a Disciplinary Committee consisting 
of the President or the Vice -President of the Council as the Presiding Officer and two members of the 
Council elected by the Council and two members to be nominated by the Central Government from 
amongst the persons of eminence having experience in the field of law, education, economics, business, 
finance, accountancy or public administration:  
Provided that the Co uncil may constitute more regional Disciplinary Committees as and when it 
deems fit.  
(2) The Disciplinary Committee in making the inquiry under the provisions of this Act shall follow 
such procedure and submit the report to the Council within such time as may be prescribed.  
27. Appoint ment of Prosecution Director .—(1) The Council may, by notification, appoint a 
Prosecution Director and such other employees to assist the Disciplinary Committee in making inquiries 
in respect of any information or complaint re ceived by the Council under the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In order to make inquiries under the provisions of this Act, the Prosecution Director shall follow 
such procedure as may be prescribed.  
28. Authority, Council, Disciplinary Committee and Prosecution Director t o have powers of 
civil court .—For the purposes of an inquiry under the provisions of this Act, the Authority, the 
Disciplinary Committee and the Prosecution Director shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil 
court under the  Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , in respect of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of any document; and  
(c) receiving evidence on aff idavit.  
29. Action by Council on Dis ciplinary Committee's report .—(1) On receipt of a report from the 
Disciplinary Committee, if the Council is satisfied that the member of the Institute is guilty of any 
professional or other misconduct, it shall record its findings accordingly and shall proceed in accordance 
with the provisions of section 30.  
(2) In case the Council is not satisfied with the report of the Disciplinary Committee and is of the 
opinion that it requires further inquiry, it may refer the repo rt again to the Disciplinary Committee for 
such further inquiry as may be directed through an order of the Council.  
(3) If the Council disagrees with the findings of the Disciplinary Committee, it may direct the 
Prosecution Director or itself make an appea l to the Authority.  
30. Member to be afforde d opportunity of being heard .—Where the Council is of the opinion that 
a member is guilty of a professional or other misconduct mentioned in the Schedule, it shall afford to the 
member a reasonable opportunity of  being heard before making any order against him and may thereafter 
take any one or more of  the following actions, namely: — 
(a) reprimand the member; or  
(b) remove the name of the member from the register permanently or for such period, as it thinks 
fit. 
(c) impose such fine as it may think fit, which may extend to five lakh rupees.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “member of the Institute” includes a person who was 
a member of the Institute on the date of the alleged misconduct although he ha s ceased to be a member of 
the Institute at the time of the inquiry.  
31. Professional  or other misconduct defined .—For the purposes of this Act, the expression 
“professional or other misconduct ” shall be deemed to include any act or omission provided in th e 
Schedule, but nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or abridge in any way the power conferred 14 
 or duty cast on the Disciplinary Committee or the Prosecution Director to inquire into the conduct of any 
member of the Institute under any other circumstances.  
CHAPTER V  
APPEALS  
32. Constit ution of Appellate Authority .—The Appellate Authority constituted under sub -section 
(1) of section 22A of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949) , shall be deemed to be the 
Appellate Authority for the purposes of this Act subject to the modification that for clause ( b) of said sub -
section ( 1), the following claus e had been substituted, namely: — 
“(b) the Central Government shall, by notification, appoint two part -time Members from amongst 
the persons who  have been members of the Council of the Institute of Actuaries for at least one full 
term and who are not sitting members of the Council;” . 
33. Term of office of Members of Autho rity.—A person appointed as a Member shall hold office 
for a term of three years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains the age of 
sixty -seven years, whichever is earlier.  
34. Allowances, conditions of service of Members and p rocedure, etc., of Authority .—The 
provisions of section 22C, section 22D an d section 22F of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949  (38 of 
1949) shall apply to the Authority in relation to allowances and terms and conditions of service of its 
Chairperson and members, and in discharge of its functions under this Act as they apply to i t in the 
discharge of its functions under the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949.  
35. Officers and other staff of Authority .—(1) The Council shall make available to the Authority 
such officers and other staff members as may be necessary for the efficient performance of the functions 
of the Authority.  
(2) The salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other staff members of 
the Authority shall be such as may be specified.  
36. Appeal to Authority .—(1) Any member of the Institute aggrieved by any order of the Council 
imposing on him any of the penalties referred to in section 30, may, within ninety days of the date on 
which the order is communicated to him, prefer an appeal to the Authority:  
Provided that the Authority may entertai n any such appeal after the expiry of the said period of ninety 
days, if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing the appeal in time.  
(2) The Authority may, after calling for the records of any case, revise any order made by the C ounc il 
under section 30 and may — 
(a) confirm, modify or set aside the order;  
(b) impose any penalty or set aside, reduce or enhance the penalty imposed by the order;  
(c) remit the case to the Disciplinary Committee for such further inquiry as the Authority 
considers proper in the circumstances of the case; or  
(d) pass such other order as the Authority thinks fit:  
Provided that the Authority shall give an opportunity of being heard to the parties concerned before 
passing any order.  
CHAPTER VI  
PENALTIES  
37. Penalty for falsely claiming to be a member, etc .—Subject to the provisions  of section 10, any 
person who, — 
(a) not being a member of the Institute, — 
(i) represents that he is a member of the Institute in any of the manners mentioned in section 
7; or 15 
 (ii) uses the designation "Actuary"; or  
(iii) uses the letters "AIAI" or "FIAI" after his name; or  
(iv) practises the profession of an Actuary;  or 
(b) being a member of the Institute, but not having a certificate of practice, represents that he is in 
practi ce, or practises as an Actuary,  
shall be punishable on first conviction with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, and on any 
subsequent conviction with imprisonment which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend 
to two lakh rupees, or wit h both.  
38. Penalty for using name of Institution, awarding degre es of actuarial science, etc. —(1) Save 
as otherwise provided in this Act, n o person shall — 
(a) use a name or a common seal which is identical with the name or the common seal of the 
Institute  or so nearly resembles it so as to deceive or as is likely to deceive the public; or  
(b) award any degree, diploma or certificate or bestow any designation which indicates or 
purports to indicate the position or attainment of any qualification or competen ce in actuaryship 
similar to that of a member of the Institute; or  
(c) seek to regulate in any manner whatsoever the profession of Actuaries.  
(2) Any person contravening the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall, without prejudice to any other 
proceedings, w hich may be taken against him, be punishable with fine, which may extend on first 
conviction to fifty thousand rupees and on any subsequent conviction with imprisonment which may 
extend to one year, or, with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or wit h both.  
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to any University or other institution established by 
law or to any body affiliated to the Institute.  
39. Companies not to engage in actuarial practice .—(1) No company, whether incorporated in 
India  or elsewhere, shall practice as Actuaries.  
(2) Any company contravening the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be punishable on first 
conviction with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, and on any subsequent conviction with 
fine which may extend to twenty -five thousand rupees.  
40. Unqualified person not to sign documents .—(1) No person other than a fellow member of the 
Institute shall sign any document on behalf of an Actuary in practice or a firm of such Actuaries in his or 
its professiona l capacity.  
(2) Any person contravening the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall, without prejudice to any other 
proceedings which may be taken against him, be punishable on first conviction with fine which may 
extend to fifty thousand rupees, and on any su bsequent conviction with imprisonment which may extend 
to one year, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.  
41. Offences by companies .—(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, 
the company as well as every  person in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conduct of its 
business at the time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall 
be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided th at nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.   16 
 (2) Notw ithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable  to any neglect on the part of, any 
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section — 
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
42. Sanction to prosecute .—No person shall be prosecuted under this Act except on a complaint 
made by or under the order of the Council or of the Central Government.  
CHAPTER VII  
QUALITY  REVIEW  BOARD  
43. Establish ment of Quality Review Board .—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, 
constitute a Quality Review Board consisting of a Chairperson and not more than four Members:  
Provided that in case the Board is constituted with two Members, one each shall be nominated by the 
Council and the Central Government, respectively . 
(2) The Chairperson and Members of the Board shall be appointed from amongst the persons of 
eminence having experience in the field of law, education, economics, business, finance, accountancy or 
public administration.  
(3) Two Members of the Board shall be nominated by the Council and other two Members shall be 
nominated by the Central Government.  
44. Functions of Board .—The Board shall perform the following functions, namely: — 
(a) to fix standards for the services provided by the members of the Institute;  
(b) to review the quality of services provided by the members of the Institute including actuarial 
audit services; and  
(c) to guide the members of the Institute to improve the quality of services and adherence to the 
various statutory and other regulatory requirements.  
45. Procedure of Board .—The Board shall follow in its meeting and in discharging its functions 
such procedure as may be prescribed.  
46. Terms and conditions of Chai rperson and Members of Board .—The terms and conditions of 
service of the Chairperson and the Members of the Board, their place of meetings, remuneration and 
allowances shall be such as may be prescribed.  
47. Expenditure of Board .—The expenditure of the Board shall be borne by the Council.  
CHAPTER VIII  
DISSOLUTION OF THE ACTUARIAL  SOCIETY OF INDIA  REGISTERED  UNDER THE SOCIETIES  
REGISTRATION  ACT 
48. Dissolution o f Actuarial Society of India .—On the appointed day, —  
(a) the Society known as the Actuarial Society of India registered under the Societies Registration 
Act, 1860  (21 of 1860)  and the Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950  (Bombay Act XXXIX of 1950)  shall 
stand dissolved and thereafter no person shall make, assert or take any claims or demands or 
proceedings against the dissolved society or against any officer thereof in h is capacity as such officer 
except in so far as may be necessary, for enforcing the provisions of this Act;  17 
 (b) the right of every member to, or in respect of, the dissolved society shall be extinguished, and 
thereafter no member of the society shall make,  assert or take any claims or demands or proceedings in 
respect of that society except as provided in this Act.  
49. Provisions respecting em ployees of dissolved society .—(1) Every person employed in the 
dissolved society and continuing in its employment immediately before the commencement of this Act 
shall, as from such commencement, become an employee of the Institute, shall hold his office or service 
therein by the same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and 
privilege s as to retirement benefits as he would have held the same under the dissolved society if this Act 
had not been passed, and shall, continue to do so unless and until his employment in the Institute is 
terminated or until his remuneration, terms and conditi ons of employment are duly altered by the 
Institute.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947)  or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any employee of the dissolved soc iety 
to the Institute shall not entitle any such employee to any compensation under that Act or other law, and 
no such claims shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
CHAPTER IX  
MISCELLANEOUS  
50. Maintenance of more  than one offices by Actuary .—(1) Where an Actuary in practice or a firm 
of such Actuaries has more than one offices within or outside India, each one of such offices shall be in 
the separate charge of a fellow member of the Institute:  
Provided that the Council may in suitable cases exempt any Actuary in practice or firm of such 
Actuaries from the operation of this sub -section.  
(2) Every Actuary in practice or a firm of such Actuaries maintaining more than one office shall send 
to the Council a list of offices and the p erson in charge thereof and shall keep the Council informed of any 
changes in relation thereto.  
51. Reciprocity .—(1) Where any country, notified by the Central Government in this behalf in the 
Official Gazette, prevents persons of Indian domicile from beco ming members of any institution similar 
to the Institute or from practicing the profession of Actuaries or subjects them to unfair discrimination in 
that country, no subject of any such country shall be entitled to become a member of the Institute or 
pract ice the profession of Actuaries in India.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Council may specify the co nditions, if any, subject 
to which foreign qualifications relating to actuarial science shall be recognised for the purposes of entry in 
the register.  
52. Power of Central Go vernment to issue directions .—(1) For the purposes of this Act, the 
Central Government may, from time to time, give to the Council such general or special directions as it 
thinks fit, and the Council shall, in the discharge of its functions under this Act, comply with such 
directions.  
(2) If, in the opinion of the Central Government, the Council has persistently made default in giving 
effect to the directions issued under sub -section ( 1), it may, after giving an opp ortunity of being heard to 
the Council, by notification, dissolve the Council, whereafter a new Council shall be constituted in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act with effect from such date as may be dec ided by the Central 
Government.  
(3) Where the  Central Government has issued a notification under sub -section ( 2) dissolving the 
Council, it may, pending the constitution of a new Council in accordance with the provisions of this Act, 
authorise any person or body of persons to take over the management  of the affairs of the Council and to 
exercise such functions as may be mentioned in the notification.  
53. Protection o f action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or the Council or the Disciplinary Committee or the Tribunal or the 
Authority or the Board or the Prosecution Director or any officer of that Government, Council, 18 
 Commi ttee, Tribunal, Authority or Board, for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
under this Act or any rule, regulation, notification, direction or order made thereunder.  
54. Members,  etc., to be public servants .—The Chairperson, Presidi ng Officer, Members and other 
officers and employees of the Authority, Tribunal and Board, and the Prosecution Director shall be 
deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
55. Power of Cent ral Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the fo llowing matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of election and nomination in respect of members to the Council under sub -section 
(2) of section 12;  
(b) the terms and conditions of service of the Presiding Officers and Members of the Tribunal, 
place of meeting, r emuneration and allowances to be paid to them under sub -section ( 3) of section 16;  
(c) the procedure of inquiry and submission of report by the Disciplinary Committee under sub -
section ( 2) of section 26;  
(d) the procedure of inquiry by the Prosecution Director under sub -section ( 2) of section 27;  
(e) any act or omission which may be determined as professional misconduct under section 31;  
(f) the procedure to be followed by the Board in its meetings and discharging its functions under 
section 45; and  
(g) terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and Members of the Board under section 46.  
56. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Council may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government and subject to the previous publication, by notification in  the Official Gazette, make 
regulations to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the examination and training for the purposes of clauses ( b), (c) and ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 6;  
(b) the manner of making an application under sub -section ( 3) of section 6;  
(c) the fees payable under sub -section ( 3) of section 6, sub -section ( 2) of section 9, clause ( a) of 
sub-section ( 2) of section 19, sub -section ( 4) of section 23;  
(d) the manner in which the honorary member may be chosen under sub -section ( 1) of section 8;  
(e) the terms and conditions on which an affiliate member may be admitted u nder sub -section ( 2) 
of section 8;  
(f) the academic qualifications for admission of a student member under sub -section ( 3) of section 
8; 
(g) qualifications required for a certificate of practice under sub -section ( 1) and the form in which 
an application ma y be made under sub -section ( 2) of section 9;  
(h) the transaction of business by the Council for the discharge of its functions mentioned in sub -
section ( 2) of section 19;  
(i) terms and conditions of the services under sub -section ( 1) of section 20;  
(j) the functions and conditions of the committees under sub -section ( 3) of section 21;  
(k) the manner in which the register of the members of the Institute and other particulars to be 
maintained under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 23;  19 
 (l) the manner in which the annual list of members of the Institute may be published under sub -
section ( 3) of section 23;  
(m) the conditions and requirements and payment of fee for re -entry in the register under section 
25; 
(n) salaries and allowances and conditions of serv ice of the officers and other staff members of 
the Authority under  sub-section ( 2) of section 35;  
(o) the conditions subject to which foreign qualifications may be recognised under sub -section ( 2) 
of section 51; and  
(p) any other matter which is required t o be, or may be, prescribed under this Act.  
57. Power of Central Government to issue directions for ma king or amending regulations .—(1) 
Where the Central Government considers it expedient so to do, it may, by order in writing, direct the 
Council to make an y regulations or to amend or revoke any regulations already made within such period 
as it may specify in this behalf.  
(2) If the Council fails or neglects to comply with such order within the specified period, the Central 
Government may itself make the reg ulations or amend or revoke the regulations made by the Council.  
58. Laying of rules and regulati ons.—Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and 
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in ma king any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule 
or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall, thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that a ny such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.  
59. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Centr al Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section a fter the expiry of a period of two years 
from the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.   20 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 31)  
PART I 
Professional misconduct in relation to members of the Institute in practice  
An Actuary in practice shall be deemed to be guilty of professional misconduct, if he — 
(1) allows any person to practice in his name as an actuary unless such person is also an actuary 
in pract ice and is in partnership with or employed by himself; or  
(2) pays by way of remuneration to an employee, pays or allows or agrees to pay or allow, 
directly or indirectly, any share, commission or brokerage in the fees or profits of his professional 
busine ss, to any person other than a member of the Institute or a partner or a retired partner or the 
legal representative of a deceased partner; or  
(3) enters into partnership with any person other than an Actuary in practice or a person resident 
outside India who but for his residence abroad would be entitled to be admitted as a member under 
clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 6 or whose qualifications are recognised by the Central 
Government or the Council for the purpose of permitting such partnership, p rovided the Actuary 
shares in the fees or profits of the business of the partnership both within and outside of India; or  
(4) secures either through the services of a person who is not an employee of such Actuary or 
who is not qualified to be his partner o r by means which are not open to an Actuary, any professional 
business; or  
(5) accepts an assignment as Actuary previously held by another Actuary without first 
communicating with him in writing; or  
(6) charges or offers to charge, accepts or offers to acc ept in respect of any professional 
employment fees which are based on a percentage of profit or which are contingent upon the findings 
or results of such employment, except as permitted under any regulation made under this Act; or  
(7) engages in any busine ss or occupation other than the profession of Actuaries unless permitt ed 
by the Council so to engage:  
Provided that nothing contained herein shall disentitle an Actuary from being a director of a 
company; or  
(8) accepts a position as an actuary previously held by some other Actuary in practice in such 
conditions as to constitute undercutting; or  
(9) allows a person not being a member of the Institute in practice, or a member not being his 
partner to sign on his behalf or on behalf of his firm, any valuation  report or financial statement; or  
(10) discloses information acquired in the course of his professional engagement to any person 
other than his client so engaging him, without the consent of such client, or otherwise than as required 
by any law for the ti me being in force; or  
(11) certifies or submits in his name, or in the name of his firm, a valuation report or a financial 
statement unless the examination of such statement and the related records has been made by him or 
by a partner or an employee in his  firm or by another Actuary in practice; or  
(12) expresses his opinion or valuation reports or financial statements of any business or any 
enterprise in which he, his firm, or a partner in his firm has a substantial interest, unless he has 
disclosed the in terest also in his report; or  
(13) fails to disclose a material fact known to him in a valuation report or a financial statement, 
but disclosures of which is necessary to make the valuation report or the financial statement not 
misleading where he is concerned with such valuation report or the financial statement in a 
professional capacity; or  21 
 (14) fails to report a material misstatement known to him to appear in a valuation report or 
financial statement with which he is concerned in a professional cap acity; or  
(15) is grossly negligent in the conduct  of his professional duties; or  
(16) fails to obtain sufficient information to warrant the formation of an opinion in regard to any 
matter contained in any valuation report or financial statement prepared b y him or on his behalf; or  
(17) fails to invite attention to any material departure from the generally accepted procedure or 
professional work applicable to the circumstances, in any valuation report or financial statement 
prepared by him or on his behalf.  
PART II 
Professional misconduct in relation to the members of the Institute in service  
A member of the Institute (other than a member in practice) shall be deemed to be guilty of 
professional misconduct, if he being an employee of any company, firm or per son,— 
(1) pays or allows or agrees to pay directly or indirectly to any person any share in the 
emoluments of the employment undertaken by him; or  
(2) accepts or agrees to accept any part of fees, profits or gains by way of commission or 
gratification; or  
(3) discloses confidential information acquired in the course of his employment except as and 
when required by law or except as permitted by his employer.  
PART III 
Professional misconduct in relation to members of the Institute generally  
A member of the Institute, whether in practice or not, shall be deemed to be guilty of  professional 
misconduct, if he — 
(1) includes in any statement, return or form to be submitted to the Council any particulars 
knowing them to be false; or  
(2) not being a fellow member o f the Institute acts himself as a fellow member of the Institute; or  
(3) does not supply the information called for or does not comply with the requirements asked for 
by the Council or any of its Committees; or  
(4) contravenes any of the provisions of this  Act or the regulations made thereunder or any 
guidelines issued by the Council under clause ( i) of sub -section ( 2) of section 19; or  
(5) is guilty of such other act or omission as may be specified by the Council.  
PART IV 
Other misconduct in relation to member of the Institute generally  
A member of the Institute, whether in practice or not, shall be deemed to be  guilty of other 
misconduct, if — 
(A) (1) he is held guilty by any civil or criminal court for an offence which is punishable with 
imprisonment for  a term not exceeding six months;  
(2) in the opinion of the Council, he brings disrepute to the profession or the Institute as result of 
his action whether or not related to his professional work;  
(B) he is held guilty by any civil or criminal court for an  offence which is punishable with 
imprisonment for a term exceeding six months . 
 
 
--------------------------The Andhra Pradesh Legislative Council Act, 2005--------------------------
1 
 THE ANDHRA PRADESH LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL ACT, 2005  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Creation of Legislative Council for Andhra Pradesh . 
4. Amendment of Third Schedule and Fourth Schedule of Act 43 of 1950 . 
5. Amendment  of section 15A of Act 43 of 1951 . 
 
  2 
 THE ANDHRA PRADESH LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL ACT, 2005  
ACT NO. 1 OF 2006  
[11th January, 2006.]  
An Act to provide for the creation of Legislative Council for the State of Andhra Pradesh and for 
matters supplemental, incidental and consequential thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Council Act, 2005.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the  context otherwise requires, each of the words and expressions 
used herein and not defined but defined in the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950), shall 
have the same meaning as in that Act.  
3. Creation of Legislative Council for Andhra Pra desh .—(1) As from such date1as the President 
may by order appoint, there shall be a Legislative Council for the State of Andhra Pradesh; and as from 
that date, in sub -clause ( a) of clause ( 1) of article 168, after the words “States of ”, the words “Andhr a 
Pradesh, ”, shall be inserted.  
(2) In the said Council, t here shall be 90 seats of which — 
(a) the numbers to be filled by persons elected by the electorates referred to in sub -clauses ( a), (b) 
and ( c) of clause ( 3) of article 171 shall be 31, 8 and 8 respectively;  
(b) the number to be filled by persons elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly of 
Andhra Pradesh in accordance with the provisions of sub -clause ( d) of the said clause shall be 31; and  
(c) the number to be filled by persons nominat ed by the Governor of Andhra Pradesh in 
accordan ce with the provisions of sub -clause ( e) of that clause shall be 12.  
(3) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, the President, after consultation with the 
Election Commiss ion, shall, by order, determine — 
(a) the constituencies into which the State of Andhra Pradesh shall be divided for the purpose of 
elections to the said Council under each of the sub -clauses (a), (b) and (c) of clause ( 3) of article 171;  
(b) the extent of each constituency; and  
(c) the number of seats to be allotted to each constituency.  
(4) As soon as may be after such determination, steps shall be taken to constitute the said Council in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) and 
the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951).  
4. Amendment of Third Schedule and Fourth Schedule of Act 43 of 1950 .—In the Represen tation 
of the People Act, 1950, — 
(a) in the Third Schedule, before entry No. 2 relating to Bihar, the following entry shall be 
inserted, namely: — 
 
“1. Andhra Pradesh  90 31 8 8 31 12”; 
 
  
                                                           
1. 30th March, 2007, (Legislative Council for Andhra Pradesh come to existence ), vide notification No. G.S.R. 262(E), dated 
30th March, 2007, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii).  3 
 (b) in the Fourth Schedule, before the heading “BIHAR ”, the following heading and ent ries shall 
be inserted, namely: — 
“ANDHRA  PRADESH  
1. Municipal Corporations.  
2. Municipalities.  
3. Nagar Panchayats.  
4. Cantonment Boards.  
5. ZilaPraja  Parishads.  
6. Mandal  Praja  Parishads. ”. 
5. Amendment of section 15A of Act 43 of 1951 .—In section 15A of the Represe ntation of the 
People Act, 1951 , for the words and figures “under the  Legislative Councils Act, 1957 ” (37of 1957) ,        
the words and figures “under the  Andhra Pradesh Legislative Council Act, 2005 ” shall be substituted.  
--------------------------The Assam Rifles Act, 2006--------------------------
1 
 THE ASSAM RIFLES ACT, 2006  
__________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Persons subject to this Act.  
 
CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTION OF THE FORCE AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF THE MEMBERS OF THE  FORCE  
4. Constitution of Force.  
5. Control, direction, etc.  
6. Enrolment.  
7. Liability for service outside India.  
8. Resignation and withdrawal from the post.  
9. Tenure of service under the Act.  
10. Termination of service by Central Government.  
11. Dismissal, removal or reduction by Director -General and by other officers.  
12. Certificate of termination of service.  
13. Restrictions on right to form association, freedom of speech, etc.  
 
CHAPTER III  
SERVICE PRIVILEGES  
14. Authorised deduction only to be made from p ay. 
15. Remedy of aggrieved persons other than officers.  
16. Remedy of agg rieved officers.  
17. Immunity from attachment.  
18. Immunity from arrest for debt.  
19. Immunity of persons attending Assam Rifles Court from arrest.  
20. Saving of rights and privileges under other laws.  
 
CHA PTER  IV 
OFFENCES  
21. Offences in relation to the enemy and punishable with death.  
22. Offences in relation to the enemy and not punishable with death.  
23. Offences punishable more severely on active duty than at other times.  2 
 SECTIONS  
24. Mutiny.  
25. Desertion and aiding desertion.  
26. Absence without leave.  
27. Striking or threatening superior officers.  
28. Disobedience to superior officer.  
29. Insubordination and obstruction.  
30. Fraudulent enrolment.  
31. False answers on enrolment.  
32. Unbecoming conduct.  
33. Certain forms of disgraceful conduct . 
34. Ill-treating a subordinate.  
35. Intoxication.  
36. Permitting escape of person in custody.  
37. Irregularity in connection with arrest or confinement.  
38. Escape from custody.  
39. Offences in respect of property.  
40. Extortion and corruption.  
41. Making away with equipment.  
42. Injury to prope rty. 
43. False accusations.  
44. Falsifying official document and false declarations.  
45. Signing in blank and failure to report.  
46. Offences relating to Assam Rifles Court.  
47. False evidence.  
48. Unlawful detention of pay.  
49. Violation of good order and discipline.  
50. Miscellaneous offences.  
51. Attempt.  
52. Abetment of offences that have been committed.  
53. Abetment of offences punishable with death and  not committed.  
54. Abetment of offences punishable with imprisonment and not committed.  
55. Civil offences.  
56. Civil offences not triable by an Assam Rif les Court.  
 
CHAPTER V  
PUNISHMENTS  
57. Punishment awardable by Assam Rifles Courts.  
58. Alternative punishments awardable by Assam Rifles Courts.  
59. Combination of punishments.  
60. Retention in the Force of a person convicted on active duty.  
61. Punishments otherwise than by Assam Rifles Courts.  
62. Minor punishments.  
63. Limit of punishments under section 62.  
64. Punishment of officers below the rank of Deputy Commandant, subordinate officers and Warrant 
Officer by Deputy Inspectors -General and others.  3 
 SECTIONS  
65. Punishment of officers  below the rank of a Commandant, subordinate officers and Warrant 
Officer by the Inspectors -General and others.  
66. Punishment or subordinate officers and Warrant Officer by Commandant, etc.  
67. Collective fines.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
PENAL DEDUCTIONS  
68. Deductions from pay an d allowances of officers.  
69. Deductions from pay and allowances of persons other than officers.  
70. Computation of time of absence or custody.  
71. Pay and allowances during trial.  
72. Limit of  certain deductions.  
73. Deduction from public money due to a person.  
74. Pay and allow ances of prisoner of war during inquiry into his conduct.  
75. Remission of deductions.  
76. Provision for dependants of prisoner of war from remitted deductions.  
77. Provision for dependants of prisoner of war from his pay and allowances.  
78. Period during which a person i s deemed to be a prisoner of war.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
ARREST AND PROCEEDINGS BEFORE TRIAL  
79. Custody of offenders.  
80. Duty of Commandant in regard to detention.  
81. Interval between committal and trial.  
82. Arrest by civil authorities.  
83. Capture of deserters.  
84. Inquiry into absence without leave.  
85. Force Police Officers.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
ASSAM  RIFLES  COURTS  
86. Kinds of Assam Rifles Courts.  
87. Power to convene a General Assam Rifles Court.  
88. Power to conven e a Petty Assam Rifles Court.  
89. Contents of warrants issued under sections 87 and 88.  
90. Composition of General Assam Rifles Court.  
91. Composition of a Petty Assam Rifles Court.  
92. Summary Assam Rifles Court.  
93. Dissolution of an Assam Rifles Court.  
94. Power of General Assam Rifles Court.  
95. Power of a Petty Assam Rifles Court.  4 
 SECTIONS  
96. Power of a Summary As sam Rifles Court.  
97. Prohibition of second trial.  
98. Period of limitation for trial.  
99. Trial, etc., of offender who ceases to be subject to this Act.  
100. Application of this Act during term of sentence.  
101. Place of trial.  
102. Choice between criminal court and Assam Rifles Court.  
103. Power of criminal court to require delivery of offender.  
 
CHAPTER IX  
PROCEDURE OF  ASSAM  RIFLES  COURTS  
 
104. Presiding officer.  
105. Law Officer.  
106. Challenges.  
107. Oath of member, Law Officer and witness.  
108. Voting by members.  
109. General rule as to evidence.  
110. Judicial notice.  
111. Summoning of witness.  
112. Documents exempted from production.  
113. Commission for examination of witness.  
114. Examination of witness on commission . 
115. Conviction of offences not charged.  
116. Presumption as to signatures.  
117. Enrolment paper.  
118. Presumption as to certain docu ments.  
119. Reference by accused to Government officer.  
120. Evidence of previous convictions and general character.  
121. Lunacy of accused.  
122. Subsequent fitness of lunatic accused for trial.  
123. Transmission to Central Government of orders under section 122.  
124. Release of lunati c accused.  
125. Delivery of lunatic accused to relatives.  
126. Order for custody and disposal of property pending trial.  
127. Order of disposal of property regarding which offences is committed.  
128. Powers of Assam Rifles Court in relation to proceedings under this Act.  
 
CHA PTER X  
CONFIRMATION AND REVISION  
129. Finding and  sentence not valid unless confirmed.  
130. Power to confirm finding and sentence of General Assam Rifles Court . 
131. Power to confirm finding and sentence of Petty Assam Rifles Court.  
132. Limitation of powers of confirming authority.  5 
 SECTIONS  
133. Power  of confirming authority to mitigate, remit or commute sentences.  
134. Confirming of findings and sentences on board a ship.  
135. Revision of finding or sentence.  
136. Finding and sentence of a Summary Assam Rifles Court.  
137. Transmission of proceedings of Summary Assam Rifles Court.  
138. Alteration of finding or sentence in certain cases.  
139. Remedy against order, finding or sentence of Assam Rifles Court.  
140. Annulment of proceed ings.  
 
CHAPTER XI  
EXECUTION OF SENTENCE, PARDON, REMISSION, ETC . 
141. Form of sen tence of death.  
142. Commencement of sentence of imprisonment.  
143. Execution of sentence of imprisonment.  
144. Temporary custody of offender.  
145. Execution of sentence of imprisonment in special cases.  
146. Conveyance of prisoner form place to place.  
147. Communication of  certain orders to prison officers.  
148. Execution of sentence of fine.  
149. Informality or error in order or warrant.  
150. Pardon and remission.  
151. Cancellation of conditional pardon, release on parole or remission.  
152. Suspension of sentence of imprisonment.  
153. Orders pending su spension.  
154. Release on suspension.  
155. Computation of period of suspension.  
156. Order after suspension.  
157. Reconsideration of case after suspension.  
158. Fresh sentence after suspension.  
159. Scope of power of suspension.  
160. Effect of suspension and remission on dismissal.  
 
 
CHAPTE R XII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
161. Disposal of property of the members of the Force.  
162. Powers and duties conferrable and imposable on members of the Force.  
163. Protection for acts of members of the Force.  
164. Power of Central Government to remove difficulties.  
165. Power to make rules.  
166. Power to make regulations.  
167. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
168. Repeal and savings.  6 
  
THE ASSAM RIFLES ACT , 2006  
ACT NO. 47 OF 2006  
[3rd November , 2006.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the governance of the Assam Rifles,  an 
Armed  Force of the Union fo r ensuring the security of the b orders of India, to carry out 
Counter Insurgency Operations in the specified areas and to act in aid of civil authorities for 
the maintenance of the law and order and for matters connected ther ewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Assam Rifles Act, 2006 . 
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “active duty ”, in relation to a person subject to this Act, means any duty as a member of the 
Force during the period in which such person is attached to, or fo rms part of, a unit of  the Force— 
(i) which is engaged in operations against an enemy or an insurgent or a terrorist or any 
person in arms against the Union, or  
(ii) which is operating at a picket or engaged on patrol or other guard duty along the bo rders 
of India,  
and includes duty by such person during any period declared by the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, as a period of active duty with reference to any are a in which or 
under any provision of this Act or for the purposes of any other law for the time being in force, any 
person or class of persons subject to this Act may be serving;  
(b) “Assam Rifles Court ” means a Court referred to in section 86;  
(c) “battal ion” means a unit of the Force constit uted as battalion by the Centra l Government;  
(d) “Chief Law Officer ” and “Law Officer ” mean, respectively, the Chief Law Officer and a Law 
Officer of the Force appointed by the Central Government;  
(e) “civil offence ” means as offence which is triable by a criminal court;  
(f) “civil prison ” means any jail or place used for the detention of any criminal prison er under the 
Prisons Act, 1894 (9 of 1894) or under any other law for the time being in force;  
(g) “Commandant ”, when used in any provision of this Act with reference to any unit of the 
Force, means the officer whose duty it is under the rules or regulations or in the absence of such rules 
or regulations, by custom of the service, to discharge with respect to that u nit, the functions of a 
Commandant in regard to matters of the description referred to in that provision;  
(h) “criminal court ” means a court of ordinary criminal justice in any part of India;  
(i) “deputation ” means a period for which the services of a pers on belonging to any department of 
the Central Government are placed at the disposal of the Director -General;  
                                                           
1. 20 th February , 2006, vide notification No. S.O. 517(E) dated 20th February , 2006, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary , Part II 
sec.3( ii) 
 7 
 (j) “Director -General” and “Additional Director -General” mean, the Director -General and 
Additional Director -General of the Force appointed under su b-sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 5, 
respectively;  
(k) “enemy” includes all armed mutineers, armed rebels, armed rioters, pirates, terrorists and any 
person in arms against whom it is the duty of any person subject to this Act to take action;  
(l) “enrolled  person” means an under -officer or other person enrolled under this Act;  
(m) “Force” means the Assam Rifles;  
(n) “Force custody ” means the arrest or confinement of a member of the Force according to rules 
and includes any military custody of such member un der the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950);  
(o) “Inspector -General” and “Deputy Inspector -General” mean, respectively the Inspector -
General and the Deputy Inspector -General of the Force appointed under sub -section ( 2) of section 5;  
(p) “mem ber of the Force ” means  an off icer, a subordinate officer, an under -officer or other 
enrolled person and includes the persons on deputation;  
(q) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(r) “offence” means any act or omission pun ishable under this A ct and includes a civil offence;  
(s) “officer” means a person appointed or in pay as an  officer of the Force; but does not include a 
subordinate office r or an under -officer;  
(t) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(u) “regulations ” means the regulations made by the Central Government under this Act;  
(v) “rule” means a rule made under this Act;  
(w) “subordinate officer ” means a person appointed or in pay as a Subedar Major, a Subedar or  a 
Naib Su bedar of the Force;  
(x) “superior offi cer”, when used in relation to a person subject to this Act, means — 
(i) any member of the Force or a person on deputation to whose command such person is for 
the time being subject in accordance with the rules;  
(ii) any officer of higher rank or class or of a higher grade in the same class,  
and includes when such person is not an officer, a subordinate officer or an under -officer of higher 
rank, class or grade;  
(y) “terrorist” means any person who, with intent to over awe the Government as by law 
establishe d or to strike terror in the people or any section of the people or to alienate any section of 
the people or to adversely affect the harmony amongst different sections of the people, does any act 
or thing by using bombs, dynamite or other explosive substan ces or inflammable substances or fire -
arms or other lethal weapons or poisons or noxious gases or other chemicals or any other substances 
(whether biological or otherwise) of a hazardous nature in such a manner, as to cause or is likely to 
cause death of, or injury to, any person or persons, or damage to, or destruction of, property or 
disruption of any supplies or services essential to the life of the community;  
(z) “under -officer” means a Warrant O fficer, Havildar, Naik  and Lance Naik of the F orce;  
(za) “unit” means any — 
(i) battalion; or  
(ii) regiment; or  
(iii) training institution ; or 
(iv) Head  Quarters of Deputy Inspector -General ; or 
(v) Hea d Quarters of Inspector -General ; or 8 
 (vi) Head Quarters of Director -General,  
of the Force and includes any other formation of the Force specified, by notification by the Central 
Government.  
(2) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Indian Penal Code  (45 
of 1860)  shall have the meanings  assigned to them in that Code.  
(3) In this Act , reference to any law not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall be 
construed as references to the corresponding law in force in that State.  
3. Persons subject to this Act .—(1) The following persons (whether on deputation or otherwise 
employed) shall be subject to this Act, wherever they may be, namely: — 
(a) officers and subordinate officers ; and 
(b) under -officers and other persons enrolled under this Act.  
(2) Members of the Force in existence at the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to h ave been 
appointed or, as the case may be, enrolled as such under th is Act.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section  (1), any person who is employed in the Force 
on deputation from the regular Army as defined under clause ( xxi) of section 3 of  the Army Act, 1950 (46 
of 1950) shall not be subject to this Act and shall, during the period of such deputation, be deemed to be 
subject to the Army Act, 1950:  
Provided that such person in regard to his duties and discipline shall be deemed to be under t he 
command of the member of the Force under whose command such person for the time being is placed:  
Provided further that, in case of such person, for the purposes of his duties and discipline, the 
expression “active duty ” defined in clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2 shall be deemed to be the 
“active service ” as defined in clause ( i) of section 3 of the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950) for taking any 
action against him under the provisions of the said Army Act,  
(4) Any person who is not subject to this Act is posted for any service with the members of the Force 
or engaged to accompany with or to provide any service in any manner to the members of the Force in 
such— 
(i) camp;  
(ii) line of march;  
(iii) frontier post;  
(iv) active duty ;or  
(v) counte r insurgency operations,  
as may be specified, by notification,  by the Central Government in this behalf shall be deemed to be a 
member of the Force, till he is so posted or engaged in such corresponding rank as may be determined, by 
notification, by the Central Government for the purposes of this Act.  
(5) Every person subject to this Act shall remain so subject until retired, discharged, released, 
removed or dismissed from the Force in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules.  
 
CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTION OF THE  FORCE  AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF THE MEMBERS OF THE  FORCE  
4. Constitution of Force .—(1) There shall be an armed force of the Union called the Assam Rifles 
for ensuring th e security of the bo rders of India, to carry out counter insurge ncy operations in the 
specified areas and to act in aid of civil authorities for the mainten ance of law and order and the matters 
connected therewith.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Force shall be reconstituted in such manner as may be 
prescribed and the conditions of service of the members of the Force shall be such as may be prescribed.  9 
 5. Control, direction, etc .—(1) The general superintendence, direction and control of the Force shall 
vest in, and be exercised by, the Central Governm ent and subject thereto and to the provisions of this Act 
and the rules and regulations, the command and supervision of the Force shall vest in an officer to be 
appointed by the Central Government as the Director -General of the Force.  
(2) The Director -General shall, in the discharge of his duties under this Act, be assisted by such 
number of Additional Director -General, Insp ectors -General, Deputy Inspectors -General, Commandants 
and other officers as may be appointed by the Central Government.  
6. Enrolment .—(1) The persons to be enrolled to the Force, the mode of enrolment and the procedure 
for enrolment shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the rules and regulations, every person who 
has, for a continuous period of three months, been in receipt of pay as a person enrolled u nder this Act 
and borne on the r olls of the Force shall be deemed to have been duly enrolled.  
(3) No person who is not a citizen of India shall, except by the consent of the Central Government 
signified in writing, be enrolled in the Force.  
7. Liabil ity for service outside India .—Every member of the Force shall be liable to serve in any 
part of India as well as outside India.  
8. Resignation  and wit hdrawal from the post .—No member o f the Force shall be at liberty — 
(a) to resign his appo intment during the term of his engagement ;or  
(b) to withdraw himself from all or any of the duties of his appointment , 
except with the previous permission in writing of the prescribed authority.  
9. Tenur e of service under the Act .—Every person subject to this Act shall hold office during the 
pleasure of the President.  
10. Termination of service by Central Government .—Subject to the provisions of this Act and the 
rules and regulations, the Central Government may dismiss or remove from the service any person subject 
to this Act.  
11. Dismissal, removal or reduction by Director -General and by other officers .—(1) The 
Director -General, Additional Director -General or any Inspector -General may dismiss or remove from 
service or reduce to a lower grade or rank or the ranks any person subject to this Act other than an officer.  
(2) An officer not below the rank of Deputy Inspector -General may dismiss or remove from the 
service any person under his command other than an officer or a subordinate officer of such rank or the 
ranks as may be prescribed.  
(3) Any such officer as is mentioned in sub -section ( 2) may reduce to a lower grade or rank or the 
ranks any person u nder his comman d except an offi cer or a subordinate officer.  
(4) The exercise of any power under this section shall be subject to the provisions of this Act and the 
rules and regulations.  
12. Certifi cate of te rmination of service .—A subordinate officer or an under -officer or other 
enrolled person who is retired, discharged, released, removed or dismissed from service shall be furnished 
by the officer, to whose command he is subject, with a certificate in the language which is the moth er-
tongue of such person a nd also in Hindi and  English language setting forth — 
(a) the authority terminating his service;  
(b) the cause for such termination; and  
(c) the full period of his service in the Force.   10 
 13. Restrictions on right to form assoc iation , freedom of speech, etc .—(1) No person subject to 
this Act shall, without the previous sanction in writing of the Central Government or of the prescribed 
authority, — 
(a) be a member of, or be associated in any way with,  any trade union, labour union, political 
association or with  any class of trade unions, labour unions or political associations; or  
(b) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any society , institution, association or 
organisation that is not recognised as part of the Force or is not of a purely social, recreational or 
religious nature ; or  
(c) communicate with the press or publish or cause to be published any book, letter or other 
document except where such communication or publication is in the bona  fide discha rge of his duties 
or is of a purely literar y, artistic or scientific character or is of a prescribed nature.  
Explanation .—If any question arises as to whether any society, institution, association or organisation 
is of a purely social, recreational or religious nature under clause ( b) of this sub -section, the decision of 
the Central Government thereon shall be final.  
(2) No person subject to this Act shall participate in, or address, any meeting or take part in any 
demonstration organised by any body or persons for any political purposes or for such  other purposes as 
may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER III  
SERVICE PRIVILEGES  
14. Authorised deduc tion only to be made from pay .—The pay of every person subject to this Act 
due to him as such under any rules or regulations for the time being in force shall be paid without any 
deduction other than the deductions authorised by or under  this Act or any other Act.  
15. Remady of aggrieved per sons other than officers .—(1) Any person subject to this Act other 
than an officer who deems himself wronged by any officer or subo rdinate officer may complain to the 
officer under whose command or orders he is serving . 
(2) when the officer complained against is the officer to whom any complaint should, under  
sub-section ( 1), be preferred, the aggrieved person may complain to such officer's next superior officer.  
(3) Every officer receiving any such complaint shall make as complete an investigation into it as may 
be possible for giving full redress to the complainant; or when necessary, refer the complaint to superior 
authority.  
(4) Every such complaint shall be preferred in such manner as may, from time to time, be specified by 
the Director -General.  
(5) The Central Government may revise any decision by the Director -General under sub -section ( 2), 
but, subject thereto, the decision of  the Director -General shall be final.  
16. Remedy of aggrieved officers .—Any officer who deems himself wronged by his Commandant 
or any superior officer and who on due application made to his Commandant or such superior officer does 
not receive the redress to which he considers himself entitled, may complain to the Central Government 
in such manner as may, from time to time, be specified by the Director -General.  
17. Immunity from attachment .—Neither the arms, cloth es, equipment, accoutrements or 
necessaries of any person subject to this Act, nor any animal used by him for the discharge of his duty 
shall be seized, nor shall, the pay and allowances of an y such person or any part there of, be attached by 
direction of any civil or revenue court or any revenue off icer in satisfaction of any decree or order 
enforceable against him.  
18. Immunity from arrest for debt .— (1) No person subject to this Act shall, so long as he belongs 
to the Force, be liable to be arrested for debt under any process issued by, or by the authority of, any civil 
or revenue court or revenue officer, except with the prior consent of the Central Government.  11 
 (2) The Judge of any such court or the said officer may examine into any complaint made by such 
person or his superior officer of the arre st of such person contrary to the provisions of this section and 
may, by warrant under his hand, discharge the person, and award reasonable costs to the complainant, 
who may recover those costs in like manner as he might have recovered costs awarded to him  by a decree 
against the person obtaining the process.  
(3) For the recovery of such costs no court -fee shall be payable by the complainant.  
19. Immunity of persons attending A ssam Rifles Court from arrest .—(1) No Presiding Officer or 
member of an Assam Rif les Court, no Law Officer, no party to any proceeding before an Assam Rifles 
Court, or his legal practitioner or agent and no witness acting in obe dience to a summons to attend an  
Assam Rifles Court shall, while proceeding to, attending or returning from, an Assam Rifles Court, be 
liable to arrest under civil or revenue process.  
(2) If any such person is arrested under any such process, he may be discharged by order of the 
Assam Rifles Court.  
20. Savings of rights an d privileges under other laws .—The rights  and privileges specified in the 
preceding section of this Chapter shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other rights and 
privileges conferred on persons subject to this Act generally by any other law for the time being in force.  
CHAPTER IV 
OFFENCES  
21. Offences in relation to the en emy and punishable with death .—Any person subject to this Act 
who commits any of the following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) shamefully abandons or delivers up any post, place or guard, committed to his charg e or 
which it is his duty to def end; or  
(b) intentionally uses any means to compel or induce any person subject to this Act or to army, 
naval,  air force law or any member of other armed forces to abstain from acting against the enemy or 
to discourage such person fr om acting against the enemy; or  
(c) in the presence of enemy, shamefully casts away his arms, ammunition, tools or equipment or 
misbehaves in such manner as to show cowardice; or  
(d) treacherously holds correspondence with, or communicates intelli gence to, the enemy or any 
person in arms against the Union; or  
(e) directly or indirectly assists the enemy with money, arms, ammunition, stores or supplies or in 
any other manner whatsoever; or  
(f) in time of active operation against the enemy intentiona lly occasions a false alarm in action, 
camp, quarters or spreads or causes to be spread reports calculated to create alarm or despondency; or  
(g) in time of action leaves his Commandant or other superior officer or his post, guard, picket, 
patrol or party wihout being regularly relieved or without leave; or  
(h) having been captured by the enemy or made a prisoner of war, voluntaril y serves with or aids 
the enemy ; or 
(i) knowingly harbours or protects an enemy not being a prisoner; or  
(j) being a sentry in t ime of active operation against the enemy or alarm, sleeps upon his post or is 
intoxicated; or  
(k) knowingly does any act calculated to imperil the success of the Force or the army, naval, air 
forces of India or any other armed forces of the Central Govern ment co -operating therewith or any 
part of such forces,  
shall, on conviction by an  Assam Rifl es Court, be liable to suffer death or such less punishment as is in 
this Act mentioned.  12 
 22. Offences in relation to the enemy and not punishable with death .—Any person subject to this 
Act who commits any of the following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) is taken prisoner or captured by the enemy, by want of due precaution or through 
disobedience of orders, or wilful neglect of duty, or having been taken prisoner or so captured fails to 
rejoin his service when able to do so; or  
(b) without due authority holds correspondence with, or communicates intelligence to, the enemy 
or any person in league with the enemy or having come by the knowledge of any such 
correspondence  or communication, wilfully omits to discover it immediately to his Commandant or 
other superior officer,  
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifl es Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
23. Offences punishable more sever ely on ac tive duty than at other times .—Any person subject to 
this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) forces a safeguard or forces or uses criminal force to a sentry; or  
(b) breaks into any house or other place in search of plunder; or  
(c) being a sentry, sleeps upon his post  or is intoxicated; or  
(d) without orders from his  superior officer, leaves his guard, picket, patrol or posts; or  
(e) intentionally or thr ough neglect occasions a false alarm in camp or quarters , or spreads or 
causes to be sp read reports calculated to create unnecessary alarm or despondency; or  
(f) makes known the parole, watchword or countersign to any person not entitled to receive it ;or  
(g) knowingly gives a parole, watch word or countersign different from what he received,  
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, — 
(A) if he commits any such offence when on active duty, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a 
term which may exten d to fourteen years or such les s punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
 (B) if he commits any such offence when not on active du ty, be liable to suffer imprison ment for 
a term which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
24. Mutiny .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is to 
say,— 
(a) begins, incites, causes or conspires with any other person to cause any mutiny in the Force or 
in the army, naval or air forces of India o r any forces co -operating there with; or  
(b) joins in any such mutiny; or  
(c) being present at any such mutiny, does not use his ut most endeavours to suppress the same; or  
(d) knowing or having reason to believe in the existence of any such mutiny, or of an y intention 
to mutiny or of any such conspiracy, does not, without delay, give information thereof to his 
Commandant or other superior officer; or  
(e) endeavours to seduce any person in the Force or in the army, naval or air f orces of India or 
any forces c ooperating therewith from his duty or allegiance to the Union,  
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer death or such less punishment as is in 
this Act mentioned.  
25. Desertion and  aiding desertion .—(1) Any person subject to this Act who deserts or attempts to 
desert the service shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, — 
(a) if he commits the offence when on active duty or when under orders for active duty, be liable 
to suffer death or such less punishment as is in this Act me ntioned;  and 13 
 (b) if he commits the offence under any other circumstances, be liable to suffer imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
(2) Any person subject to this Act who knowingly harb ours any such deserter shall, on conviction by 
an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or 
such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
(3) Any person subje ct to this Act who, being cogniz ant o f any desertion or attempt at desertion of  a 
person subject to this Act, does not forthwith give notice to his own or some other superior officer, or take 
any steps in his power to cause such person to be apprehended, shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifle s 
Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or such less punishment 
as is in this Act mentioned.  
26. Absence without leave .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, that is to say, — 
(a) absents himself without leave; or  
(b) without sufficient cause, overstays leave granted to him; or  
(c) being on leave of absence and having received information from the appropriate authority that 
any battalion or part thereof or any other unit of the Fo rce, to which he belongs, has been ordered on 
active duty, fails, without sufficient cause, to rejoin without delay; or  
(d) without sufficient cause, fails to appear at the time fixed at the parade or place appointed for 
exercise or duty; or  
(e) when on pa rade, or on the line of march, without sufficient cause or without leave from his 
superior officer, quits the parade or line of march ; or  
(f) when in camp or elsewhere, is found beyond any limits fixed, or in any place prohibited, by 
any general, local or  other order, without a pass or written leave from his superior officer; or  
(g) without leave from his superior officer or without due cause, absents himself from any school 
when duly ordered to attend there, shall, on conviction by an  Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act 
mentioned.  
27. Striking or threatening superior officers .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of 
the following offences, that is to say,— 
(a) uses criminal force to or assaults his superior officer; or  
(b) uses threa tening language to such officer ; or 
(c) uses insubordinate language to such officer,  
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, — 
(A) if such officer is at the time in the execution of his office or, if the offence is commit ted on 
active duty, be liable to suffer impriso nment for a term which may extend to fourteen years or such 
less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
(B) in other cases, be liable to suf fer imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years or 
such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned:  
Provided that in the case of an offence specified in clause ( c), the imprisonment shall not exceed five 
years.  
28. Dis obedience to superior officer .—(1) Any person subject to this Act who disobeys, in such 
manner as to show a wilful defiance of authority, any lawful command given personally by his superior 
officer in the execution of his office whether the same is given orally, or in writing o r by signal or 
otherwise, shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  14 
 (2) Any person subject to this Act who dis obeys any  lawful command given by his superior officer 
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, — 
(a) if he commits such offence when on active duty, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is i n this Act mentioned; and  
(b) if he commits such offence when not on active duty, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to five years or such less punish ment as is in this Act mentioned.  
29. In subordination and obstruction .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) being concerned in any quarrel, affray or disorder, refuses to obey any officer, though of 
inferior rank, who order s him into arrest, or uses criminal force to or as saults any such officer; or  
(b) uses criminal force to, or assaults any person, whether subject to this Act or not, in whose 
custody he is lawfully placed, and whether he is or is not his superior officer; or  
(c) resists an escort whose duty it is to appre hend him or to have him in charge; or  
(d) breaks out of barracks, camp or quarters; or  
(e) neglects to obey any general, local or other order ;or  
(f) impedes the Force Police referred to in section 85 or any person lawfully acting on its behalf, 
or when called upon, refuses to assist in the execution of his duty a Force Police or any person 
lawfully acting on his behalf,  
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend, in the case of the offences  specified in clauses ( d) and ( e), to two years, and in  the case of the 
offences specified in the other clauses, to ten years, or in either case such less punishment as is in this Act 
mentioned.  
30. Fraudulent enrolment .—Any person subject to this Act who knowingly attempts to get enrolled 
or enrolls any other person who does not fulfil the conditions enabling h im to be enrolled, shall, on 
conviction by the Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
five years or suc h less punish ment as is in  this Act mentioned.  
31. False answers on enrolment .—Any person having become subject to this Act who is discovered 
to have made at the time of enrolment a wilfully false answer to any question set -forth in the prescribed 
form of enrolment which has been put to him  by the enrolling officer before whom he appears for the 
purpose of being enrolled, shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to five years or such less pu nishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
32. U nbecoming conduct .—Any officer, subordinate officer or an under -officer who behaves in a 
manner unbecoming his position and the character expected o f him shall, on conviction by an  Assam 
Rifles Court, be liable to  be dismissed or to suffer such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
33. Certai n forms of disgraceful conduct .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) is guilty of any disgraceful conduct of a cruel, indecent or unnatural kind; or  
(b) malingers, or feigns or produ ces disease or infirmity in himself or  intentionally delays his cure 
or aggravates his disease or infirmity; or  
(c) with intent to render himself or any other person unfit for service, voluntarily causes hurt to 
himself or that person,  
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
34. Ill -treating a subordinate .—Any officer, s ubordinate officer or an under -officer who uses 
criminal force to or otherwise ill -treats any person subject to this Act, being his subordinate in rank or 15 
 position, shall, on conviction by an As sam Rifles Court, be liable to suff er imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
35. Intoxication .—Any person subject to this Act who is found in a state of intoxication whether on 
duty or not, shall, on conviction by an Assa m Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
36. Permittin g escape of person in custody .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of 
the following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) when in command of guard, picket, patrol or post, releases without proper authority, whether 
wilfully or without reasonable excuse, any person committed to his charge, or refuses to receive any  
prisoner or person so committed ; or 
(b) wilfully or without reasonable excuse allows to escape any person who is committed to his 
charge, or whom it is his duty to keep or guard,  
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable, if he has acted wilfully, to suffer imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and if he 
has not acted wilfully, to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
37. Irregula rity in connecti on with arrest or confinement .—Any person subject to this Act who 
commits any of the following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) unnecessarily detains a person in arrest or confinement without br inging him to trial, or fails 
to bring his case before the proper authority for investigation; or  
(b) having committed a person to Force custody fails without reasonable cause to deliver at the 
time of such committal, or as soon as practicable, and in any case within forty -eight hours thereafter, 
to the  officer or other person into whose custody the person arrested is committed, an account in 
writing signed by himself of the offence with which the person so committed is charged,  
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonm ent for a term which may 
extend to one year or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
38. Escape from custody .—Any perso n subjec t to this Act who, being in lawful custody, escapes or 
attempts to escape, shall on conviction by an Assam Rifles Cou rt, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
39. Of fences i n respect of property .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say,— 
(a) commits theft of any property belonging to the Government, or to any Force mess, band, or 
institution, or to any person subject to this Act; or  
(b) dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use any such property; or  
(c) commits criminal breach of trust i n respect of any  such property ; or 
(d) dishonestly receives or retains any such property in respect of which any of the offences under 
clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) has been committed, knowing or having reason to beli eve the commission of 
such offence; or  
(e) wilfully dest roys or injures any property of the Government entrusted to him; or  
(f) does any other thing with intent to defraud, or to cause wrongful gain to one person or 
wrongful loss to another person,  
shall, on conviction by an Assam R ifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.   16 
 40. Extortion and corruption .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, that is to say,— 
(a) commits extortion; or  
(b) without proper authority extracts from any person money, provisions or service,  
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to ten years or such less punishment  as is in this Act mentioned.  
41. Making away with equipment .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) makes away with, or is concerned in making away with any arms, ammunition, equipment, 
instruments, tools, clothing or any other thing being the property of the Government issued to him for 
his use or entrusted to him ; or 
(b) loses by neglect anything mentioned in clause ( a); or 
(c) sells, pawn s, destroys or defaces any meda l or decoration granted to him,  
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend, in the case of the offences specified in clause ( a), to ten years, and in the case of the offences 
specified in the other clauses, to five years, or in either case such less punishment as is in this Act 
mentioned.  
42. Injury to property .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, 
that is to say, — 
(a) destroys or injures any property mentioned in clause ( a) of section 41 or any property 
belonging to any Force mess, band or institution, or to any person subject to this Act; or  
(b) commits any act which causes damage to, or destruction of , any pro perty of the Government 
by fire ; or 
(c) kills, injures , makes away with , ill-treats or loses any animal entrusted to him,  
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable, if he has acted wilfully, to suffer imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and if he 
has acted without reasonable excuse, to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or 
such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
43. False accusations .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the fol lowing offences, 
that is to say, — 
(a) makes a false accusation against any person subject to this Act, knowing or having reason to 
believe such accusation to be false ; or 
(b) in making complaint against any person subject to this Act, makes any statement a ffecting the 
character of such person, knowing or having reason to believ e such statement to be false, o r 
knowingly and wilfully suppresses any material facts,  
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which  may 
extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
44. Falsifying official do cument and false declarations .—Any person subject to this Act who 
commits any of the following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) in any report, return, list, certificate, book or other document made or signed by him, or of the 
contents of which it is his duty to ascertain the accuracy, knowingly makes, or is privy to the making 
of, any false or fraudulent statement; or  
(b) in an y document of the description mentioned in clause ( a), knowingly makes, or is privy to 
the making of, any omission, with intent to defr aud; or 17 
 (c) knowingly  and with intent to injure any person or knowingly and with intent to defraud, 
suppresses, defaces, a lters or make s away with any document which it is his duty to preserve or 
produce; or  
(d) where it is his official duty to make a declaration respecting any matter, know ingly makes a 
false declaration ; or 
(e) obtains for himself, or for any other person, a ny pension, allowance or other advantage or 
privilege by a statement which is false, and which he either knows or beli eves to be false or does not 
believe to be true, or by making or using false entry in any book or record, or by making any 
document contai ning a false statement, or by omitting to make a true entry or document containing a 
true statement,  
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer impriso nment for a term which may 
extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
45. Signing in blank and failure to report. —Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) when signing any document relating to pay, arms, ammunition, equipment, clothing, supplies 
or sto res, or any property of the Government fraudulently leaves in blank any material par t for which 
his signature is a voucher ; or 
(b) refuses or by culpable neglect omits to make or send a report or return which it is his duty to 
make or send,  
shall, on convi ction by an As sam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentio ned. 
46. Offences r elating to Assam Rifles Court .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of 
the following offe nces, that is to say, — 
(a) being duly summoned or ordered to attend as a witness before an Assam Rifles Court, wilfully 
or without reasonable exc use, makes default in attending ; or 
(b) refuses to take an oath or make an affirmation legall y required by an Assam R ifles Court to be 
taken or made ; or 
(c) refuses to produce or de liver any document in his power  or control legally required by an 
Assam Ri fles Court to be produced or delivered by him ; or 
(d) refuses, when a witness, to answer any q uestion whi ch he is by law bound to answer; or 
(e) is guilty of contempt of the Assam Rifles Court by using insulting or threatening language, or 
by causing any interruption or disturbance in the proceedings of such Court,  
shall, on conviction by an Assam Ri fles Court, be liable to suffer  imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
47. False evidence .—Any person subject to this Act who, having been duly sworn or affi rmed before 
any Assam Rifles Court or other court competent under this Act to administer an oath or affirmation, 
make s any statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not beli eve 
to be true, shall, on conviction by a n Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
48. Unlawful detention of pay .—Any officer, subordinate officer or an under -officer who, having 
received the pay of a person subject to this Act, unlawfully detains or refuses to pay the same when due, 
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to five years or such less punishment as  is in this  Act mentioned.  
49. Violation  of good order and discipline .—Any person subject to this Act who is guilty  of any act 
or omission which, though not specified in this Act, is prejudicial to good order and discipline of the 
Force shall, on conviction by an Ass am Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  18 
 50. Miscellaneous offences .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, that is to say,— 
(a) being in command at any post  or on the march, and receiving a complaint that anyone under 
his command has beaten or otherwise mal -treated or oppressed any person, or has disturbed any fair 
or market, or committed any riot or trespass, fails to  have due reparation made to the injured person 
or to report the case to the proper authority; or  
(b) by defiling any place of worship, or otherwise, intentionally insults the religion, or wounds the 
religious feelings of any person; or  
(c) attempts to com mit suicide, and in such attempt does any act towards  the commission of such 
offence ; or 
(d) being below the rank of subordinate officer, when off duty, appears without proper authority, 
in or about camp, or when going, to, or retur ning from, any town or b azaar, carrying a rifle, sword or 
other offensive weapons; or  
(e) directly or indirectly accepts or obtains, or agrees to accept or attempts to obtain, for himself 
or for any other person, any gratification as a motive or re ward for procuring the enrolment  of any 
person or leave of absence, promotion or any other advantage or indulgence for any person in  the 
service; or 
(f) commits any offence against the property or person of any inhabitant of, or resident in, the 
country in which he is serving,  
shall, on  conviction by an Assam, Rifles Court, be liable  to suffer imprisonment for a t erm which may 
extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
51. Attempt .—Any person subject to this Act who attempts to commit any of the offences s pecified 
in sections 21 to 50 (both inclusive) and in such attempt does any act towards the commission of the 
offence shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, where no express provision is made by this Act 
for the punishm ent of such attempt, be liabl e,— 
(a) if the offence attempted to be comm itted is punishable with death, to suffer imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
(b) if the offence attempted to be committed is punishable with imprisonment to suffer 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one -half of the longest term provided for that offence 
or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
52. Abetment of offe nces that have been committed .—Any person sub ject to this Act who abets the 
commission of an y of the offences specified in s ections 21 to 50 (both inclusive) shall, on conviction by 
an Assam Rifles Court, if the Act abetted is committed in consequence of the abetment and  no express 
provision is made by this Act for the punishment of such abetment, be liable to suffer the punishment 
provided for that offence or such less punishment as is in t his Act mentioned.  
53. Abetment of offences punishable  with death and not committed .—Any person subject to this 
Act who abets the commission of any of the offences punishable with death under sections 21, 24 and 
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 25 shall, on  conviction by an Assam Rifles C ourt, if that offence, 
be not committed in consequence of the abetment,  and no express provision is made by this Act for the 
punishment of such abetment, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen 
years of such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
54. Abetment of offences punishable with imprisonment and not committed .—Any person 
subject to this Act who abets the commission of any of the offences specified in sections 21 to 50 (both 
inclusive) and punishable with imprisonment shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, if that 
offence, be not committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Act 
for the punishment of such abetment, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
one-half of the longest term provided for that offence or suc h less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  19 
 55. Civil offences .—Subject to the provisions of section 56, any person subject to this Act who at any 
place in, or beyond, India commit s any civ il offence shall be deemed to be guilty of an offence against 
this Act and, if charged therewith under this section, shall be liable to be tried by an Assam Rifles Court 
and, on conviction, be punisha ble as follows, that is to say, — 
(a) if the offence is one which would be punishable under any law in force in India wit h death, he 
shall be li able to suffer any punishment assigned for the offence, by the aforesaid law and such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
(b) in any other case, he shall be liable to suffer any punishment assigned for the offence by the  
law in force in India, or imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, or such less 
punishment as in this Act mentioned.  
56. Civil offences not tri able by an Assam Rifles Court .—A person subject to this Act who 
commits an offence of murder or of culpable homicide not amounting to murder against, or of rape in 
relation to, a person not subject to this Act shall not be deemed to be guilty of an offence against this Act 
and shall not be tried by an Assam Rifles Court, unless he co mmits any of the said offences, — 
(a) while on active duty; or  
(b) at any place outside India; or  
(c) at any place specified by the Central Government, by notification in this behalf.  
CHAPTER V  
PUNISHMENTS  
57. Punishment awa rdable by Assam Rifles Courts .—(1) Punishment s may be inflicted in respect 
of offences committed by persons subject to this Act and convicted by the Assam Riles Courts, according 
to the s cale following, that is to say, — 
(a) death;  
(b) imprisonment which may be for the term of life or any other lesser term but excluding 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months in Force custody;  
(c) dismissal from the service;  
(d) compulsory retirement from service;  
(e) imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months in Force custody except in case of 
office rs and subordinate officers;  
(f) reduction to the ranks or to a lower rank or grade or place in the list of their rank in the case of 
an under -officer;  
(g) forfeiture of senior ity of rank and forfeiture of all or any part of the service for the purpose of 
promotion;  
(h) forfeiture of service for the purpose of increased pay, pension or any other prescribed purpose;  
(i) fine;  
(j) severe reprimand or reprimand except in the case of persons below the rank of an under -
officer;  
(k) forfeiture of pay and allowances for a period not exceeding three months for an offence 
committed on active duty;  
(l) forfeiture in the case of person sentenced to dismissal from the service of all arrears of pay and 
allowances and other public money due to him at the time of s uch dismissal;  
(m) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage occa sioned by the offence 
for which he is convicted is made good.  20 
 (2) Each of the punishments s pecified in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be inferior in degree to 
every punishment preceding it in the above scale.  
58. Alternative punishments awardable by As sam Rifles Courts .—Subject to the provisions of 
this Act, an Assam Rifles Court may, on convicting a person subject to this Act of any of the offences 
specified in secti ons 21 to 54 (both inclusi ve) award either the particular punishment with which the 
offence is stated in the said sections to be punishable or, in lieu thereof, any of the punishments lower in 
the scale set out in section 57 regard being had to the nature and degree of the offence.  
59. Combination of punishment s.—A sentence of an Assam Rifles Court may award in addition to, 
or without any one other punishment, the punishment specified in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 
57, and any one more of the punishments specified in clauses ( f) to ( m) (both inclusive) of that  
sub-section.  
60. Retention in the Force of a pe rson convicted on active duty .—When on active duty, any 
enrolled person has been sentenced by an Assam Rifles Court to dismissal or to impr isonment whether 
combined with dismissal or not, the prescribed officer may direct that such person may be retained to 
serve in the ranks, and such service shall be reckoned as part of his term of imprisonment, if any.  
61. Punishments otherwis e than by Ass am Rifles Courts .—Punishments may also be inflicted in 
respect of offences committed by persons subject to this Act without the intervention of an Assam Rifles 
Court in the manner stated  in sections 62, 64, 65 and 66.  
62. Minor punishments .—Subject to the  provisions of section 63, a Commandant or such other 
officer as is, with the consent of the Central Government, specified by the Director -General may, in the 
prescribed manner, proceed against a person subject to this Act, otherwise than as an officer or a 
subordinate officer or a Warrant Officer who is charged with an offence under this Act and award such 
person to the extent prescribed, one or more of the followi ng punishments, that is to say, — 
(a) imprisonment in Force custody up to twenty -eight days;  
(b) detention up to twenty -eight days;  
(c) confinement to the lines up to twenty -eight days;  
(d) extra guards or duties;  
(e) deprivation of any special position or special emoluments or any acting rank or reduction to a 
lower grade of pay;  
(f) forfeiture of  good service and good conduct pay;  
(g) severe reprimand or reprimand;  
(h) fine up to fourteen day's pay in any one month;  
(i) deduction from his pay and allowances of any sum required to make good such compensation 
for any expense, loss, damage or destruc tion caused by him to the Central Government, or any 
building or property as may be awarded by his Commandant.  
63. Limit of  punishments under section 62 .—(1) In the case of an award of two or more of the 
punishments specified in clauses ( a), (b), (c) and ( d) of section 62, the punishments specified in clause ( c) 
or clause ( d) shall take effect only at the end of the punishment specified in clause ( a) or clause ( b). 
(2) When two or more of the punishments specified in the said clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) are aw arded to 
a person conjointly, or when already undergoing one or more of the said punishments, the whole extent of 
the punishments shall not exceed in the aggregate forty -two days.  
(3) The punishments specified in the said clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) shall not  be awarded to any person 
who is of the rank of an under -officer or was at the time of committing the offence for which he is 
punished of such rank.  
(4) The punishments specified in clause ( g) of section 62 shall not be awarded to any person below 
the rank  of an under -officer.   21 
 64. Punishment of officers below the rank of Deputy Commandant, subordinate officers and 
Warrant Officer by Deputy Inspectors -General and others .—(1) An officer not below the rank of the 
Deputy Inspector -General or such other officer  as is, with the consent of th e Central Government, 
specified  by the Director -General may, in the prescribed manner, proceed against an officer below the 
rank of a Deputy Comma ndant and of any rank of subo rdinate officer and of the rank of Warrant Officer 
who is charged with an offence under this Act and award one or more of the following punishments, that 
is to say,— 
(a) forfeiture of seniority, or in the case of any of them whose promotion depends upon the leng th 
of service, forfeiture of se rvice for the purpose of promotion for a period not exceeding twelve 
months, but subject to the right of the accused previous to the award to elect to be tried by an Assam 
Rifles Court;  
(b) severe reprimand or reprimand;  
(c) stoppage of pay and allowances until any prov ed loss or damage occasioned by the offence of 
which he is convicted is made good.  
(2) In every case in which punishment has been awarded under sub -section ( 1), certified true copies 
of the proce edings shall be forwarded, in the prescribed manner, by the o fficer awarding the punishment 
to the prescr ibed superior authority who may , if the punishment awarded, appears to him to be illegal, 
unjust or ex cessive, cancel, vary or remit the punishment and make such other direction as may be 
appropriate in the circumstances of the case.  
65. Punishment of officers below the rank of a Commandant, subordinate officers and Warrant 
Officer by the Inspectors -General and others .—(1) An officer not below the rank of the Inspector -
General or such other officer as is, wit h the consent of the Central Government, specified by the Director -
General may, in the prescribed manner, proceed against an officer below the rank  of a Commandant and 
any subordi nate officer and a Warrant Officer who is charged with an offence under this Act and award 
one or more of the follo wing punishment, that is to say ,— 
(a) forfeiture of seniority, or in the case of any of them whose promotion depends upon the length 
of service, forfeiture of service for the purpose of promotion for a period not excee ding twelve 
months, but subject to the right of the accused previous to the award to elect to be tried by an Assam 
Rifles Court;  
(b) severe reprimand or reprimand;  
(c) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or  damage occasioned by the offence  of 
which he is convicted is made good.  
(2) In every case in which punishment has been awarded under sub -section ( 1), certified true copies 
of the proceedings shall be forwarded, in the prescribed manner, by the officer awarding the punishment 
to the presc ribed superior authority who may, if the punishment awarded appears to him to be illegal, 
unjust or excessive, cancel, vary or remit the punishment and make such other direction as may be 
appropriate in the circumstances of the case.  
66. Punishment of subo rdinate officers and Warr ant Officer by Commandant , etc.—A 
Commandant or such other officer as is , with the consent of the Central Government, specified by the 
Director -General may, in the prescribed manner, proceed against any subordinate officer or a War rant 
Officer who is charged with an offence under this Act and award one or more of the follow ing 
punishment s, that is to say, — 
(a) severe reprimand or reprimand;  
(b) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned by the offence of 
which he is convicted is made good:  
Provided that the punishment mentioned under clause ( a) shall only be awarded by an officer not 
below the rank of Commandant authorised by the Director -General to award such punishment.  22 
 67. Collective fines .—(1) Whene ver any weapon or part of a weapon, or ammunition, forming part of 
the equipment of a unit of the Force, is lost or stolen, an officer not below rank of the Commandant of a 
battalion may, after making such inquiry as he thinks fit and subject to the rules and regulations, impose a  
collective fine upon the subordin ate officer , under -officer and me n of such unit, or upon so many of them 
as, in his judgment, should be held responsible for such loss or theft.  
(2) Such fine shall be assessed as a percentage on the pay of the individuals on whom it falls.  
CHAPTER VI  
PENAL DEDUCTIONS  
68. Deductions from p ay and allowances of officers .—The following penal deductions may be 
made from the pay and allowance s of an officer, that is to say, — 
(a) all pay and allowances d ue to an officer for every day he absent himself without leave, unless 
a satisfactory explanation has been given to his commanding officer and has been approved by the 
Central Government;  
(b) all pay and allowances for every day while he is in custody or u nder suspension from duty on 
a charge for a n offence for which he is after wards convicted by a criminal court or an Assam Rifles 
Court or by an officer exercising authority under section 64 or section 65;  
(c) any sum required to make good the pay of any pe rson subject to this Act which he has 
unlawfully retained or un lawfully refused to pay;  
(d) any sum required to make good such compensation for any expenses, loss , damage or 
destruction occasioned by the commission of an offence as may be determined by an Assam Rifles 
Cour t by whom he  is convicted of such offence or by an officer exercising authority under section 64 
or section 65;  
(e) all pay and allowances ordered  by an Assam Rifles Court to be forfeited or stopped;  
 (f) any sum required to pay a fine awarded by a criminal court or an Assam Rifles Court;  
(g) any sum required to make good any loss, damage or destruction of public or regimental 
property which, after due investigation, appears to the Central Government to have been occasioned 
by the wrongful act or negligence on the part of the officer;  
(h) all pay and allowances forfeited by order of the Central Government if the officer is found by 
a Court of inquiry  constituted by the Director -General in this behalf, to have deserted t o the enemy, or 
while in enemy hands, to have s erved with, or under the orders of, the enemy, or in any manner to 
have aided the enemy, or to have allowed himself to be taken prisoner b y the enemy through want of 
due precaution or through disobedience of orders or wilful neglect of duty, or having been taken 
prisoner by the enemy, to have failed to rejoin his service when it was possible to do so;  
(i) any sum required by order of the Cen tral Government to be paid for the maintenance of his 
wife or his legitimate or illegitimate child or towards the cost of any relief given by the said 
Government to the said wife or child.  
69. Deductions  from pay and allowa nces o f persons other than office rs.—Subject to the 
provisions of section 72, the following penal deductions may be made from the pay and allowances of a 
person subject to this Act other t han an officer, that is to say, — 
(a) all pay and allowances for every day of absence either on desertion or without leave, or as a 
prisoner of war unless a satisfactory explanation has been given and accepted by his Commandant, 
and for every day of imprisonment awarded by a criminal court, an Assam Rifles Court or an officer 
exercising authority und er section 62;  
(b) all pay and allowances for every day while he is in custody on charge for an offence of which 
he is afterwards convicted by a criminal court or an Assam Rifles Court or on a charge of absence 
without leave for which he is afterwards awar ded imprisonment by an officer exercising authority 
under section 62;   23 
 (c) all pay and allowances for every day on which he is in hospital on account of sickness 
certified by the medical officer attending on him to have been caused by an offence under this  Act 
committed by him;  
(d) for every day on which he is in hospital on account of sickness certified by the medical officer 
attending on him to have been caused by his own misconduct or imprudence, such sum as may be 
specified by the order of the Central G overnment or such officer as may be specified by that 
Government;  
(e) all pay and allowances ordered by an Assam Rifles Court or by an officer exercising authority 
under any of the sections 62, 64,  65 and 66 to be forfeited or stopped;  
(f) all pay and allo wances for every day between his being recovered from the enemy and his 
dismissal from the service in consequence of his conduct when being taken prisoner by, or while in 
the hands of the enemy;  
(g) any sum required to make good such compensation for any e xpenses, loss, damage or 
destruction caused by him to the Central Government or to any building or property as may be 
awarded by his Commandant;  
(h) any sum required to pay a fine awarded by a criminal court, an Assam Rifles Court or an 
officer exercising authority under any of the sections 62 and 67;  
(i) any sum required by order of the Central Government or any prescribed officer to be paid for  
the maintenance of his wife or his legitimate or illegitimate child or towards the cost of any relief  
given by the said Government to the said wife or child.  
70. Computation of time of absence of custody .—For the purpose of clauses ( a) and ( b) of section 
69, 
(a) no person shall be treated as absent or in custody for a day unless the absence or custody has 
lasted, whether wholly in one day, or partly in one day and partly in another, for six consecutive hours 
or upwards;  
(b) any absence or custody for less than a day may be reckoned as absence or custody for a day if 
such absence or custody prevented the absentee fr om fulfilling any duty which was thereby thrown 
upon some other person;  
(c) absence or custody for twelve consecutive hours or upward may be reckoned as absence or 
custody for the whole of each day during any portion of which the person was absent or in custody;  
(d) a period  of absence or imprisonment, which commences before, and ends after, midnight may 
be reckoned as a day.  
71. Pa y and allowances during trial .—In case of any person subject to this Act who is in custody or 
under suspension from duty on a  charge for an offence, the prescribed officer  may direct that the whole or 
any part of the pay and allowances of such person shall be withheld, pending the result of his trial on the 
charge against him, in order to give effect to the provisions of clause (b) of section 68 and section 69.  
72. Limit of certain deductions .—The total deductions from the pay and allowances of a person 
made under clauses ( e), (g) to ( i) of section 69 shall not, except where he is sentenced to dismissal or 
removal, exceed in any one month one -half of his pay and allowances of that month.  
73. Deduction from  public money due to a person .—Any sum authorised by this Act to be 
deducted from the pay and allowances of any person may, without prejudice to any other mode of 
recovering the same, be deducted from any public money due to him other than a pension.  
74. Pay and allowances of prisoner of war during inquiry into his conduct .—Where the conduct 
of any person subject to this Act when being taken prisoner by, or while in the hands of the enemy, is to 
be inquired into this Act or any other law, the Director -General or any officer authorised by him may 
order that the whole or any pa rt of the p ay and allowances of such person shall be withheld pending the 
result of such inquiry.   24 
 75. Remission of deductions .—Any deduction from pay and allowances authorised by this Act may 
be re mitted in such manner and to such extent and by such autho rity, as may, from time to time be 
prescribed.  
76. Provision for dependents of prisoner of  war from remitted deductions .—In the case of all 
persons subject to this Act, being prisoners of war, whose pay and allowances have been forfeited under 
clause ( a) of section 69, but in respect of whom a remission has been made under section 75, it shall be 
lawful for proper provision to be made by the prescribed authorities out of such pay and allowances for 
any dependants of such persons , and any such remission shal l in that case be deemed to apply only to the 
balance thereafter remaining of  such pay and allowances.  
77. Provision for dependents of prisoner of wa r from his pay and allowances .—It shall be lawful 
for proper provision to be made by the prescribed authorities for any dependants of any person subject to 
this Act who is prisoner of war or is missing, out of his pay and allowances.  
78. Period during which a person is d eemed to be a prisoner of war .—For the purposes of 
sections 76 and 77, a person shall  be deemed to continue to be prisoner of war until the conclusion of  any 
inquiry into his conduct such as is referred to in section 74 and if he is dismissed or removed from the 
service in consequence of such conduct, until the date of such dismissal or re moval.  
CHAPTER VII  
ARREST AND PROCEEDINGS BEFORE TRIAL  
79. Custody of offenders .—(1) Any person subject to this Act who is charged with an offence may 
be taken into Force custody, under the order of any superior officer.  
(2) Notwit hstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), an officer may order into Force custody 
any other officer, though such other officer may be of a higher rank, engaged in a quarrel, affray or 
disorder.  
80. Duty of Comm andant in regard to detention .—(1) It shall be the duty of  every Commandant to 
take care that a person under his command when charged with an offence is not detained in custody for 
more than forty -eight hours after the committal of such person into custody is reported to him without the 
charge being investigated,  unless investigation within that period seems to him to be impracticable having 
regard to the public service.  
(2) The case of every person, being detained in custody beyond a period of forty -eight hours, and 
reason thereof, shall be reported by the Comman dant to the Deputy Inspector -General under whom he is 
serving or such other officer to whom an application may be made to convene as Assam Rifles Court for 
the trial of the person charged.  
(3) In reckoning the period of forty -eight hours specified in sub-section ( 1), sundays and other pub lic 
holidays shall be excluded.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may make rules providing for the 
manner in which and the period for which any person subject to this Act may be taken in to and detained 
in Force custody, pending the trial by any competent authority for any offence committed by him.  
81. Interva l between committal and trial .—In every case where any such person as is mentioned in 
section 79 and as not on active duty, remains in such custody for a longer period than eight days, without 
his trial by an Assam Rifles Court being ordered to be convened, a special report giving reaso ns for the 
delay shall be made by his C ommandant in the manner prescribed, and a similar report shall be forwarded 
at intervals of every eight days until an Assam Rifles Court is convened or such person is released from 
custody.  
82. Arrest by civil authori ties.—Whenever any person subject to this Act who is accused of an 
offence under this Act, is within the jurisdiction of any magistrate or police officer, such magistrate or 
police officer shall aid in the apprehension and delivery to Force custody of such  person upon receipt of a 
written application to that effect signed by his Commandant or an officer authorised by the Commandant 
in that behalf.   25 
 83. Capture of deserters .—(1) Whenever any person subject to this Act deserts, the Commandant of 
the unit to w hich he belongs, shall give information of the desertion to such civil authorities as, in his 
opinion, may be able to afford assistance towards the capture of the deserter; and such authorities shall 
thereupon take steps for the apprehension of the said de serter in like manner as if he were a person for 
whose apprehension a warrant had been issued by a magistrate and shall deliver the deserter, when 
apprehended, into Force custody.  
(2) Any p olice officer may arrest without  warrant any person re asonably beli eved to be subject to this 
Act, and to be a deserter or to be travelling without authority, and shall bring him without delay before the 
nearest magistrate, to be dealt with according to law.  
84. Inqui ry into absence without leave .—(1) When any person subject to this Act has been absent 
from his  duty without due authority for a per iod of thirty days, a court of inquiry shall, as soon as 
practicable, be assembled and such court shall, on oath or affirmation administered in the prescribed 
manner, inquire respecting the absence of the person, and the deficiency, if any, in the prop erty of the 
Government entrus ted to his care, or in any arms, ammunition, equipment, instruments, clothing or 
necessaries; and if sati sfied of the fact of such absence without due  authority or other sufficient cause, the 
court shall declare such absence and the period thereof and the said deficiency, if any, and the 
Commandant of the unit to which the person belongs shall make a record thereof in the prescribed 
manner.  
(2) If the p erson declared absent does not afterwards surrender or is not apprehended, he shall, for the 
purposes of this Act, be deemed to be deserter.  
85. Force Police Officers .—(1) The Director -General or any prescribed officer may appoint persons 
(in this Act refe rred to as Force Police) for discharging the functions specified in sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3). 
(2) The duties of a person appointed under sub -section ( 1), are to take charge of persons confined for 
any offence, to preserve good order and discipline and to p revent breaches of the same by persons serving 
in, or attached to, the Force.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 79, a person appointed under sub -section ( 1) may, 
at any time, arrest and detain for trial, any person subject to th is Act who c ommits, or is charge d with, an 
offence, and may also carry into effect any punishment to be inflicted in pursuance of a sentence awarded 
by an Assam Rifles Court or by an off icer exercising authority under se ction 62 but shall not inflict any 
punishment on  his own authority:  
Provided that no officer shal l be arrested or detained other wise than on the order of another officer.  
CHAPTER VIII  
ASSAM  RIFLES  COURTS  
86. Kinds of Assam Rifles Court s.—For the purposes of this Act there  shall be three kinds of Assam 
Rifles Courts , that is to say, — 
(a) General Assam Rifles Courts;  
(b) Petty Assam Rifles Courts ; and  
(c) Summary Assam Rifles Courts.  
87. Power to convene  a General Assam Rifles Court .—A General Assam Rifles Court may be 
convened by the Central Government or the Director -General or by any officer empowered in this behalf 
by warrant of the Director -General.  
88. Power to conve ne a Petty Assam Rifles Court .—A Pett y Assam Rifles Court may be conv ened 
by an officer having power  to convene a General Assam Rifles C ourt or by an officer empowere d in this 
behalf by warrant of any such officer.  
89. Contents of warrants  issued under  section s 87 and 88 .—A warrant issued under section 87 or 
section 88 may contain such restrictions , reservations or conditions as the officer issuing it may think fit.  
90. Composition of General Assam Rifles Court .—A General Ass am Rifles Court shall consist of  
not less than five officers, each of whom has held the post of Assistant Commandant for not le ss than 26 
 three whole years and of whom not less than four are of a rank not below that of confirmed Assistant 
Commandant.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section and section 91, “Assistant Commandant ” includes any 
post of a higher rank and any post declared by the Central Government, by notification, to be an 
equivalent post as also any post higher in rank than the post so declared.  
91. Composition of a Petty Assam Rifles Court .—A Petty Assam Rifles Co urt shall consist of not 
less than three officers each of whom has held the post of Assistant Commandant for not less than two 
whole years.  
92. Summary Assam Rifles Court .—(1) A Summary Assam Rifles Court may be  held by the 
Commandant of any unit of the Force and he alone shall constitute the Court.  
(2) The proceeding shall be attended through out by two other persons who shall be officers or 
subordinate officers or one of either, and who shall not as such, be sworn or affirmed.  
93. Dissolu tion of an Assam  Rifles Court .—(1) If an Assam Rifles  Court after the commencement 
of a trial is reduced below the minimum number of officers required by this Act, it shall be dissolved.  
(2) If, on account of the illness of the Law Officer or of the accused before the fin ding, it is 
impossible to continue the trial, an Assam Rifles Court shall be dissolved.  
(3) The officer who convened an Assam Rifles Court may dissolve the same if it appears to him that 
the exigencies of the service or necessiti es of discipline render it impos ible or inexpedient to continue the 
said Assam Rifles Court.  
(4) Where an Assam Rifles Court is dissolved under this section, the accused may be tried again.  
94. Power of Gener al Assam Rifles Court .—A General Assam Rifles Court shall  have the power to 
try any person subject to this Act for any offence punishable thereunder and to pass any sentence 
authorised thereby.  
95. Power of a Petty Assam Rifles Court .—A Petty Assam Rifles Court shall have power to try any 
person subject to this Act other than an officer or a subordinate officer for any offence made punishable 
thereunder and to pass any sentence authorised by this Act other than a sentence of death or imprison ment 
for a term exceeding two years.  
96. Power of  a Summary Assam Rifles Court .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), a 
Summary Assam Rifles Court may try any offence punishable under this Act.  
(2) When there is no grave reason for immediate action and reference can, without detriment to 
discipline, be made to the officer empowered to convene a Petty Assam Rifles Court for the trial of the 
alleged offender, an officer holding a Summary Assam Rifles Court shall not try without such reference 
any offence punishable under  any of the sections 21, 24 and 5 5, or any offence against the officer holding 
the Court.  
(3) A Summary Assam Rifles Court may try any person subject to this Act and under the command of 
the officer holding the Court, except an officer or a subordinate officer.  
(4) A Summary Assam  Rifles Court may pass any sentence which may be passed under this Act 
except the sentence of death or if imprisonment for a term exceeding the limit specified in sub -section ( 5). 
(5) The limit referred to in sub -section ( 4) shall be— 
(a) one year, if the officer holding the Assam Rifles Court has held either the post of 
Commandant or a post declared by the Central Government, by notification, to be equivalent thereto 
for a period of not less than three years or holds a post of higher rank than either of th e said posts; and  
(b) three months, in any other case.  
97. Prohibition of second trial .—(1) When any person subject to this Act has been acquitted or 
convicted of an offence by an Assam Rifles Court or by a criminal court or has been dealt with under 27 
 section 62 or section 64 or section 65 or section 66, he shall not be liable to be tried again for the same 
offence by  an Assam Rifles Court or dealt with under the said sections.  
(2) When any person, subject to this Act has been acquitted or convicted of an offence by an Assam 
Rifles Court or has been dealt with under section 62 or section 64 or section 65 or section 66, he shall not 
be liable to be tried again by a criminal court for the same offence or on the same facts.  
98. P eriod of limitation for trial.—(1) Except as provided by sub -section ( 2), no trial by an Assam 
Rifles Court of any person subject to this Act for any offence shall be commenced after the expiratio n of a 
period of three years and such period shall commence — 
(a) on the date of the offence; or 
(b) where the commission of the offence was not known to the person aggrieved by the offence or 
to the authority competent to initiate action, from the first day on which such offence comes to the 
knowledge of such person or authority, whicheve r is earlier; or  
(c) where it is not known by whom the offence was committed, from the first day on which the 
identity of the offender is known to the person aggrieved by the offence or to the authority competent 
to initia te action, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that in computing any period under this section, the period during which the proceedings of 
investigation has been stayed by any court in such offence by injunction or order, the period of the 
continuance of the inju nction or order, the day on which it was issued or made; and the day on which it 
was withdrawn, shall be excluded.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall not apply to a trial for an offence of desertion or for any of 
the offences mentioned in section 24 or an offence under secti on 30.  
(3) In computation of the period of three years under sub -section ( 1), any time spent by such person in 
evading arrest after the commission of the offence, shall be excluded.  
99. Trial, etc., of offender who cea ses to be subject to this Act .—(1) Whe re an offence under this 
Act had been committed by any person while subject to this Act  and he had ceased to be so subject, he 
may be taken into and kept in Force custody and tried and punished for such offence as if he continued to 
be so subject.  
(2) No s uch person shall be tried for an offence, unless his trial commences within a period of three 
years after he had ceased to be subject to this Act; and in computing such period, the  time during which 
such person has avoided arrest by absconding or concealin g himself or where the institution of the 
proceeding in respect of the offence has been stayed by an injunction or order, the period of the  
continuance of the injun ction or order, the day on whic h it was issued or made, and the day on which it 
was withdraw n, shall be excluded:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to the trial of any such person for an 
offence of desertion or for any of the offences mentioned in section 24 or shall a ffect the jurisdiction of a 
criminal court to try an offence triable by such court as well as by an Assam Rifles Court.  
100. Application of th is Act during term of sentence .—(1) When a person subject to this Act is 
sentenced by an Assam Rifles Court to imprison ment, this Act shall apply to him during the term of his 
sentence, though he is dismissed from the Force or has otherwise ceased to be subject to this Act, and he 
may be kept, removed, imprisoned and punished as if he continued to be subject to this Act.  
(2) When a person subject to this Act is sentenced by an Assam Rifles Court to death, this Act shall 
apply to him till the sentence is carried out.  
101. Place of trial .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any offence against it may be tried 
and punis hed for such offence in any place whatever.  
102. Choice between criminal  court and Assam Rifles Court .—When a criminal court and an 
Assam Rifles Court each have jurisdiction in respect of an offence, it shall be in the discretion of the 
Director -General, or the Inspector General or the Deputy Inspector -General within whose command the 
accused person is serving or such other officer as may be presc ribed, to decide before which court 28 
 proceedings shall be instituted, and , if that officer, decides that they sh all be instituted before an Assam 
Rifles Court, to direct that the accused  person shall be detained in For ce custody.  
103. Power of criminal court to require delivery of  offender .—(1) When a criminal court having 
jurisdiction is of opinion that proceedings  shall be instituted before itself in respect of any alleged 
offence, it may, by written notice, require the officer referred to in section 102 at his option, either to 
deliver over the offender to the nearest Magistrate to be proceeded against according t o law, or to 
postpone proceedings, pending a reference to the Central Government.  
(2) In every such case the said officer shall either deliver over the offender in compliance with the 
requis ition, or shall forthwith refer the question as to the court before which the proceedings are to be 
instituted , for the determination of the C entral Government whose order upon such reference shall be 
final.  
CHAPTER IX  
PROCEDURE  OF ASSAM  RIFLES  COURTS  
104. Presiding Officer .—At every General Assam Rifles C ourt or Pe tty Assam Rifles Court, the 
senior member shall be the presiding officer.  
105. Law Officer .—Every General Assam Rifles Court shall, and every Petty Assam Rifles Court 
may, be attended by a Law Officer, or if no such officer is available, an officer approve d by the Chief 
Law Officer or a Law Officer.  
106. Challenges .—(1) At all trials by a General Assam Rifles Court or by a Petty Assam Rifles 
Court , as soon as the Court is assembled, the names of the presiding officer and members shall be read 
over to the accused, who shall thereupon be asked whether he objects to being tried by any officer sitting 
on the court.  
(2) If the accused objects to such off icer, his objection and also the reply thereto of the officer 
objected to, shall be heard and recorded, and the remaining officers of the court shall, in the absence of 
the challenged officer, decide on the objection.  
(3) If the objection is allowed by one -half or more of the votes of the officers entitled to vote, the 
object ion shall be allowed, and the me mber objected to shall retire, and his vacancy may be filled in the 
prescribed manner, by another officer subject to the same right of the accused to obj ect. 
(4) When no challenge is made, or when a challenge has been made and disallowed, or the place of 
every officer successfully challenged has been filled by another officer to whom no objection is made or 
allowed, the court shall proceed with the trial.  
107. Oath of member, Law O fficer and witness .—(1) An oath or affirmation in the prescribed 
manner shall be administ ered to every member of an Assam Rifles Court and to the Law Officer or, as the 
case may be, the officer approved under section 105 before the commencement of the trial.  
(2) Every person giving evidence before an Assam Rifles Court shall be examined after being duly 
sworn or affirmed in the prescribed form.  
(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall not apply where the witness is a child und er twelve years 
of age and the Assam Rifles Court is of opinion that though the witness understands the duty of speaking 
the truth, he does not understand the nature of an oath or affirmation.  
108. Voting by members .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), every decision 
of an Assam Rifles Court shall be passed by a majority of votes; and where there is an equality of votes 
on either the finding or the sentence, the decision shall be in favour of the accused.  
(2) No sentence of death shal l be passed by a General Assam Rifles Court without the concurrence of 
at least two -thirds of the members of the Court.  
(3) In matter s, other than a challenge or the finding or sentence, the presiding officer shall have a 
casting vote.   29 
 109. General rule as to evidence .—The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), shall , subject to the 
provisions of this Act, apply to all proceedings before an Assam Rifles Court.  
110. Judicial notice .—An Assam Rifles Court may take judicial notice of any matter within the 
general knowledge of the members as officers of the Force.  
111. Summoning of witness .—(1) The convening officer, the presiding officer of an Assam Rifles 
Court or court of inquiry or the Law Officer or, as the case may be, the officer approved under section 
105 or the Commandant of the accused person may, by summons under his hand, require the attendance , 
at a time and place to be mentioned in the summons, of any person either to give evidence or to produce 
any document or other thing.  
(2) In the case of a wi tness, who is subject to this Act, the summons shall be sent to his Commandant 
and such officer shall serve it upon him accordingly.  
(3) In the case of any other witness, the summons shall be sent to the Magistrate within whose 
jurisdiction he may be, or r esides, and such Magistrate shall give effect to the summons as if the witness 
were required in the court of such Magistrate.  
112. Docum ents exempted from production .—(1) Nothing in section 111 shall be deemed to affect 
the operation of sections 123 and 12 4 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) or to apply to any 
letter, postcard, telegram or other document in the custody of the postal or telegraph authorities.  
(2) If any document in such custody is, in the opinion of any Chief Judicial Magistrate, C hief 
Metropolitan Magistrate, Court of Session or High Court, wanted for the purpose of any Assam Rifles 
Court, such Magistrate or Court may require the postal or telegraph authorities, as the case may be, to 
deliver such document to such person as such Ma gistrate, or Court may direct.  
(3) If any such documents is , in the opinion of any other Magistrate of any Commissioner of Police or 
District Superintendent of Police, wanted for any such purpose, he may require the postal or telegraph 
authorities, as the case may be, to cause such search to be made for, and to det ain such document pending 
the orders of any such Chief Judicial Magistrate, Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or Court of Session or 
High Court.  
113. Commissi on for examination of witness .—(1) Whenever , in the course of a trial by an Assam 
Rifles Court, it app ears to the Court that the examination of a witness is necessary for the ends of justice, 
and that the attendance of such witness cannot be procured without an amount of delay, expense or 
inconvenience which, in the circumstances of the case, would be unre asonable, such court may address 
the Chief Law Officer in order that a commission to take the evidence of such witness may be issued.  
(2) The Chief Law Officer may then, if he thinks necessary, issue a commission to any Chief Judicial 
Magistrate or Judicia l Magistrate of the first class, within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such 
witness resides to take the evidence of such witness.  
(3) The Chief Judicial Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first class to whom the commission is 
issued, or  if he is the Chief Judicial Magistrate, he or such Judicial Magistrate of the first class as he 
appoints in this behalf, shall summon the witness before him and shall take down his evidence in the same 
manner, and may for this purpose exercise the same powers, as in the trials of warrant -cases under the 
Code of criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974).  
(4) When the witness resides in tribal area or in any place outside India, the commission may be 
issued in the mann er specified in sub -heading “B.—Commissions  for the  examination of witnesses ” of 
Chapter XXIII of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) . 
114. Examina tion of witness on commission .—(1) The prosecutor and the accused person in any 
case in which a commission is issued under section 113 may respectively forward any interrogatories in 
writing which the court may think relevant to the issue, and the Chief Judicial Magistrate or the Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class executing the commission shall examine the witness upon such 
interrogatorie s.  30 
 (2) The prosecutor and the accused person may appear before such Chief Judicial Magistrate or the 
Judicial Magistrat e of the first class by counsel or, except in the case of an accused person in custody, in 
person, and may examine, cross -examine and re -examine, as the case may be, the said witness.  
(3) After a commission issued under section 113 has b een duly executed, it shall be r eturned, together 
with the deposition of the witness examined thereunder to the Chief Law Officer.  
(4) On receipt of a comm ission , and deposition returned under sub -section ( 3), the Chief Law Officer 
shall forward the same to the court at whose instance the commission was issued or, if such court has 
been dissolved, to any other court convened for the trial of the accused pers on and the commission, the 
return thereto and the deposition shall be open to inspection by the prosecutor or the accused, person and 
may, subject to all just exception s, be read in evidence in the case by either th e prosecutor or the accused , 
and shall fo rm part of the proceeding s of the court.  
(5) In every case in which a commissi on is issued under section 113, the trial may be adjourned for 
specified time reasonably sufficient for the execution and return of the commission.  
115. Convi ction of offences no t charged .—A person charg ed before an Assam Rifles Court — 
(a) with desertion may be found guilty of attempting to desert or of being absent without leave;  
(b) with attempting to desert may be found guilty of being absent without leave;  
(c) with using criminal force may be found guilty of assault;  
(d) with using threatening language may be found guilty of using insubordinate language;  
(e) with any one of the offences specified in clauses ( a), (b), (c) and ( d) of section 39 may be 
found guilty of any oth er of these offences with which he might have been charged;  
(f) with an offence punishable under section 55 may be found guilty of any other offence of 
which he might have been found guilty, if the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  
(2 of 1974) , were applicable;  
(g) with any offence under this Act may, on failure of proof of an offence having been committed 
in circumstances involving a more severe punishment, be found guilty of the same offence as having 
been committed in circumstances involving a less severe punishment;  
(h) with any offence under this Act may be found guilty of having attempted or abetted the 
commission of that offence, although the attempt or abetment is not separately charged.  
116. Presumpti on as to signatures .—In any  proceeding under this Act, any application, certificate, 
warrant, reply or other document purporting to be signed by an officer in the service of the Government 
shall, on production, be presumed to have been duly signed by the person by whom and in the ch aracter in 
which it purports to have been signed, until the contrary is shown.  
117. Enrolment paper .—(1) Any enrolment paper purporting to be signed by an enrolling officer 
shall, in proceedings under this Act, be evidence of the person enrolled having giv en the answers to 
questions which he is therein represented as having given.  
(2) The enrolment of such person may be proved by the production of the original or a copy of this 
enrolment paper purporting to be certified to be a true copy by the officer havi ng custody of enrolment 
paper.  
118. Presum ption as to certain documents .—(1) A letter, retu rn or other document respecting the 
service of any person in, or the dismissal, removal or discharge of any person from, any unit of the Force, 
or respecting the cir cumstances of any person not having served in , or belonged to any unit of the Force, 
if purporting to be signed by or on behalf of the Central Government or the Director -General , or by any 
prescribed officer, shall be the evidence of facts stated in such letter, return or other document.  
(2) An Assam Rifles list or Gazette purporting to be published by authority shall be evidence of the 
status and rank of the officers, subordinate  officers therein mentioned, and of any appointment held by 
them and of the battalion, unit or branch of the Force to which they belong.   31 
 (3) Where a record is made in any battalion book in pursuance of this Act or of any rules or otherwise 
in the discharg e of official duties, and purporting to be signed by the Commandant or by the officer 
whose duty it is to make such record, such record shall be evidence of the facts therein stated.  
(4) A copy of any record in any battalion book purporting to be certified  to be a true copy by the 
officer having custody of such book shall be evidence of such record.  
(5) Where any person subject to this Act is being tried on a charge of desertion or of absence without 
leave, and such person has surrendered himself into the c ustody of any officer or other person subject to 
this Act, or any unit of the  Force, or has been apprehended by such officer or person, a certificate 
purporting to be signed by such officer or by the Commandant of the unit to which such person belongs, 
as the case may be, and stating the fact, date and place of such surrender or apprehension, and the manner 
in which he was dressed, shall be the evidence of the matters so stated.  
(6) Where any person subject to this Act is being tried on a charge of desertio n or of absence without 
leave and such person has surrendered himself into the custody of, or has been apprehended by, a police 
officer not below the rank of an officer in charge of a police station, a certificate purporting to be signed 
by such police off icer and stating facts, the date and place of such surrender or apprehension, and the 
manner in which he was dressed shall be evidence of the matters so stated.  
(7) Any document purporting to be the report under the hand of a Government scientific expert, upon 
any matter or thing duly submitted to him for examination or analysis and report in the course of  any 
proceeding under this Act, may be used as evidence in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this 
Act. 
(8) The Assam Rifles Court may, if it th inks fit, summon and examine the expert referred to in sub -
section ( 7) as to the subject matter of his report.  
(9) Where any such expert is summoned by an Assam Rifles Court and he is unable to attend 
personally, he may, unless the C ourt has expressly dire cted him to appear personally, depute any 
responsible officer working with him to attend the Court, if such deputed officer is conversant with the 
facts of the case and sati sfactorily depose in the Court on his behalf.  
(10) The provisions of sub -sections ( 7), (8) and ( 9) shall apply to such Government scientific experts 
as specified in sub -section ( 4) of section 293 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974).  
119. Reference by accused to Government officer .—(1) If at any trial for desertion or absence 
without leave, overstaying leave or not rejoining when warned for service, the accused person states in his 
defence any sufficient or reasonable excuse for his unauthorised absence, and refers  in support thereof to 
any officer in the service of the  Government, or if it appears that any such officer is likely to prove or 
disprove the said statement in the defence, the Court shall address such officer and adjourn the 
proceedings until his reply is received.  
(2) The written reply of any officer  so refe rred to shall, if signed by him, be received in evidence and 
have the same effect as if made on oath before the Court.  
(3) If the Court is dissolved before the receipt of such reply or if the Court omits to comply with the 
provisi ons of this section, the c onven ing officer may, at his discretion, annul the proceedings and order a 
fresh trial.  
120. Evidence of previous conv ictions and general character .—(1) When any person subject to 
this Act has been convicted by an Assam Rifles Court of any offence, such Assam Rifles Court may 
inquire into, and receive,  and record evidence of any prev ious convictions of such person, either by an 
Assam  Rifles Court or by a criminal c ourt, or any previous award of punishment under section 62 or 
section 64 or section 65 or se ction 66, and may further inquire into and record the general character of 
such person and such other matters as may be prescribed.  
(2) Evidence received under this section may be either oral, or in the shape of entries in, or certified 
extracts from, books of an Assam Rifles Court, or other official records; and it shall not be nec essary to 
give notice before trial to the person tried t hat evidence as to his previous convictions or character will be 
received.  32 
 (3) At a Summary Assam Rifles Court, the officer holding the trial may, if he thinks fit, record any 
previous  convictions against the offender, his general character, and such other  matters as may be  
prescribed, as of his own knowledge, instead  of requiring them to be proved under the foregoing 
provisions of this section.  
121. Lunacy of accused .—(1) Whenever, in the course of a trial by an Assam Rifles Court, it appears 
to the Court that the person charged is by reason of unsoundness of mind incapable of making his 
defence, or that he committed the act alleged but was by reason of unsoundness of mind incapable of 
knowing the nature of the act or knowing that it was wrong or contrary t o law , the Cou rt shall record a 
finding accord ingly.  
(2) The presiding officer of the Court, or in the case of a Summary Assam Rifles Court, the officer 
holding the trial, shall forthwith report the case to the confirming officer, or to the authority empowered 
to deal with its findings under section 137, as the case may be.  
(3) The confirming officer to whom the case is reported under sub -section ( 2) may, if he does not 
confirm the finding, take steps to have the accused person tried by the same or ano ther Assam Rifles 
Court for the offence with which he was charged.  
(4) The authority to whom the finding of a Summary Assam Rifles Court is reported under sub -
section ( 2), and a confirming officer confirming the findi ng in any case so re ported to him shall  order the 
accused person to be kept in custody in the prescribed manner and shall report the case for the orders of 
the Central Government.  
(5) On receipt of a report under sub -section ( 4), the Central Government may order the accused 
person to be detaine d in a lunatic asylum or other suitable place of safe custody.  
122. Subsequent fitness  of lunatic accused for trial .—Where any accused person, having been 
found by reason of unsoundness of mind to be incapable of making his defence, is in custody or under 
detention under section 121, any officer pre scribed in this behalf, may, — 
(a) if such person is in custody under sub -section ( 4) of section 121, on the report of a medical 
officer that he is capable of making his defence, or  
(b) if such person is detained in a jail under sub -section ( 5) of section 121 on a certificate of the 
Inspector -General of Prisons, and if such person is detained in a lu natic asylum under the said sub -
section, on a certificate of any two or more of the visitors of such asylum and if he  is detained in any 
other place under that sub -section, on a certificate of the prescribed authority, that he is capable of 
making his defence,  
take steps to have such person tried by the same or another Assam Rifles Court for the offence with which 
he was  originally charged or, if the offence is a civil offence, by a criminal court.  
123. Transmission to Central Governmen t of orders under section 122 .—A copy of every order 
made by an officer under section 122 for the trial of the accused shall forthwith be sent to the Central 
Government.  
124. Release of lunatic accused .—Where any person is in custody under sub -section ( 4) of section 
121 or under detention under sub -section ( 5) of that section, — 
(a) if such person is in custody under the said sub -section ( 4), on the report of a medical officer, 
or 
(b) if such person is detained under the said sub -section ( 5), on a certificate from any of the 
authorities mentioned in clause ( b) of section 122 that in the judgment of such officer or authority 
such person may be released without danger of his doing injury to  himself or to any other person,  
the Central Government may order that such person be released or detained in custody, or transferred to a 
public lunatic asylum if he has not already been to such an asylum.  
125. Delivery of  lunatic accused to relatives .—Where any relative or friend of any person who is in 
custody under sub -section ( 4) of section 121 or under detention under sub -section ( 5) of that section 
desires that he should be delivered to his care and cu stody, the Central Government, may, upon  33 
 application by such relative or friend and, on his giving security to the satis faction of that Government 
that the person delivered shall be prop erly taken care of and, prevented from doing injury to himself or to 
any other person, and be produced for the inspection of such officer, and at such times and places, as the 
Central Government may direct, order such person to be delivered to such relative or friend.  
126. Order for custody and dispo sal of property pending t rial.—When any property regarding 
which any offence appears to have been committed, or which appears to have been used for the 
commission any offence, is produced before an Assam Rifles Court during a trial, the Court may make  
such order as it thinks fit for the proper custody of such property pending the conclusion of the trial, and 
if the property is subject to speedy or natural decay may, after recording such evidence as it thinks 
necessary, order it to  be sold otherwise disposed of.  
127. Order of dispo sal of property regardi ng which offence is committed .—(1) After the 
conclusion of a trial before any Assam Rifles Court , the C ourt or the officer confirming the finding or 
sentence of such Assam Rifles Court, or any authority superior to such officer, or, in the case of Summary 
Assam Rifles Court whose finding or sentence does not require confirmation, an officer not below the 
rank o f Deputy Inspector -General with in whose command the trial was held, may make such order as it or 
he thinks fit for the disposa l by destruction, confiscation, delivery to any person claiming to be entitled to 
possession thereof, or otherwise, of any property or document produced before the Court or in its custody, 
or regarding which any offence appears to have been committed or wh ich has been committed or which 
has been used for the commission of any offence.  
(2) Where any order has been made under sub -section ( 1) in respect of property regarding which an 
offence appears to have been committed, a copy of such order signed and certi fied by the authority 
making the same may, whether the trial was held within India or not, be sent to a Magistrate within whose 
jurisdiction such property for the time being is situated, and such Magistrate shall ther eupon cause the 
order to be carried int o effect as if it were an order passed by him under the provisions of the C ode of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(3) In this section, the term “property” includes, in the case of property regarding which an offence 
appears to have been committed, not only such property as has been originally in the possession or under 
the control of any person, but also any property into or for which the same may have been  converted or 
exchanged, and anything acquired by such conversion or exchange whether immediately or otherwise.  
128. Powers of Assam Rifles Court in relation to  proceedings under this Act .—Any trial by an 
Assam Rifles Court under the provisions of the Act shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of section s 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) and the Assam Rifles Court shall 
be deemed to be the Court within the meaning of section s 345 and 346 of the Co de of Criminal 
Proce dure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
CHAPTER X  
CONFIRMATION AND REVISION  
129. Finding and senten ce not valid unless confirmed .—No finding or sentence of a General 
Assam Rifles Court or a Petty Assam Rifles Court shall be valid except so far as it may be confirmed as 
provided by this Act.  
130. Power to confirm finding and sentence of General Assam Rifles Court .—The findings and 
sentences of General Assam Rifles Courts may be confirmed by the Central Government or by any officer 
empowered in this behalf by warrant of th e Central Government.  
131. Power to confirm finding and sentenc e of Petty Assam Rifles Court .—The findings and 
sentences of Petty Assam Rifles Court may be confirmed by an officer having powers to convene a 
General Assam Rifles Court or by any officer empo wered in this behalf by warrant of such officer.  
132. Limitation of p owers of confirming authority .—A warrant issued under section 130 or section 
131 may contain such restrictions, reservations or conditions as the authority issuing it may think fit.  
133. Power for confirming authority to mitiga te, remit or commute sentences .—Subject to such 
restrictions, reservations or conditions, as may be contained in any warrant issued under section 130 or 34 
 section 131, a confirming authority may, when confirming the se ntence of an Assam Rifles Court, 
mitigate or remit the punishment thereby awarded, or commute that punishment for any punishment or 
punishment lower in the scale laid down in section 57.  
134. Confirming of findings and sentences on board a ship .—When any p erson subject to this Act 
is tried and sentenced by an Assam Rifles Court while on board a ship, the finding and sentence so far as 
not confirmed and executed on board the ship, may be confirmed and executed in like manner as if such 
person had been tried at the port of disembarkation.  
135. R evision of finding or sentence .—(1) Any finding or sentence of an Assam Rifles Court which 
requires confirmation may be once revised by order of the confirming authority and on such revision, the 
Court, if so directed by the confirming authority, may take additional evidence.  
(2) The Court, on revision, shall consist of the same officers as were present when the original 
decision was passed unless any of those officers are unavoidably absent.  
(3) In case of such unavoid able absence the cause thereof shall be duly certified in the proceedings, 
and the Court shall proceed with the revision:  
Provided that, if a General Assam Rifles Court, still consists of five officers, or , if a Petty Assam 
Rifles Court, of three officers.  
136. Finding and sentence of  a Summary Assam Rifles Court .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in 
sub-section ( 2), the finding and sentence of a Summary Assam Rifles Court shall not require to be 
confirmed, but may be carried out forthwith.  
(2) If the officer holding the trial is of the rank of Deputy Commandant or of a rank declared under 
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 5) of section 96 as equivalent thereto or of a lower rank and has held such rank 
for less than five years, he shall not, except on active duty, car ry into effect any sentence, until it has 
received the approval of an officer not below the rank of a Deputy Inspector -General.  
137. Transmission of proceedings of Summary Assam Rifles court .—The proceedings of every 
Summary Assam Rifles Court shall, without delay, be forwarded to the officer not below the rank of 
Deputy Inspector -General within whose command the trial was held, or to the prescribed officer, and such 
officer or the Director General or any officer empowered by him in this behalf may, fo r reasons based on 
the merits of the case, but not on merely technical grounds, set aside the proceedings , or reduce the 
sentence to any other sentence which the court might have passed.  
138. Alteration of finding  or sentence in certain cases .—(1) Where a finding of guilty by an Assam 
Rifles Court, which has been confirmed or which does not require confirmation, is found for any reason 
to be invalid or cannot be supported by the evidence , the authority which would have had power under 
section 150 to commute  the punishment awarded by the sentence, if the finding had been valid may 
substitute a new finding and pass a sentence for the offence specified or involved in such finding:  
Provided that no such substitution shall be made unless such finding could have b een validly made by 
the Assam Rifles Court on the charge and unless it appears that the Assam Rifles Court must have been 
satisfied of the facts establishing the said offence.  
(2) Where a sentence passed by an Assam Rifles Court which has been confirmed, o r which does not 
require confirmation, not being a sentence passed in pursuance of new finding substituted under sub -
section ( 1) is found for any reason to be invalid, the authority referred to sub -section ( 1) may pass a valid 
sentence.  
(3) The punishment awarded by a sentence passed under sub -section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) shall not 
be higher in the scale of punishment than, or in exces s of, the punishment awarded by, the sentence for 
which a new sentence is substituted under this section.  
(4) Any finding substituted, or any sentence passed, under this section shall, for the purpose of this 
Act and the rules, have effect as if it were a finding or sentence, as the case may be, of an Assam Rifles 
Court.  35 
 139. Remedy against order , finding or s entence of Assam  Rifles Court .—(1) Any person subject 
to this Act who considers himself aggrieved by any order passed by any Assam Rifles Court may present 
a petition to the officer or authority empowered to confirm any finding or sentence of the Assam Rifles 
Court and th e confirming authority may take such steps as may be considered necessary to satisfy itself as 
to the correctness, legality or propriety of the order passed or as to regularity of any proceeding to which 
the order relates.  
(2) Any person subject to this Ac t who considers himself aggrieved by a finding or sentence of any 
Assam Rifles Court which has been confirmed may present a petition to the Central Government, the 
Director -General or any prescribed officer superior in command to the one who confirmed such  finding or 
sentence, and the Central Government, the Director -General or the prescribed officer, as the case may be, 
may pass such order thereon as it or he thinks fit.  
140. Annulment of proceedings .—The Central Government, the Director -General or any pre scribed 
officer may annul the proceeding of any Assam Rifles Court on the ground that they are illegal or unjust.  
CHAPTER XI  
EXECUTION OF SENTENCE, PARDON, REMISSION, ETC . 
141. Form of sentence of death .—In awarding a sentence of death, an Assam Rifles Court shall in 
its discretion direct that the offender shall  suffer death by being hanged by the neck until he be dead, or 
shall suffer death by being shot to death.  
142. Commencemen t of sentence of imprisonment .—Whenever any person is sentenced by an 
Assam Rifles Court under this Act to imprisonment, the term of his sentence shall, whether it has been 
revised or not, be reckoned to commence on the day in which the original proceedings were signed by the 
presiding officer, or in the case of a Summary As sam Rifles Court, by the Court:  
Provided that when a person subject to this Act is sentenced by an Assam Rifles Court to a term of 
imprisonment, not being an imprisonment in default of payment of fine, the period spent by him in civil 
or Force custody duri ng investigation, inquiry or trial of the same case,  and before the date of order, such 
sentence shall be set off against the term of imprisonment imposed upon him and the liability of such 
person or officer to undergo imprisonment on such order of sentenc e shall  be restricted to the remainder, 
if any, of the term of imprisonment imposed upon him . 
143. Executio n of sentence of imprisonment .—(1) Whenever any sentence of imprisonment is 
passed under this Act by an Assam Rifles Court or whenever any sentence o f death is commuted to 
imprisonment, the confirming officer or in case of a Summary Assam Rifles Court, the officer holding the 
Court or such other officer as may be prescribed,  shall, s ave as otherwise provided in sub -sections ( 3) and 
(4) direct that the sentence shall be carried out by confinement in a civil prison.  
(2) When a direction has been made under sub -section ( 1), the Commandant of the person under 
sentence or such other officer as may be prescribed shall forward a warrant in the prescribed form to the 
officer in charge of the prison in which such person is to be confined and shall arrange for his despatch to 
such prison with the warrant.  
(3) In the case of a sentence of imprisonment for a period not exceeding three months and passed 
under this Ac t by an Assam Rifles Court the appropriate officer under sub -section ( 1) may direct that the 
sentence shall be carried out by confinement in force custody instead of in a civil prison.  
(4) On active duty, a sentence of imprisonment may be carried out by co nfinement in such place as 
the Deputy Inspector -General within whose command the person sentenced is serving or any prescribed 
officer may from time to time appoint.  
144. Tempor ary custody of offender .—Where a sentence of imprisonment is directed to be 
undergone in a civil prison, the offender may be kept in Force custody or in any other fit place till such 
time as it is possible to send him to a  civil prison.  
145. Execution of sentence of imprisonment in special cases .—Whenever, in the opinion of an 
office r not below the rank of Deputy Inspector -General within whose command the trial is held, any 
sentence or portion of  a sentence of imprisonment cannot for special reasons, conveniently be carried out 36 
 in Force custody in accordance with the provisions of sec tion 143, such officer may direct that such 
sentence or portion of sentence shall be carried out by confinement in any civil prison or other fit place.  
146. Conveyance of priso ner from place to place .—A person under sentence of imprisonment may, 
during his  conveyance from place to place, or when on board ship, aircraft or otherwise, be subjected to 
such restraint as is necessary for his safe conduct and removal.  
147. Communication of cert ain orders to prison officers .—When an order is duly made under this 
Act setting aside or varying any sentence, order or warrant under which any person is confined in a civil 
prison, a warrant in accordance with such order shall be forwarded by the officer making the order or his 
staff officer or such other person as may be prescribed, to the officer in charge of the prison in which such 
person is confined.  
148. Execution of sentence of fine .—When a sentence of fine is imposed by an Assam Rifles Court 
under section 55, a copy of such sentence signed and certified by the confirming officer, or where no 
confirmation is required by the officer holding the trial may be sent to any Magistrate in India and such  
Magistrate shall thereupon cause the fine to be recovered in accordance with the provis ions of the Code of 
Criminal Pr ocedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) as if it were a sentence of fine imposed by such Magistrate.  
149. Informality  or error in order or warrant .—Whenever any person is sentenced to 
imprisonment under this Act and is undergoing the sentence in any place or manner in w hich he might be 
confined under a lawful order or warrant in pursu ance of this Act, the confinement of such person shall 
not be deemed to be illegal only by reason of informality or error in, or as respects the order, warrant or 
other document, or the auth ority by which, or in pursuance where of such person was brought into, or is 
confined in any such place, and any such order, warrant or document may be amended accordingly.  
150. Pardon and remission .—When any person subject to this Act has been convicted b y an Assam 
Rifles Court of any offence, the Central Government or the Director -General, or in the case of a sentence 
which he could have confirmed or which did not require confirmation, an officer not below the rank of 
Deputy Inspector -General within whose  command such person at the time of conviction was serving or 
the prescribed officer may, — 
(a) either with or without conditions which the person sentenced accepts, pardon the person or 
remit the whole or any part of the punishment awarded; or  
(b) mitigate  the punishment awarded; or  
(c) commute such punishment for any less punishment or punishments mentio ned in this Act ; or 
(d) either with or without conditio ns which the person sentenced accepts, release the person on 
parole.  
151. Cancellation of conditiona l pardon, r elease on parole or remission .—(1) If any condition on 
which a person has been pardoned or rel eased on parole or a punishment has been remitted is, in the 
opinion of the authority which granted the pardon, rel ease or remission, not fulfilled , such authority may 
cancel the pardon, release or remission, and thereupon the sentence of the Court shall be carried into 
effect as if such pardon, release or remission had not been granted.  
(2) A person whose sentence of imprisonment is carried into effect under the provisions of sub -
section ( 1) shall undergo only the unexpired portion of his sentence.  
152. Suspensio n of sentence of imprisonment .—(1) Where a person subject to this Act is sentenced 
by an Assam Rifles Court to imprisonment, the Central Government, the Director -General or any officer 
empowered to convene a General Assam Rifles Court may suspend the sentence whether or not the 
offender has already been committed to prison or to Force custody.  
(2) The authority or officer specified in sub -section ( 1) may, in the case of an offender so sentenced 
direct that until the order of such authority or officer have been obtained, the offender shall not be 
committed to prison or to Force custody.  
(3) The powers conferred by sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) may  be exercised in the case of any such 
sentence with has been confirmed, reduced or commuted.   37 
 153. Orders pen ding suspension .—(1) Where sentence referred to in section 152 is im posed by an 
Assam Rifles Court other than Summary Assam Rifles Court, the confi rming officer may, when 
confirming the sentence, direct that the offender be not committed to prison or to Force custody until the 
orders of the authority or officer specified in section 152 have been obtained.  
(2) Where a sentence of imprisonment is impos ed by a Summary Assam Rifles Court, the officer 
holding the trial or the officer authorised to approve the sentence under sub -section ( 2) of section 136 
may make the direction referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
154. Release on suspension .—Where a sentence  is suspended under section 152 the offender shall 
forthwith be released from custody.  
155. Computation of per iod of suspension .—Any period during which the sentence is under 
suspension shall be reckoned as part of the term of such sentence.  
156. Order after s uspension .—The authority or officer specified in section 152 may, at any time 
while a sentence is suspen ded, order — 
(a) that the offender be committed to undergo the un expired portion of the sentence ; or 
(b) that the sentence be remitted.  
157. Reconsidera tion of case after suspension .—(1) Where a sentence has been suspended, the case 
may at any time, and shall at intervals of not more than four months, be reconsidered by the  authority or 
officer specified in section 152 or by any off icer not below the rank  of a Deputy Inspector -General duly 
authorised by the authority or officer specified in section 152.  
(2) Where on such reconsideration by the officer so authorised it appears to him that the conduct of 
offender since his conviction has been such as to just ify a remission of the sentence, he shall refer the 
matter to the authority or officer specified in section 150.  
158. Fr esh sentence after suspension .—Where an offender, while a sentence on him is suspended 
under this Act, is sentenced for any other offenc e, then,— 
(a) if the further sentence is also suspended under this Act, the two sentence shall run 
concurrently;  
(b) if the further sentence is for a period of three months or more and is not suspended under this 
Act, the offender shall be so committe d to prison or to Force custody for the unexpired portion o f the 
previous sentence, but bot h sentences shall run concurrently; and  
(c) if the further sentence is for a period of less than three months and is not suspended under this 
Act, the offender shall be so committed on th at sentence only, and the previ ous sentence shall, subject 
to any order which may be passed under section 156 or section 157, continue to be suspended.  
159. Scope of power of suspension .—The powers conferred by sections 152 and 156 sha ll be in 
addition to, and not in derogation of the power of mitigation, remission and commutation.  
160. Effect of suspensi on and remission on dismissal .—(1) Where in addition to any other sentence  
the punishment of dismissal or removal has been awarded by an Assam Rifles Court, and such sentence is 
suspended under section 152, then, such dismissal or removal shall not take effect until so ordered by the 
authority or officer specified in section 152.  
(2) If such other sentence is remitted under section 156, the punishment of dismissal or removal shall 
also be remitted.  
CHAPTER XII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
161. Disposal of propert y of the members of the Force .—The Central Government or any other 
authority empowered in this behalf by that Government may, by a general or special order, make 
provisions for the disposal of the private or regimental property of any person subject to this Act or any 38 
 other dues includi ng provident fund of that person, who dies or deserts, or is ascertained to be of unsound 
mind or while on active duty is officially reported as missing.  
162. Powers and duties conferrable and imposab le on members of the Force .—(1) The Central 
Government m ay, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, direct that, subject to such 
conditions and limitations, and within the local limits of such area adjoining the border of India, as may 
be specified in the order, any member of the Force ma y,— 
(a) for the purpose of prevention of any offence punishable under the Passpor t (Entry into India) 
Act, 1920 (34 of 1920) , the Registration of Foreigner s Act 1939 (16 of 1939) , the Cen tral E xcise A ct, 
1944 (1 of 1944) , the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 19 46), the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962), the 
Passports Act, 1967 (15 of 1967) or the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) or of 
any cognizable offence punishable under any other Central Act; or  
(b) for the purpose of apprehending any person who has committed any offence referred to in 
clause ( a), 
exercise or discharge such of the powers or duties under that Act or any other Central Act as may be 
specified in the said order, being the powers and duties which, in the opinion of the Central Gove rnment, 
an officer of the corresponding or lower rank is by that or such other Act empowered to exercise or 
discharge for the said purposes.  
(2) The Central Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, confer 
or impose, with the concurrence of the State Government concerned, any of the powers or duties which 
may be exercised or discharged under a State Act by a police officer upon a members of the Force who, in 
the opinion of the Cen tral Government, holds a corresponding or higher rank.  
(3) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more succ essive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification  
in the order or both Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order sh all thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order.  
163. Protection for  acts of members of the Force .—(1) The provision of section 125 o f the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) shall apply to such members of the Force who exercise or discharge any 
power or duty under sub -section ( 1) of section 162 or on whom any power is co nferred or duty is imposed 
under sub -section ( 2) of that section in the same manner as it apply to a police officer.  
(2) In any suit or proceeding against any member of the Force for any act done by him in pursuance 
of a warrant or order of a competent authority,  it shall be lawful for him to plead, that such act was done 
by him under the authority of such warrant or order.  
(3) Any such plea may be proved by the production of the warrant or order directing the act, and if it 
is so proved the members of t he Force shall thereupon be discharged from liability in respect of the act so 
done by him, notwithstanding any defect in jurisdiction of the authority which issued such warrant or 
order.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time  being in force, any legal 
proceeding (whether civil or criminal) which may lawfully be brought against any member of the Force 
for anything done or intended to be done under the powers conferred by, or in pursuance of, any provision 
of this Act or the rul es, shall be commenced within three months after the act complained of was 
committed and not otherwise, and notice in writing of such proceedings and of the cause thereof shall be 
given to the defendant or his superior officer at least one month before the  commencement of such 
proceedings.  
164. Power of Central Gove rnment to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving 
effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official 39 
 Gazette, make such provi sions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be 
necessary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
165. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for the 
purposes of carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing po wer, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the manner of re -constitution of the Force and the conditions of service of the members of the 
Force under sub -section ( 2) of section 4;  
(b) the mode of enrolment and the procedure for enrolment under sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(c) the authority wh ose previous permission in writ ing is required for resigning from appointment 
or withdrawing from all or any of the duties under section 8;  
(d) rank o r ranks of an officer or a subordinate officer referred to under sub -section ( 2) of section 
11; 
(e) the a uthority who shall give previous s anction in writing under sub -section ( 1) of section 13;  
(f) nature of communication or publication under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 13;  
(g) other purposes of meeting or demo nstration under sub -section ( 2) of section 13;  
(h) form of enrolment under section 31;  
(i) any other purpose under clause ( h) of sub -section ( 1) of section 57;  
(j) the o fficer who may direct that an en rolled person who has been sentenced to dismissal or 
imprisonment whether combined with dismissal or not may be retained to serve in the  ranks under 
section 60;  
(k) the manner of proceedings against a person and the extent of awarding puni shment under 
section 62;  
(l) the manner of proceeding against an officer below the rank of a Deputy Commandant and of 
the rank of subordinate officer and of the rank of Warrant Officer under sub -section ( 1) of section 64;  
(m) the manner of forwarding certi fied true copies of the proceedings and the superior authority 
to whom such copies shall be forwarded under sub -section ( 2) of section 64;  
(n) the manner of proceeding against an officer below the rank of Commandant and of any rank 
of subordinate officer a nd of the rank of Warrant Officer under sub -section ( 1) of section 65;  
(o) the manner of proceeding against any subordinate officer or a Warrant Officer under section 
66; 
(p) the officer by whose order any sum is required to be paid, for the maintenance  of wife or 
legitimate or illegitimate child of a person subject to this Act other than an officer, under clause ( i) of 
section 69;  
(q) the officer who may direct that the whole or any part of the pay and allowances of person 
subject to this Act shall be with held under section 71;  
(r) the manner and the extent of remission of deductions from pay and allowances authorised by 
this Act and the authority by which such remission shall be made under section 75;   40 
 (s) the authorities by whom proper provision to be mad e out of the pay and allowances of all 
persons subject to this Act, being prisoners of war, for the dependents of such persons under section 
76; 
(t) the authorities who shall make proper provision out of  the pay and allowances of any person 
subject to this  Act, who is prisoner of war or is missing under section 77;  
(u) the manner in which and the period for which any person subject to this Act may be taken into 
and detained in force custody under sub -section ( 4) of section 80;  
(v) the manner of making speci al report giving reasons for delay under section 8 1; 
(w) the authority to appoint, and the manner of appointment of, a court of inquiry; the manner of 
administering oath or affirmation by such court of inquiry and the manner of making record under 
sub-section (1) of section 84;  
(x) the officer who may appoint Force police under sub -section ( 1) of section 85;  
(y) the other officer having the discretion to decide before which court the proceeding shall be 
instituted under section 102;  
(z) the manner of fillin g up the vacancy of member by another officer under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 106;  
(za) the manner of administering oath or affirmation to every member of an Assam Rifles Court 
and to the Law Officer, or , as the case may be, the officer approved under sec tion 105 before the 
commencement of the trial, under sub -section ( 1) of section 107;  
(zb) the form for being duly sworn or affirmed under sub -section ( 2) of section 107;  
(zc) the officer by whom the letter, return or other documents purported to be signed shall be the 
evidence of the facts stated in such letter, return or other document under sub -section ( 1) of section 
118; 
(zd) the other matters to be further  inquired and recoded under sub -section ( 1) of section 120;  
(ze) the other matters to be recorded under sub -section ( 3) of section 120;  
(zf) the manner of keeping in custody of the accused person under sub -section ( 4) of section 121;  
(zg) the officer who may take  steps to have certain persons tried under section 122;  
(zh) the authority for issuing cert ificate in case of detention in any other place under clause ( b) of 
section 122;  
(zi) the officer to whom the proceedings of every summary Assam Rifles Courts shall be 
forwarded under section 137;  
(zj) the officer superior in command, to the one who confir med the findings or sentence referred 
to in sub -section ( 2) of section 139, to whom petition may be presented under that sub -section;  
(zk) the officer who may annu l the proceeding of any Assam Rifles Court under section 140;  
(zl) the other officer who shal l direct that sentence shall be carried out by the confinement in a 
civil prison under sub -section ( 1) of section 143;  
(zm) the officer who s hall forward a warrant and the f orm of such warrant unde r sub-section ( 2) 
of section 143;  
(zn) the officer who may from time to time appoint the place of confinement under sub -section 
(4) of section 143;  
(zo) the other pe rson by whom the warrant shall be forwarded to the officer in charge of the 
prison under section 147;  
(zp) the officer who may pardon or exercise othe r powers as specified under clauses ( a) to ( c) of 
section 150;  41 
 (zq) any other matter which is to be, may be , prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to be, 
or may be , made by rules.  
166. Power to make regulation s.—The Director -General may make regu lations for all or any of the 
purpose s of this Act other than those specified in section 165, subject to approval of the Central 
Government.  
167. Rules and regulations  to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule or regulation made under 
this Act shall be laid , as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions , and if, before the expiry of the session immediatel y following the session, or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect o nly in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be , so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation.  
168. Repeal and savings .—(1) The Assam Rifles Act, 1941 (5 of 1941) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, — 
(a) the Assam Rifles in existence at the commencement of this Act and constituted under t he Act 
so repealed shall be deem ed to be reconstituted under this Act;  
(b) members of the Assam Rifles in existence at the comme ncement of this Act and appointed 
under the Act so repealed shall be deemed to have been appointed or, as the case may be, enrolled as 
such under this Act;  
(c) any appeal, application, trial, inquiry or investigation pending immediately before the 
commencement of this Act shall be disposed of , continued, held or made , as the case may be, in 
accordance with the pro visions of the Assam Rifles Act, 1941 (5 of 1941) , as if this Act had not come 
into force;  
(d) any thing done or any action taken before the commencement of this Act, in relation to any 
person appointed or enrolled, shall be valid and as effective in law as if such thing or action was done 
or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
--------------------------The Cantonments Act, 2006--------------------------
 
1 
 THE CANTONMENTS ACT, 2006  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
DEFINITION  AND DELIMITAITON  OF CONTONMENT  
3. Definition  of cantonments.  
4. Alteration of limits  of cantonments.  
5. The effect of including area in cantonment.  
6. Disposal of cantonment fund and cantonment development fund when area ceases to be a 
cantonment.  
7. Disposal of cantonment fund and cantonment development fund when area ceases to be included 
in a c antonment.  
8. Application  of funds and property transferred under sections 6 and 7.  
9. Limitation of operation of Act . 
 
CHAPTER II I 
CANTONMENT BOARDS  
Boards  
10. Cantonment Board.  
11. Incorporation of Cantonment  Board.  
12. Constitution of Cantonment of Board s.  
13. Power to vary  constitution of Boards in special circumstances.  
14. Term of office of  members.  
15. Filling of vacancies.  
16. Vacancies in special cases.  
17. Oath or affirmation.  
18. Resignation.  
19. President and Vice -President.  
20. Term of office of Vice -President.  
21. Duties of President.  
22. Duties of Vice -President.  
23. Allowances to Vice -President and members.  
24. Appointment of Chief Executive Officer.  
25. Duties of Chief Executive Officer.  
26. Special power of Chief Executive Officer.  
   
2 
 SECTIONS  
Elections  
27. Electoral rolls.  
28. Qualification  of electors.  
29. Qualification  for being a member of the Board.  
30. Interpretation.  
31. Power to make rules regulating e lections.  
 
Members  
32. Member not to vote on matter in which he is interested.  
33. Liability of members.  
34. Removal of members.  
35. Consequences of removal.  
36. Member  of the Board to be deemed a public servant.  
 
Employees  
37. Disqualification of person as an employee of Board.  
38. Cantonment employee to be deemed a public servant.  
 
Procedure  
39. Meetings.  
40. Business to be transcted.  
41. Quorum.  
42. Presiding Officer.  
43. Minutes.  
44. Meetings to be  public.  
45. Method of deciding questions.  
46. Civil area.  
47. Committees for civil areas.  
48. Power to make regulations.  
49. Joint action with other local authority.  
50. Report on administration.  
 
Control  
51. Power of Central Government  to require production of documents.  
52. Inspection.  
53. Power to call for documents.  
54. Power to require execution of work, etc.  
55. Power to provide for enforcement of direction under section 54.  
56. Power to override decision of Board.  
57. Power of Central Government to review.  
58. Power of General Officer Commandin g-in-Chief, the C ommand , on reference under section 56  or 
otherwise.  
59. Power of Central  Government  on a reference made under section 56.  
60. Supersession of Board.  
   
3 
 SECTIONS  
Validity of proceeding s 
61. Validity of proceedings, etc.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
DUTIES AND DISCRETIONARY FUNCTIONS  OF BOARDS  
62. Duties of Board.  
63. Power to manage property . 
64. Discretionary functions of Board.  
65. Power of expenditure of  educa tional, health and other purposes  outside the cantonment.  
 
CHAPTER V  
TAXES  AND FEES  
Imposition of taxation  
66. General power of taxation.  
67. Charging of fees.  
68. Norms of property  tax. 
69. Framing of preliminary proposals.  
70. Objections and disposal thereof.  
71. Imposition of tax.  
72. Power of Central Government  to issue directions to the Board.  
73. Definition of “annual ra teable value ”. 
74. Incidence  of taxation.  
 
Assessment list  
75. Assessment list.  
76. Revision of assessment list . 
77. Authentication of assessment list.  
78. Evidential value of assessment list.  
79. Amendment of assessment list.  
80. Preparation of new assessment list.  
81. Notice of transfers.  
82. Notice of erection of buildings.  
 
Remission and refund  
83. Demolition, etc., of buildings.  
84. Remission of tax.  
85. Power to require entry in assessment list of details of buildings.  
86. Notice to be given of the circumstances in which remission or refund is claimed.  
87. What buildings, etc., are to be deemed vacant.  
88. Notice to be given of every occupation of vacant building or house.  
 
Charge on immovable property  
89. Tax on building s and land to be a charge thereon . 
  
4 
 SECTIONS  
Octroi, terminal tax and toll  
90. Inspection of imported goods,  octroi, terminal tax and toll, etc.  
91. Power to  seize, etc.  
92. Lease of octroi, terminal tax or toll.  
 
Appeals  
93. Appeals against assessment.  
94. Costs of appeal.  
95. Recovery of costs from Board.  
96. Conditions of right to appeal.  
97. Finality of appellate orders.  
 
Payment and recovery of taxes  
98. Time and manner of payment of taxes.  
99. Public notice for taxes due . 
100. Notice of demand.  
101. Recovery of tax.  
102. Interest payable on taxes due.  
103. Distress.  
104. Disposal of distrained property.  
105. Attachment and sal e of immovable property.  
106. Recovery from a person about to leave cantonment and refund of surplus sale proceeds , if any.  
107. Power to institute suit for recovery.  
 
Special provision s relating to taxation, etc.  
108. Board to be a M unicipality for taxation purpose s. 
109. Payment to be made to a Board as service charges by Central Government or State Government.  
110. Power to be mak e special provision for conservancy in certain cases.  
111. Exemption in case of buildings.  
112. General power of exemption.  
113. Exemption of poor persons.  
114. Composition.  
115. Irrecoverable debts.  
116. Obligation to disclose liability.  
117. Immaterial error not to  affect liability.  
118. Distraint not to be invalid by reason of immaterial de fect. 
 
CHAPTER VI  
CANTONMENT  FUND  AND PROPERTY  
Cantonment fund and cantonment development fund  
119. Cantonment fund and cant onment development fund.  
120. Custody of cantonment fund and cantonment development fund.  
121. Power of Board to borrow money.  
 
Property  
122. Property.   
5 
 SECTIONS  
123. Application of cantonment fund, cantonment development fund and property . 
124. Acquisition of immovable property.  
125. Power to make rules regarding cantonment fund, cantonment development fund and property.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
CONTRACTS  
126. Contracts by whom to be executed.  
127. Sanction.  
128. Execution of contract.  
129. Contracts improperly executed not to be binding on a Board.  
 
CHAPTER VII I 
SANITATION  AND THE  PREVENTION AND  TREATMENT  OF DISEASE  
Sanitary authorities  
130. Responsibility for sanitation.  
131. General duties of Health Officer.  
 
Conservancy and sanitation  
132. Public latrines, urinals and conservancy establishments.  
133. Duty of occupier to collect and  desposit rubbish, etc.  
134. Power of Board to undertake private conservancy arrangement.  
135. Deposit s and disposal of rubbish, etc.  
136. Cesspools, receptacles, for fil th, etc.  
137. Filling up of tank, etc.  
138. Provision of latrines, etc.  
139. Sanitation in factories, etc.  
140. Private l atrines.  
141. Special provision s for collection of rubbish and solid waste management.  
142. Removal of congested buildings.  
143. Overcrowding of dwelling houses.  
144. Power to require re pair or alternation of building . 
145. Power to require land or building  to be cleansed.  
146. Prohib ition in respect of air pollutant.  
147. Power to order disuse of house.  
148. Removal of noxious vegetation.  
149. Agriculture and irrigation.  
 
Burial and burning grounds  
150. Power to call for information regarding burial and burning grounds.  
151. Permission for use of new burial or burning ground.  
152. Power to require closing of burial or burning ground.  
153. Exemption from operation of section s 150 to 152.  
154. Removal of corpses.  
 
Prevention of infectiou s, contagious or communicable diseases  
155. Obligation concerning infectiou s, contagious o communicable diseases.  
156. Blood Bank.   
6 
 SECTIONS  
157. Special measure s in case of outbreak of infectiou s or epidemic diseases.  
158. Power to require names of a dairyman‟s customers.  
159. Power to require names of a washerman‟s customers.  
160. Power to require names of patients or custo mers of a medical practitioner  or paramedical 
workers.  
161. Report after inspection of dairy or washerman or medical practitioner‟s place of business.  
162. Action on report submitted by Health Officer.  
163. Examination of milk, washed clothes or needles, syringes, e tc. 
164. Contamination of public conveyance.  
165. Disinfection of public conveyance.  
166. Penalty for failure to report.  
167. Driver of conveyance not bound to carry  person suffering from infectious  or contagious  disease.  
168. Disinfection of building or articles therein.  
169. Destruction of infectious  hut or shed.  
170. Temporary s helter for inmates of disinfected or destroyed buildings or shed.  
171. Disinfection of building before letting the same.  
172. Disposal of infected article without disinfection.  
173. Means of disinfection.  
174. Marking or selling of food, etc., or washing clothes by infected person.  
175. Power to restrict or prohibit sale of food or drink.  
176. Control over wells, tanks, etc.  
177. Disposal of infectious  corpse.  
 
Hospital s and dispensaries  
178. Maintenance or aiding of hospitals or dispensaries . 
179. Medical supplies, appliances, etc.  
180. Free patients.  
181. Paying patients.  
182. Power to order person to attend hospital or dispensary.  
183. Power to exclude from cantonment persons refusing to attend hospital or dispensary.  
 
Control of traffic for hygienic purposes  
184. Routes for pilgrims and others.  
 
Special conditiou s regarding essential services  
185. Conditions of service of Safai Karamcharis and others . 
 
CHAPTER IX  
WATER -SUPPLY , DRAINAGE  AND SEWAGE  COLLECTION  
Water -supply  
186. Maintenance of water -supply.  
187. Term s of water -supply.  
188. Board to carry out survey and formulate proposals.  
189. Control over sources of public water -supply.  
190. Power to require maintenance or closing of private source of public drinking water -supply.  
191. Supply of water.  
192. Power to require water -supply to b e taken.  
193. Supply of water under agreement.   
7 
 SECTIONS  
194. Board not liable for failure of supply.  
195. Condition s of universal application.  
196. Supply to persons outside cantonment.  
197. Penalty.  
 
Water, drainage and other connections  
198. Power of Board to lay wires, connections, etc. 
199. Wires, etc., laid above surface of ground.  
200. Connection with main not be made without permission.  
201. Power to prescribe ferrules and establish meters, etc.  
202. Power of inspection.  
203. Power to fix rates and charges.  
 
Application of this Chapter to Government wate r-supplies  
204. Government water -supply.  
205. Water supply for domestic consumption.  
206. Recovery of charges.  
207. Supply of water from Government water -supply to the Board.  
208. Functions of the Board in relati on to distribution of bulk supply.  
209. Special provisions concerning drainage and sewage.  
210. Construction of and control of drains and sewage collection and disposal works.  
211. Certain matters not to be passed into cantonment s drains.  
212. Application by owners and occupiers to drain into cantonment drains.  
213. Drainage of undrai ned premis es. 
214. New premises not be erected without drains.  
215. Power to drain group or block of premises by combined operations.  
216. Power to close or limit the use of private drains in certain cases.  
217. Use of drain by a person other than the owner.  
218. Sewage an d rain water drain s to be distin ct. 
219. Power to require owner to carry out certain works for satisfactory drainage.  
220. Appointment of places for the em ptying of drains and collection  of sewage.  
 
Miscellaneous  
221. Connection with water works and drains not to be made without permissio n. 
222. Buildings, railways and private stre ets not to be erected or constructed over drains or water 
works without permission.  
223. Rights or user of property for aqueducts, lines, etc.  
224. Power of owner of premises to place pipes and drains through land belonging to other person s. 
225. Power to require railway level, etc., to be raised or lowered.  
226. Power to execute work after giving notice to the person liable.  
227. Power to affix shafts, etc., for ventilation of drain or cesspool.  
228. Power to examine and test drains, etc., believe d to be defective.  
229. Bulk delivery of sewage by the Board.  
230. Employment of  Government agencies for repair, etc.  
231. Work s to be done by licensed plumbe r. 
232. Prohibition of certain acts.  
   
8 
 CHAPTER X  
TOWN  PLANNING AND CONTROL OVER BUILDING, ETC.  
SECTIONS  
233. Preparation of  land use plan.  
234. Sanction for building.  
235. Notice of new building s. 
236. Conditions of valid notice.  
237. Power s of Board under certain section s exercisable b y Chief Executive Officer.  
238. Power of Board to sanction or refuse.  
239. Order of stoppage of building or works in certain cases and disposal of things removed.  
240. Power to sanction general scheme for prevention of overcrowding, etc.  
241. Compensation.  
242. Completion notice.  
243. Lapse of sanction.  
244. Restrictions on use of buildings.  
245. Period for completion of building . 
246. Completion c ertific ate. 
247. Illegal erection and re -erection . 
248. Power to stop erect ion or re -erection  or to demolish . 
249. Power to seal unauthorised constructions.  
250. Courts not to entertain proceedings in certain cases.  
251. Power to make bye -laws.  
252. Prohibition of structures or fixtures which  cause obstruction in streets.  
253. Unauthorised buildings over drains, etc.  
254. Drainage and sewer connections.  
255. Power to attach brackets for lamps an d other accessories.  
256. Main tenance of R oads.  
 
Streets  
257. Temporary occupation of stree t, land, etc.  
258. Closing and opening of streets.  
259. Names of streets and numbers of buildings.  
260. Group Housing Schemes.  
261. Boundary wall s, hedges and fences.  
262. Felling, lopping and trimming or trees.  
263. Digging of public land.  
264. Improper use of land.  
 
CHAPTER XI  
MARKET , SLAUGHTER -HOUSES, TRADES  AND OCCUPATI ONS 
265. Public markers and slaughter -houses.  
266. Use of public market.  
267. Power to transfer by public auction, etc.  
268. Stallages , rents, etc., to be published.  
269. Private markets and slaughter -house s. 
270. Conditions of grant of licence for pr ivate market or slaughter -house.  
271. Penalty for keeping market or sla ughter -house open without licence, etc.  
272. Penalty for using unlicens ed market or slaughter -house.  
273. Prohibition and restriction of use of slaughter -house.  
274. Power to inspect sla ughter -house s. 
275. Power to regulate certain activities.   
9 
  
SECTIONS  
Trade s and occupation s 
276. Provision of washing places.  
277. Licences required for carrying on of certain occupations.  
278. Power to stop use of premi ses used in contravention of lice nces.  
279. Conditions which may be attached to licences.  
 
General provisions  
280. Power  to vary licence.  
281. Carrying on trade, etc., without li cence or in contravention of section 280.  
282. Feeding animals on dirt, etc.  
 
Entry, inspection and seizure  
283. Power s of entry and seizure.  
 
Import of cattle and flesh  
284. Import of cattle and flesh.  
 
CHAPTER XII  
SPIRITUOUS LIQUORS  AND INTROXICATING  DRUGS  
285. Unautho rised sale of spirituous liquor  or intoxicating  drug.  
286. Unauthorised possession of spirituous liquor.  
287. Arrest of persons and seizure and confiscation of things for offences against the two last 
foregoing sections.  
288. Saving of articles sold or supplied for medicinal purpose s. 
 
CHAPTER XII  
PUBLIC  SAFETY AND  SUPRESSION OF NUISANCES  
General Nuisances  
289. Penalty for causing nuisances.  
 
Dogs  
290. Registration and control of dogs.  
 
Traffic  
291. Traffic rule of the road.  
 
Prevention of fire, etc.  
292. Use of inflammable materials for buildings purpose s. 
293. Stacking or collecting  inflammable materials.  
294. Care of naked lights.   
10 
 SECTIONS  
295. Regulation  of cinematographic  and dramatic performances.  
296. Discharging fire -works, fir e-arms, etc.  
297. Power to require buildings, wells, etc., to be rendered safe.  
298. Enclosure of wasteland used for improper purpose s. 
 
CHAPTER XIV  
REMOVAL  AND EXCLUSION  FROM CANTONMNETS AND  SUPPRESSION  OF SEXUAL IMMORALITY  
299. Power to remove brothels and prostitutes.  
300. Penalty for loitering and importuning for purpose s of prostitution.  
301. Removal of persons from cantonment.  
302. Removal and exclusion from cantonment of disorderly per sons.  
303. Removal and exclusion from cantonment of seditious persons.  
304. Penalty.  
CHAPTER XV  
POWERS, PROCEDURES, PENALTIES AND APPEALS  
Entry and inspection  
305. Power s of entry.  
306. Power of inspection by member of a Board.  
307. Power of inspection, etc.  
308. Power to enter land, adjoining land where work is in progress.  
309. Breaking into premises.  
310. Entry to be made in the day time.  
311. Owner‟s consent ordinarily  to be obtained.  
312. Regard to be had to social and religious usages.  
313. Penalty for obstruction.  
 
Powers and duties of police officers  
314. Arrest without warrant.  
315. Duties of police officers.  
 
Notices  
316. Notice s to fix reasonable time.  
317. Authentication and validity of notices issued by Board.  
318. Service of notice, etc.  
319. Method of giving notice.  
320. Power s of Board in case of non -complia nce with notice, etc.  
321. Occupier not to obstruct owner when complying with notice.  
 
Recovery of Money  
322. Liability of occupier to play in default of owner.  
323. Relief to Agents and Trustees.  
324. Method of recovery.  
 
   
11 
 SECTIONS  
Committees of Arbitration  
325. Application for a Committee of Arbitration.  
326. Procedure for convening Committee of Arbitration.  
327. Constitution of the Committee of Arbitration.  
328. No person to be nominated who has direct interest or whose service s are not immediately 
available. 
329. Meetings and powers of Committee or Arbitration.  
330. Decisions of Committee of Arbitration.  
 
Prosecutions  
331. Prosecutions.  
332. Composition of offence . 
 
General Penalty Provisions  
333. General penalty.  
334. Offences by companies.  
335. Cancellation or suspension of licences, etc.  
336. Recovery of amount payable in respect of damage to cantonment property.  
 
Limitation  
337. Limitation for prosecution.  
 
Suits  
338. Protection of a ction of Board, etc.  
339. Notice to be given of suits.  
 
Appeals and Revision  
340. Appeals from executive orders.  
341. Petition of Appeal . 
342. Suspension of Action Pending Appeal.  
343. Revision . 
344. Finality of the Appellate Orders.  
345. Right of appellant to be heard.  
 
CHAPTER XVI  
RULES  AND BYE-LAWS  
346. Power to make  rules.  
347. Supplemental provision s respecting rules.  
348. Power to make  bye-laws.  
349. Penalty for breach of bye -laws.  
350. Supplemental provisions regarding bye -laws and regulations.  
351. Rules and bye -laws to be available for inspection and purchase.  
   
12 
 CHAPTER XVII  
SUPPLEMENTAL  PROVISIONS  
SECTIONS  
352. Extension of certain provision s of the Act and rules to place beyond cantonments.  
353. Power to delegate functions to the President, etc.  
354. Registration.  
355. Validity of notice s and other documents.  
356. Admissibility of document  or entry as evidence.  
357. Evidence by officer or employee of the Board.  
358. Application of Act 4 of 1899.  
359. Power to remove difficu lties. 
360. Repeals and savings.  
SCHEDULE I.  
SCHEDULE II.  
SCHEDULE III.  
SCHEDULE IV.  
SCHEDULE V.   
   
13 
 THE CANTONMENTS ACT, 2006  
ACT NO. 41 OF 2006  
[13th September , 2006.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the administration of cantonments with a 
view to impart  greater democratisation, improvement of their financial base to make 
provisions for developmental activities  and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -seventh  Year of the Republic of India as follow s:— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short t itle, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Cantonments Act, 2006.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official  Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this A ct and 
any reference in any provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the  
coming into force of that provision.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless there is anything repug nant in the subject or context, — 
(a) “Assistant Health Officer ” means the medical officer appointed by the General Officer 
Commanding -in-Chief, the Command, to be the Assistant Health Officer for a cantonment;  
(b) “Board ” means a Cantonment Board constituted under this Act;  
(c) “boundary wall ” means a w all which abuts on a street and which does not exceed two and a 
half metres in  height;  
(d) “building ” means a house, outhouse, stable, la trine, shed, hut or other roofed  structure 
whether of masonry,  brick, wood, mud, metal or other material, and any part thereof, and includes a 
well and a wall other than a  boundary wall but does not include a tent or other portable and temporary 
shelter;  
(e) “casual election ” means an election held to fill a casual vacancy;  
(f) “casual vacancy ” means a vacancy occurring ot herwise than by efflux of time in the office of 
an elected  member of a Board and includes a vacancy in such office, arising under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 1 6;  
(g) “Chief Executive Officer ” means the person appointed under this Act to be the Chief 
Executive Officer of a  cantonment;  
(h) “civil area ” means an area declared to be a civil area by the Central Government under               
sub-section ( 1) of section 46;  
(i) “civil area committee ” means a committee appointed under section 47;  
(j) “Command ” means one of the Commands into which India is for military purposes for the 
time being  divided, and includes any area which the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette,  declare to be a Command for all or any of the purposes of this Act;  
(k) “dairy ” includes any farm, cattle -shed, milk -store, milk -shop or other place from which milk 
is supplied or  in which milk is kept for purposes of sale or is manufactured for the sale int o butter, 
ghee, cheese or curds,  and, in relation to a dairyman who does not occupy any premises for the sale of 
milk, includes any place in  which he keeps the vessels used by him for the storage or sale of milk;  
                                                           
1. 18th December, 2006, vide notification No. S.R.O. 15 (E), dated 18th December, 2006, see Gazette of India , 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3 (i).  
14 
 (l) “dairyman ” includes the keeper of a cow , buffalo, goat, ass or other animal, the milk of which 
is offered or  is intended to be offered for sale for human consumption, and any supplier of milk and 
any occupier of a dairy;  
(m) “dangerous disease ” means cholera, leprosy, enteric fever, smallpox, tuberculosis, diphtheria, 
plague,  influenza, venereal disease, hepatitis, Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome and any other 
epidemic,  endemic, infectious or communicable disease which the Board may by publi c notice, 
declare to be, an  infectious, contagious or communicable disease for the purposes of this Act;  
(n) “Defence Estates Circle ” means one of the circles into which India is, for the purposes of 
defence estates  management, for the time being divided, and includes any area which the Central 
Government may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be a Defence Estates Circle for all 
or any of the purposes of this  Act; 
(o) “Defence Estates Officer ” means the officer appointed by the Central Gov ernment to perform 
the duties of  the Defence Estates Officer for the purpose of this Act and the rules made thereunder;  
(p) “Director General ” means an officer of the Indian Defence Estates Service (IDES) appointed 
by the Central  Government to perform the duties of the Director General, Defence Estates for the 
purpose of this Act and  includes Senior Additional Director General and Additional Director General;  
(q) “Director ” means the officer appointed by the Central Government to perform the duties of 
the D irector,  Defence Estates, the Command, for the purposes of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder;  
(r) “entitl ed consumer ” means a person in a cantonment who is paid from the Defence Service 
Estimates and is  authorised by general or special order of the Ce ntral Government to receive a supply 
of water for domestic   purposes from the Military Engineer Services or the Public Works Department 
on such terms and conditions as  may be specified in the order;  
(s) “Executive Engineer ” means the officer of the Militar y Engineer Services of that grade, 
having charge of  the military works in a cantonment or where more than one such officer has charge 
of the military works in a  cantonment such one of those officers as the Officer Commanding the 
station may designate in th is behalf, and  includes the officer of whatever grade in immediate 
executive engineering charge of a cantonment;  
(t) “factory ” means a factory as defined in clause ( m) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948                
(63 of 1948) ; 
(u) “Forces ” means the regular Army, Navy and Air Force or any part of any one or more of 
them;  
(v) “General Officer Commanding -in-Chief, the Command  (GOC -in-C, Command) ” means the 
Officer  Commanding any of the Commands;  
(w) “Gene ral Officer Commanding the Area ” means  the Officer Commanding any one of the 
areas into which  India is for military purposes for the time being divided, or any sub -area which does 
not form part of any such  area, or any area which the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gaze tte, declare to be an  area for all or any of the purposes of this Act;  
(x) “Group Housing ” means a group of houses for dwelling purposes and may comprise all or any 
of the  following: namely , (a) a dwelling unit , (b) open spaces intended for recreation and            
ventilation , (c) roads, paths,  sewers, drains, water supply and ancillary installations, stree t lighting 
and other amenities , (d) convenient  shopping place, schools, community hall or  other amenities for 
common use ; 
(y) “Government ” in relation to this Act means the Central Government;  
(z) “Health Officer ” means the senior executive medical officer in military employ on duty in a 
cantonment;  
(za) “hospital ” includes family welfare centre, child welfare centre, mate rnity centre and health 
centre;   
15 
 (zb) “hut” means any building, no material portion of which above the plinth level is constructed 
of masonry or of  squared timber framing  or of iron framing;  
 (zc) “inhabitant ”, in relation to a cantonment, or local area means  any person ordinarily residing 
or carrying on business or owning or occupying immovable property  therein, or  declared as such by 
the Chief Executive Officer and in case of a dispute, as decided by the District Magistrate;  
(zd) “intoxicating drug ” includes a narcotic drug and psychotropic substance as defined in the 
Narcotic Drugs  and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985  (61 of 1985) as modified from time to time;  
(ze) “market ” includes any place where  persons assemble for the sale of, or for the pur pose of 
exposing for sales, meat, fish, fruits, vegetables, animals  intended for human food or any other 
articles of human food whatsoever, with or without the consent of the  owner of such place 
notwithstanding that there may be no common  regulation for th e concourse of buyers and  sellers and 
whether or not any control is exercised over the business of, or the persons frequenting, the market  by 
the owner of the place or by any other person, but shall not include a single shop or group of shops 
not being mor e than six in number and shops within unit lines;  
 (zf) “military ” includes Air Force, Navy and other  defence related establishments;  
(zg) “military officer ” means a person who, being an officer within the  meaning of the Army Act, 
1950  (46 of 1950) , the Navy Act, 1957  (62 of 1957) or the Air Force Act, 1950  (45 of 1950) , is 
commissioned, gazetted or  in pay as an officer doing army, naval or air force duty with the army, 
navy or air force, or is an officer doing  such duty in any arm, branch or part of any of those forces;  
(zh) “nuisance ” includes any act, omission, place,  animal or thing which causes or is likely to 
cause injury, danger, annoyance or offence to the sense of sight,  smell or hearing or disturbance to 
rest or sleep, or which is or may be dang erous to life or injurious to health or  property;  
(zi)  “occupier ” includes an owner in occupation of, or otherwise using his own land or building;  
 (zj) “Officer Commanding t he station or Station Commander ” means the military officer for the 
time being in  command of the forces in a cantonment and if such officer is likely to be absent for 
more than thirty days, the  General Officer Commanding -in-Chief, the Command may nominate, by 
an order, another military officer as  “Officer Commanding t he station or Stat ion Commander ”; 
 (zk) “ordinary election ” means an election held to  fill a vacancy in the office of an elected 
member of a Board arising by efflux of time;  
 (zl) “owner ” includes  any person who is receiving or is entitled to receive the rent of any 
buildin g or land whether on his own  account or on behalf of himself and others or an agent or trustee, 
or who would so receive the rent or be  entitled to receive it if the building or land were let to a tenant;  
(zm) “party wall ” means a wall forming part of  a building and used or constructed to be used for 
the support or separation of adjoining buildings belonging to  different owners, or constructed or 
adapted to be occupied by different persons;  
 (zn) “Principal Director ” means the Officer appointed by the Centr al Government to perform the 
duties of the Principal Director,  Defence Estates, the Command for the purpose of this Act and the 
rules made thereunder;  
(zo) “private  market ” means a market which is not maintained by a Board and which is licensed 
by a Board under the  provisions of this Act;  
(zp) “private slaughter -house ” means a slaughter -house which is not maintained by a  Board and 
which is licensed by a Board under the prov isions of this Act;  
 (zq) “public market ” means a market  maintained by a Board;  
 (zr) “public place ” means any place which is open to the use and enjoyment of the  public, 
whether it is actually used or enjoyed by the public or not;  
 (zs) “public slaughter -house ” means a slaughter -house maintained by a Board;   
16 
  (zt) “resident ”, in relation to a cantonment, means a person who  maintains therein a house or a 
portion of a house which is at all times available for occupation by himself or  his family even though 
he may himself reside elsewhere, provided that he has not abandoned all intention of  again occupying 
such house either by himself or his family;  
(zu) “regulation ” means a regulation made by a  Cantonment Board under this Act by notification 
in the Official G azette;  
 (zv) “rule” means a rule made by the  Central Government under this Act by notification in the 
Official Gazette;  
(zw) “shed” means a slight or  temporary structure for shade or shelter;  
(zx) “slaughter -house ” means any place ordinarily used for th e slaughter of animals for the 
purpose of selling the flesh thereof for human consumption;  
(zy) “soldier ” means  any person who is a soldier or sailor or an airman subject to the Army Act, 
1950  (46 of 1950) , the Navy Act, 1957  (62 of 1957)  or the  Air Force  Act, 1950  (45 of 1950) , as the 
case may be, and who is not a military officer;  
(zz) “spirituous liquor ” means any  fermented liquor, any wine, or any alcoholic liquid obtained by 
distillation or the sap of any kind of palm tree,  and includes any other liq uid containing alcohol which 
the Central Government may, by notification in the  Official Gazette, declare to be a spirituous liquor 
for the purposes of this Act;  
 (zza) “street ” includes any way,  road, lane, square, court, alley or passage in a cantonment,  
whether a thoroughfare or not and whether built  upon or not, over which the public have a right of 
way and also the road -way or foot -way over any bridge or  cause way;  
(zzb) “sub-area” means one of the sub -areas into which India is for military purposes f or the time  
being divided and includes, for all or any of the purposes of this Act, any territory which the Central  
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be a sub -area for such purposes;  
(zzc) “trade or commercial premises ” means any premises used or intended to be used for 
carrying on any trade,  commerce or industry;  
(zzd) “vehicle ” means a wheeled conveyance of any description which is capable of  being used 
on a street, and includes a motor -car, motor lorry, motor omnibus, cart, locomotive, tram -car, 
handcart,  truck, motor -cycle, bicycle, tricycle and rickshaw;  
(zze) “wate r-works ” includes all lakes, tanks, streams,  cisterns, springs, pumps, wells, reservoirs, 
aqueducts, water -trucks, sluices mains, pipes, culverts , hydrants,  stand -pipes, and conduits and all 
machinery, lands, buildings, bridges and things used for, or intended for the  purpose of supplying 
water to a cantonment; and  
(zzf) “year” means the year commencing on the first day of  April.  
CHAPTER II  
DEFINIT ION AND DELIMITATION  OF CANTONMENT  
3. Definition of cantonments. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, declare any place or places along  with boundaries in which any part of the Forces is quartered or 
which, being in the vicinity of any such place  or places, is or are required for the service of such forces to 
be a cantonment for the purposes of this Act and  of all other enactments for the time being in force, and 
may, by a like notification, declare that any cantonment  shall cease to be a cantonment.  
(2) The Central Government may, by a like notification, define the limits of  any cantonment for the 
aforesaid purposes.  
(3) When any place is declared a cantonment under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall 
constitut e a Board within a period of one year in accordance with the  provisions of this Act:  
Provided that the Central Government may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing,  extend the said 
period of one year for a further period of six months at a time:   
17 
 Prov ided further that the Central  Government may, until a Board is constituted, by order make 
necessary provisions for the efficient  administration of the cantonment.  
(4) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,  direct that in any p lace 
declared a cantonment under sub -section ( 1) the provisions of any enactment relating  to local               
self-government other than this Act shall have effect only to such extent or subject to such  modifications, 
or that any authority constituted u nder any such enactment shall exercise authority only to such  extent, as 
may be specified in the notification.  
4. Alteration of  limits of cantonments. —(1) The Central Government may after consulting the State 
Government and the Board  concerned, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare its intention to 
include within the cantonment any  local area situated in the vicinity thereof or to exclude from the 
cantonment any local area comprised therein.  
(2) Any inhabitant of a cantonment or local are a in respect of which notification has been published 
under sub -section  (1) may, within eight weeks from the date of notification, submit in writing to the 
Central Government  through the General Officer Commanding -in-Chief, the Command, an objection to 
the notification, and the  Central Government shall take such objection into consideration.  
(3) On the expiry of eight weeks from the  date of the notification, the Central Government may after 
considering the objections, if any, which have been  submitted unde r sub -section ( 2), by notification in the 
Official Gazette, include the local area in respect of  which the notification was published under           
sub-section ( 1), or any part thereof, in the cantonment or, as the  case may be, exclude such area or any 
part thereof from the cantonment . 
 5. The effect of  including area in cantonment .—When, by a notification under section 4, any  local 
area is included in a cantonment, such area shall there  upon become subject to this A ct and to all other  
enactments for the time being in force throughout the cantonment and to all notifications, rules, 
regulations,  bye-laws, orders and directions issued or made thereunder.  
6. Disposal of cantonment fund and  cantonment development fund when area ceases to be a 
cantonment .—(1) When, by a notification under  section 3, any cantonment ceases to be a cantonment 
and the local area comprised therein is immediately  placed under the control of a local authority, the 
balance of the cantonment fund or the cantonment  development fund and other property vesting in the 
Board shall vest in such local authority, and the liabilities  of the Board shall be tran sferred to such local 
authority.  
(2) When, in like manner, any canto nment ceases to  be a cantonment and the local area comprised 
therein is not immediately placed under the control of a local  authority, the balance of the cantonment 
fund or the cantonment development fund and other property vesting  in the Board shall vest in the Central 
Government, and the liabilities of the Board shall be transferred to that  Government.  
7. Disposal of cantonment fund and cantonment development fund when area  ceases to be 
included in a cantonment .—(1) When, by a notification under section 4, any local area forming  part of a 
cantonment ceases to be under the control of a particular Board and is immediately placed under the  
control of some other local authority, such portion of the cantonment fund or the cantonment development  
fund and other property vesting in the Board and such portion of the liabilities of the Board, as the Central  
Government may, by general or special order, direct, shall be transferred to that other local authority.  
(2)When, in like manner, any local area forming part of  a cantonment ceases to be under the control 
of a particular Board and is not immediately placed under the control of some other local authority; such 
portion of  the cantonment fund or the cantonment development fund and other property vesting in the 
Board  shall vest in  the Central Government, and such portion of the liabilities of the Board shall be 
transferred to that  Government, as the Central Government may, by general or special order, direct.  
8. Application of funds and property transferred under  sections 6 and 7 .—Any cantonment fund 
or a cantonment development fund or a portion thereof or other  property of a Board vesting in the Central 
Government under the provisions of section 6 or section 7 shall be  applied in the first place to satisfy any 
liabili ties of the Board transferred under such provisions to that  Government, and in the second place for  
18 
 the benefit of the inhabitants of the local area which has ceased to be  a cantonment or, as the case may be, 
part of a cantonment.  
9. Limitation of operati on of Act. —The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, exclude  from the operation of any part of this Act the whole or any part of a cantonment, or 
direct that any provision of  this Act shall, in the case of any cantonment — 
(a) situated within the limits of a metropolitan area; or  
 (b) in which the Board is superseded under section 60, apply with such modification as may be 
so specified.  
CHAPTER III  
CANTONMENT  BOARDS  
Boards  
10. Cantonment  Board. —(1) For every cantonment there shall be a Cantonment Board.  
(2) Every Board shall  be deemed to be a municipality under clause ( e) of article 243P of the 
Constitution for the  purposes of — 
(a) receiving grants and allocations; or  
(b) implementing the Central  Government schemes of social welfare,  public health, hygiene, 
safety, water supply, sanitation, urban renewal and education.  
11. Incorporation of Cantonment Board. —Every Board shall, by the name of the place  by 
reference to which the cantonment is known, be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a  
common seal with power to acquire and hold property both movable and immovable and to contract and 
shall  by the said name, sue and be sued.  
12. Constitution of Cantonment Boards .—Cantonments shall be divided into four categories, 
namely: — 
(i) Category I  Cantonments, in which the population exceeds fifty thousand;  
(ii) Category II Cantonments, in which the  population exceeds ten thousand, but does not exceed 
fifty thousand;  
(iii) Category III Cantonments, in which  the population exceeds two thousand five hundred, but 
does not exceed ten thousand; and  
(iv) Category IV  Cantonments, in which the population does not exceed two thousand five 
hundred.  
(2) For the purposes of  sub-sectio n (1), the population shall be calculated in accordance with the latest 
official census, or, if the  Central Government, by general or special order, so directs, in accordance with a 
special census taken for the  purpose.  
(3) In Category I Cantonments, the Board shall consist of  the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Officer Commanding the station as ex officio  or, if the Central Government so directs in 
respect of any  cantonment, such other military officer as may be nominated in his place by the 
General O fficer  Commanding -in-Chief, the Command;  
(b) the District Magistrate or an Executive Magistrate not below the  rank of Additional District 
Magistrate nominated by him;  
(c) the Chief Executive Officer;  
(d) the Health  Officer ex officio ;  
(e) the Executive Engineer ex officio ; 
(f) three military officers nominated by name by the  Officer Commanding the station by order in 
writing;   
19 
 (g) eight members elected under this Act.  
(4) In Category  II Cantonments, the Board shall consist of the followin g members, namely: — 
(a) the Officer Commanding the  station as ex officio  or, if the Central Government so directs in 
respect of any cantonment, such other military  officer as may be nominated in his place by the 
General Officer Commanding -in-Chief, the Command;  
(b) the District Magistrate or an Executive Magistrate not below the rank of Additional District 
Magistrate nominated  by him;  
(c) the Chief Executive Officer ;  
(d) the Health Officer ex officio ;  
(e) the Executive Engineer ex officio ; 
(f) two military officers  nominated by name by the Officer Commanding the station by order in  
writing;  
(g) seven members elected under this Act.  
(5) In Category III Cantonments, the Board shall consist of  the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Officer Commanding the station as ex officio  or, if the Central  Government so directs in 
respect of any cantonment, such other military officer, as may be nominated in his  place by the 
General Officer Commanding -in-Chief, the Command;  
(b) the District Magistrate or an Executive  Magistrate  nominated by him;  
(c) the Chief Executive Officer ;  
(d) the Health Officer ex officio ;  
(e) the Executive Engineer ex officio ; 
(f) one military officer nominated by name by the Officer Commanding the  station by order in 
writing;  
(g) six members elected under this Act.  
(6) In Category IV Cantonments, the Board  shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) the  Officer Commanding the station ex officio  or, if the  Central Government so directs in 
respect of any cantonment, such other military officer as may be nominated  in his place by the 
General Officer Commanding -in-Chief, the Command;  
(b) the Chief Executive Officer;  
(c) two members elected under this Act.  
(7) The Officer Commanding the station may, if he thinks fit, with the sanction of the General Officer 
Commanding -in-Chief, the Command, nominate in place of any military  officer whom he is empowered 
to nominate under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 3), clause ( f) of sub -section ( 4) or clause ( f) of                          
sub-section ( 5), any person, whether in the service of the Government or not, who is ordinarily  resident in 
the cantonment or in the vicinity thereof.  
(8) Every election or nomination of a member of a Board  and every vacancy in the elected 
membership ther eof shall be notified by the Central Government in the  Official Gazette;  
(9) The Member of Parliament and Member of Legislative Assembly representing  constituencies 
which comprises wholly or partly the cantonment area, shall be special invitees for the me etings  of the 
Board but without a right to vote.  
13. Power to vary constitution of Boards in special circumstances .—(1) Notwithstanding  anything 
contained in section 12, if the Ce ntral Government is satisfied, — 
(a) that by reason of military  operations, it is necessary, or   
20 
 (b) that, for the administration of the cantonment, it is desirable, to vary the  constitution of the 
Board in any cantonment under this section, the Central Government may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, make a de claration to that effect.  
(2) Upon the making of a declaration under sub -section  (1), the Board in the cantonment shall consist 
of the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Officer  Commanding the station,  
(b) the Chief Executive Officer, and  
(c) one membe r, not being a person in the  service of the Government, nominated by the Central 
Government in consultation with the General Officer  Commanding -in-Chief, the Command.  
(3) The nomination of a member of  a Board constituted under this section, and the vacanc y in the 
membership thereof shall be notified by the Central Government in the Official  Gazette.  
(4) The term of office of a Board constituted by a declaration under sub -section ( 1) shall not  
ordinarily extend beyond one year:  
Provided that the Central Government may from time to time, by a like  declaration, extend the term 
of office of such a Board by any period not exceeding one year at a time:  
Provided also that the Central Government shall forthwith direct that the term of office of such a 
Board shal l cease if, in the opinion of the Central Government, the reasons stated in the declaration 
whereby such Board  was constituted or its term of office was extended, have ceased to exist.  
(5) When the term of office of a Board  constituted under this section has expired or ceased, the Board 
shall be replaced by the former Board which,  but for the declaration under sub -section ( 1) or                         
sub-section ( 4), would ha ve continued to hold office, or , if the  term of office of such former Board has 
expired, by a Board constituted under section 12.  
14. Term of office of members. —(1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term  of office of 
a member of a Board shall b e five years and shall commence — 
 (a) in case of an elected member,  from the date of notification of his election under                           
sub-section ( 8) of section 12, or from the date on which the  vacancy has occurred to which he is 
elected, whichever is later; and  
(b) in case of a nominated member, from  the dat e of nomination under clauses ( b) and ( f) of              
sub-section ( 3), clauses ( b) and ( f) of sub -section ( 4) and  clauses ( b) and ( f) of sub -section ( 5) of 
section 12, or the date of vacancy under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 18, whichever is later, 
and the member so nominated shall be able to take part in the proceedings of the  Board:  
 Provided that the Central Government may, when satisfied that it is necessary in order to avoid  
administrative difficulty, extend the term of office of all the elected members of a Board by such period 
not exceeding one year, as it thinks fit:  
Provided further that a member whose term of office has been so extended,  shall cease to hold office 
on the date of the notification of the election of his successor u nder sub -section ( 8) of section 12.  
 (2) The term of office of an ex officio member of a Board shall continue so long as he holds the  
office by virtue of which he is such a member.  
(3) The term of office of a member elected to fill a casual  vacancy shall commence from the date of 
the notification of his election, and shall continue so long only as the  member in whose place he is elected 
would have been entitled to hold office if the vacancy had not occurred.  
(4) An outgoing member shall, unless the Central  Government otherwise directs, continue in office 
until the  election of his successor is notified under sub -section ( 8) of section 12 or the nomination of his 
successor, as  the case may be.  
 (5) Any outgoing member may, if qualified, be re -elected or re -nominated.   
21 
 15. Filling of vacancies .—(1) Vacancies arising by efflux of time in the office of an elected  member 
of a Board shall be filled by an ordinary election to be held on such date as the Central Government  may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette , direct.  
 (2) A casual vacancy shall be filled by a casual election the  date of which shall be fixed by the 
Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette, and shall be, as  soon as may be, after the 
occurrence of the vacancy:  
Provided that no  casual election shall be held to fill a  vacancy occurring within six months of any 
date on which the vacancy will occur by efflux of time, but such  vacancy shall be filled at the next 
ordinary election.  
 16. Vacancies in  special cases. —(1) If for any cau se at an election no member is elected, or if  the 
elected member is unwelling  to serve on the Board, fresh election shall be held to fill up such vacancy.  
(2) If a person is elected to more  than one seat in a Board, then, unless he resigns all but one of the 
seats within fourteen days from the date on  which he is declared elected, or where the dates on which he 
is declared elected are different in respect of  different seats, from the last of such dates, all the seats shall 
become vacant.  
(3) Vacancies ari sing in any of  the following cases shall be filled by nomination by the Central 
Government after consultation with the  General Officer Commanding -in-Chief, the Comma nd, namely: — 
(a) where at a casual election no member is  elected;  
(b) where at an election held when a Board is constituted for the first time no member or an  
insufficient number of members is elected or an elected member is unwilling to serve on the Board.  
(4) For the  purposes of sub -section ( 2) of section 15, a member nominated in pursuance o f                       
sub-section ( 3) of this section  shall where there has been a division of the cantonment into wards, be 
deemed to have been elected by such  ward as the Central Government may at the time of making the 
nomination or at any time therea fter declare.  
(5) The term of office of a member nominated under this section shall expire at the time at which it 
would have  expired if he had been elected at the casual election.  
17. Oath or affirmation. —Every person who is by virtue of his office, or who is nominated or 
elected to be, a member of the Board shall,  before taking his seat, make and subscribe at a meeting of the 
Board an oath or affirmation of his allegiance to  the Constitution of India  in the following form, 
namely: — 
 become   
“I, A.B., having  been elected  a member of this Board, do   been nominated  
 swear in the name of God      that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of    solemnly affirm   
India as by law established and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am 
about to enter.  
18. Resignation .—(1) (a) Any elected  member of a Board who wishes to resign his office may give 
his resignation in writing to the President of the  Board who shall forward it for acceptance and 
notification to the Central Government under intimation to the  General Officer Co mmanding -in-Chief, 
the Command.  
(b) Any nominated member of a Board who wishes to  resign his office may forward his resignation in 
writing through the President of the Board to the General  Officer Commanding -in-Chief, the Command 
for orders.  
(2) If the Central Government or the General Officer  Commanding -in-Chief, the Command, as the 
case may be, accepts the resignation, such acceptance shall be  communicated to the Board, and thereupon 
the seat of the member resigning shall become vacant.   
22 
  (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the resignation of any person elected to 
more than one  seat in a Board from all but one of t he seats in pursuance of sub -section ( 2) of section 16 
shall take effect when  such resignation is received by the President of the Board.  
19. President and Vice -President .—(1) The Officer commanding the station if a member of the 
Board shall be the  President of the Board:  
Provided that when a military officer holding the office of the President ceases to be  the Officer 
commanding the station merely by reason of a temporary absence from the station for a period not  
exceeding thirty consecutive days, h e shall not vacate the office of President.  
(2) Where the Officer  commanding the station is not a member of the Board, the military officer 
nominated in his place under clause  (a) of sub -section ( 3), sub -section ( 4), sub -section ( 5) or                  
sub-section ( 6) of section 12 shall be the President of  the Board.  
(3) In every Board except in case of a Board falling under Category IV Cantonment there shall be a  
Vice -President elected by the elected members only from amongst them in accordance with suc h 
procedure as  the Central Government may by rule prescribe.  
 (4) In case of a Board falling under Category IV Cantonment,  the Vice -President shall be elected by 
draw of lot under the supervision of the President of the Board in such  manner as he may decid e.  
20. Term of office of Vice -President .—(1) The term of office of a Vice -President shall be five years 
or his residual term of office as a member,  whichever is less.  
(2) A Vice -President may resign his office by notice in writing to the President and, on the  
resignation being accepted by the Board, the office shall become vacant.  
(3) A Vice -President may be  removed from his office, at a special meeting convened for the purpose 
on a requisition for the same by not  less than one -half of the elected membe rs of the Board holding office, 
by a resolution passed by a majority of  not less than two -thirds of the total number of elected members 
then holding office and attending and no  member, other than an elected member, shall have the r ight to 
vote on the resol ution:  
Provided that in case of  Category IV Cantonments, the Vice -President may be removed if a resolution 
to this effect is passed by the  Board and the other elected member shall become the Vice -President.  
21. Duties of President. —(1) It shall be the duty o f the President of every Board — 
(a) unless prevented by  reasonable cause, to convene and preside at all meetings of the Board and 
to regulate the conduct of business  thereat;  
(b) to control, direct and supervise the financial and executive administration of the Board;  
(c) to perform all the duties and exercise all the powers specifically imposed or conferred on the 
President by or  under this Act; and  
(d) subject to any restrict ions, limitations and conditions imposed by this Act, to exercise  
executive power for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act and to be directly 
responsible for the  fulfilment of the purposes of this Act;  
(e) in case of gross misconduct dur ing the course of meeting, to suspend  a member other than a 
Chief Executive Officer from attending the unconcluded part of the meeting of the  Board.  
(2) The President may, by order in writing, empower the Vice -President to exercise all or any of the  
power s and duties referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) other than any power, duty or function which 
he is by resolution of the Board expressly forbidden to delegate.  
 (3) The exercise or discharge of any powers,  duties or functions delegated by the Pres ident under this 
section shall be subject to such restrictions,  limitations and conditions, if any, as may be laid down by the 
President and to the control of, and to revision  by, the President.  
(4) Every order made under sub -section ( 2) shall forthwith b e communicated to the Board  and to the 
General Officer Commanding -in-Chief, the Command.  
   
23 
 22. Duties of Vice -President .—(1) It shall be the duty of the Vice -President of every Board, — 
(a) in the absence of  the President and unless prevented by reasonable cause, to preside at 
meetings of the Board and when so  presiding to exercise the authority of the President under                 
sub-section ( 1) of section 21;  
(b) during the  incapacity or temporary absence of the President or pending his appointment or 
succession to perform any  other duty and exercise any other power of the President; and  
(c) to exercise any power and perform any duty  of the President which may be delegated to him 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 21.  
23. Allowances to Vice -President an d members .—The Vice -President and each  elected member of 
the Board shall be entitled to receive such allowances, as the Central Government may, by  rule, prescribe.  
24. Appointment of Chief Executive  Officer. —(1) For every cantonment there shall be a Chief  
Executive Officer appointed by the Central  Government or by such person as the Central Governmen t 
may authorise in this behalf:  
Provided that, in the  event of temporary absence of the Chief Executive Officer, not exceeding ninety 
days, the Principal Director  shall designate an officer under his jurisdiction to perform the duties of the 
Chief Executive Officer during  such period.  
(2) Not less than one -half of the salary of the Chief Executive Officer shall be paid by the Central  
Government and the bal ance from the cantonment fund.  
(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall be the Member -Secretary of the Board and of every Committee 
of the Board.  
25. Duties of Chief Executive Officer .—(1) Subject to the provisions of clause ( c) and clause ( d) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 21, the  Chief Executive Officer shall — 
(a) exercise all the powers and perform all the duties  conferred or imposed upon him by or under 
this Act or any other law for the time being in force;  
(b) subject to  any restrictions, limi tations and conditions imposed by this Act, to exercise 
executive power to ensure that the  administration of the Board is carried out in accordance with 
provisions of this Act;  
 (c) prescribe the duties of,  and exercise supervision and control over the act s and proceedings of 
all, officers and employees of the Board;  
(d) be responsible for the custody of all records of the Board;  
 (e) arrange for the performance of such duties  relative to the proceedings of the Board or of any 
Committee of the Board or of any Committee of Arbitration  constituted under this Act, as those 
bodies may respectively impose on him; and  
(f) comply with every  requisition of the Board on any matter pertaining to the administration of 
the cantonment.  
26. Special power of Chief Execu tive Officer .—(1) The Chief Executive  Officer may direct the 
execution of any work or the doing of any act, in public interest and in accordance with  the provisions of 
this Act and the rules made thereunder, and incur such expenditure as may be necessary i n executing such 
work or doing such act, as the case may be, subject to the financial limits which the Board may  by 
resolution determine subject to general guidelines issued by the Director General, Defence Estates with 
the approval of the Central Governme nt.  
(2) The Chief Executive Officer may, in case of emergency, direct the  execution of any work or the 
doing of any act which would ordinarily require the sanction of the Board and  immediate execution or 
doing of which is in his opinion, necessary for the  service or safety of the public, and  may direct that the 
expense of executing such work or doing such act shall be paid from the cantonment fund:  
   
24 
 Provided that — 
 (a) he shall not act under this section without the previous sanction of the President or, in his  
absence, of the Vice -President;  
(b) he shall not act under this section in contravention of any order of the  Board prohibiting the 
execution of any particular work or the doing of any particular act; and  
(c) he shall  report forthwith the action ta ken under this section and the reasons there  for to the 
Board.  
Elections  
 27. Electoral rolls. —(1) The Board or, where a Board is not constituted in any place declared by  
notification under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 to be a cantonment, the Officer Commanding the station, 
shall  prepare and publish an electoral roll showing the names of persons qualified to vote at elections to 
the Board  and such roll shall be prepared, revised and finally published in such manner and on such date 
in each year as  the Central Government may by rule prescribe.  
(2) Every person whose name appears in the final electoral roll  shall, so long as the roll remains in 
force, be entitled to vote at an election to  the Board, and no other person shall be so entitled.  
(3) When a ca ntonment has been divided into wards, the electoral roll shall be divided into  separate 
lists for each ward.  
(4) If a new electoral roll is not published in any year on the date prescribed, the  Central Government 
may direct that the old electoral roll shall continue in operation until the new roll is  published.  
28. Qualification of electors .—(1) Every person who, on such  date as may be fixed by the Central 
Government in this behalf by notification in the Official Gazette  here in after in this section r eferred to as 
“the qualifying date ”, is not less than eighteen years of age and who  has resided in the cantonment for a 
period of not less than six months immediately preceding the qualifying  date shall, if not otherwise 
disqualified, be entitled to be enr olled as an elect or.  
Explanation. —When any place is declared a cantonment for the first time, or when any local area is 
first included in a cantonment, residence  in the place or area comprising the cantonment on the aforesaid 
date shall be deemed to be residence in the  cantonment for the purposes of this sub -section.  
(2) A person notwithstanding that he is otherwise qualified,  shall not be entitled to be enrolled as an 
elector if he on the qualifying d ate— 
(i) is not a citizen of India, or  
(ii) has been  adjudged by a competent court to be of unsound mind, or  
(iii) is an undischarged insolvent, or  
(iv) has been sentenced by a Criminal Court to imprisonment for a term exceeding  two years for 
an offence which is declared by the Central Government to be su ch as to unfit him to become an 
elector or has been sentenced  by a Criminal Court for any offence under Chapter IXA of the Indian 
Penal Code  (45 of 1860):  
Provided that any  disqualification in curred by a person under clause  (iv) shall terminate on the lapse 
of three years from the  expiry of the sentence or order.  
(3) If any person having been enrolled as an elector in any electoral roll  subsequently becomes 
subject to any of the disqualifications referred to in sub -section ( 2), his name shall be  remove d from the 
electoral roll unless, in the case referred to in clause ( iv), the disqualification is removed by  the Central 
Government.  
29. Qualification for being  a member of the Board. —(1) Save as hereinafter provided, every 
person, not being a person hold ing any office  of profit under the Government, whose name is entered on 
the electoral roll of a cantonment shall be qualified  for election as a member of the Board in that 
cantonment.   
25 
 (2) No person shall be qualified for nomination as a  member of a Board if he is subject to any of the 
disqualifications specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 28.  
(3) No person shall be qualified for being chosen whether by election or nomination as, and for being 
a member of  a Board, if he — 
(a) has been dismissed from the service of the Government and is debarred from re -employment  
therein, or is a dismissed employee of a Board;  
(b) is debarred from practising his profession or  calling by order of any competent authority;  
(c) holds any place of profit in the gift or at th e disposal of the  Board, or is a police officer, or is 
the servant or employer of a member of the Board; or  
(d) is interested in a  subsisting contract made with, or in work being done for, the Board except as 
a shareholder other than a  director in an inco rporated company; or  
(e) is an officer or employee, permanent or temporary, of a Board or  of any other local authority; 
or 
 (f) is a member of any other local authority; or  
 (g) has, by the authority referred  to in clause ( f) of section 31, been found to have been guilty of 
any of the corrupt practices specified in sub-section  (2) of section 30 unless a period of five years has 
elapsed since the date of the decision of the authority; or  
(h) fails to pay any arrears of any kind due by him otherwise than as an agent, receiver, trustee or  
an executor, to the Board within thirty days after the notice in this behalf has been served upon him; 
or  
(i) is disqualified under a ny other provision of this Act:  
Provided that a person shall not be deemed to have any  interest in such a contract or work as is 
referred to in clause ( d) by reason only of his having a share or interest  in— 
(a) any lease or sale or purchase of immovable property or any agreement for the same; or  
(b) any  agreement for the loan of money or any s ecurity for the payment of money only; or  
(c) any newspaper in  which any advertisement relating to the affairs of the Board is inserted; 
or  
(d) the sale to the Board of any  articles in which he regularly trades or the purchase from the 
Board of any artic les, to a value in either case not  exceeding twenty -five thousand rupees in the 
aggregate in any year during the period of the contract or work.  
30. Interpretation. —(1) For the purpo ses of sections 27, 28 and 29, „ person‟  means an  individual 
human being.  
(2) The following shall be deemed to be corrupt practices within the meaning of  clause ( g) of                  
sub-section (3) of section 29, namely: — 
(1) “bribery ” that is to say — 
(A) any gift, offer or promise  by a candidate or his agent or by any other person with the 
consent of a candidate or his agent of any  gratification to any person whomsoever, with the 
object, dire ctly or indirectly of inducing — 
(a) a person to  stand or not to stand as, or to withdraw or not to withdraw from being, a 
candidate at an election; or  
(b) an elector to vote or refrain from voting at an election, or as a reward to — 
(i) a person for having so stood or not  stood, or for having withdrawn or not having 
withdrawn his candidature; or  
(ii) an elector for having voted or  refrained from voting;   
26 
 (B) the receipt of, or agreement to receive, any gratification, whether as a motive or are           
ward — 
(a) by a person for standing or not standing as, or for withdrawing or not withdrawing, 
from being a  candidate; or  
(b) by any person whomsoever for himself or any other person for voting or refraining 
from  voting, or inducing or attempting to induce any elector to vote or refrain from voting, or 
any candidate to  withdraw or not to withdraw his candidature.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this clause, the term “gratification ” is not restricted to 
pecuniary gratification or gratifications estimable in money and it includes all forms of entertainment 
and all forms of employment for reward but it does not include the payment of any expenses bona 
fide incurred at, or for the  purpose of, any election.  
 (2) Undue  influence, that is to say, any direct or indirect interference or attempt to interfere on the 
part of the candidate or his agent, or of any other  person with the consent of the candidate or his agent 
with the free exercise of any electoral right:  
Provide d that — 
(a) without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of this clause any such person as is referred 
to therein who — 
(i) threatens any candidate or any elector, or any person in whom a candidate or an elector is  
interested, with injury of any kind including social ostracism and ex -communication or expulsion 
from any  caste or community; or  
(ii) induces or attempts to induce a candidate or an elector to believe that he, or any  person in 
whom he is interested, will become or will be rendered an o bject of divine displeasure or spiritual  
censure, shall be deemed to interfere with the free exercise of the electoral right of such candidate 
or elector  within the meaning of this clause;  
(b) a declaration of public policy, or a promise of public action,  or the mere  exercise of a legal right 
without intent to interfere with an electoral right s hall not be deemed to interfere within the meaning of 
this clause.  
(3) The appeal by a candidate or his agent or by any other person with the  consent of a candidat e or 
his agent to vote or refrain from voting for any person on the ground of his religion,  race, caste, 
community or language or the use of, or appeal to religious symbols or the use of, or appeal to,  national 
symbols, such as national flag or the nationa l emblem for the furt herance of the prospects of the election 
of that candidate or for prejudicially affecting the election of any candidate.  
(4) The promotion of, or  attempt to promote, feelings of enmity or hatred between different classes of 
the citize ns of India on grounds  of religion, race, caste, community or language, by a candidate or his 
agent or any other person with the  consent of a candidate or his agent for the furtherance of the prospects 
of the election of that candidate or for  prejudicially  affecting the election of any candidate.  
(5) The publication by a candidate or his agent or by any  other person, with the consent of a candidate 
or his agent, of any statement of fact which is false, and which he  either believes to be false or does not 
believe to be true, in relation to the personal character or conduct of any  candidate, or in relation to the 
candidature, or withdrawal of any candidate, being a statement reasonably  calculated to prejudice the 
prospects of that candidate's election.  
(6) The hiring or procuring, whether on payment or otherwise, of any vehicle or vessel by a candidate 
or his agent or by any other person with the  consent of a candidate or his agent or the use of such vehicle 
or vessel for the free conveyance of any elector  other than the candidate himself, the members of his 
family or his agent to or from any polling station or place  fixed for the poll:  
Provided that the hiring of a vehicle or vessel by any elector or by several electors at their  joint costs 
for the purpose of conveying him or them to and from any such polling station or place fixed for the  poll 
shall not be deemed to be a corrupt practice under this clause if the vehicle or vessel so hired is a vehicle  
or vessel not propelled by mechanical power:   
27 
 Provided f urther that the use of any public transport vehicle or  vessel or any tramcar or railway 
carriage by any elector at his  own cost for the purpose of going to or coming  from any such polling 
station or place fixed for the poll shall not be deemed to be a corr upt practice under this  clause.  
Explanation .—In this clause, the expression “vehicle ” means any vehicle used or capable of being 
used for the purpose of road transport, whether propelled by mechanical power or otherwise and whether 
used for  drawing other v ehicles or otherwise.  
 (7) The obtaining or procuring or abetting or at tempting to obtain or procure by a candidate or his 
agent or, by any other person with the consent of a candidate or his agent, any  assistance other than the 
giving of vote for the furt herance of the prospects of that candidate's election, from any person in the 
service of the Government or the Board:  
Provided that where any person, in the service of  the Government or the Board in the discharge or 
purported discharge of his official duty, makes any  arrangements or provides any facilities or does any 
other act or thing, for, to, or in relation to, any candidate or  his agent or any other person acting with the 
consent of the candidate or his agent whether by reason of the  office held by  the candidate or for any 
other reason, such arrangements, facilities or act or thing shall not be  deemed to be assistance for the 
furtherance of the prospect s of that candidate‟ s election.  
Explanation .—In this  section, the expression “agent ” includes any person who is held to have acted 
as an agent in connection with  the election with the consent of the candidate.  
31. Power  to ma ke rules regulating elections .—The Central Government may, either generally or 
specially for any  cantonment or group of cantonme nts, after previous publication, make rules consistent 
with this Act to  regulate all or any of the following matters for the purpose of the holding of el ections 
under this Act, namely: — 
(a) the division of a cantonment into wards;  
(b) the determination of  the number of members to be elected by  each ward;  
(c) the preparation, revision and final publication of electoral rolls;  
(d) the reservation of wards for  election of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and 
women;  
 (e) the registration of electors,  the nomination of candidates, the time and manner of holding 
elections and the method by which votes shall be  recorded;  
 (f) the authority which may be an officer of the State Govern ment by which and the manner in 
which disputes relating to electoral roll s or arising out of elections shall be decided, and the powers 
and duties  of such authority and the circumstances in which such authority may declare a casual 
vacancy to have been  created or any candidate to have been elected;  
(g) the fee to be paid for a dmission and consideration of any  application relating to election or 
election disputes;  
 (h) any other matter relating to elections or election  disputes in respect of which the Central 
Government is empowered to make  rules under this Chapter or in respect  of which this Act makes no 
provision or makes insufficient provision and provision is, in the opinion  of the Central Government, 
necessary.  
Members  
32. Member not to vote on mat ter in which he is interested. —(1) No member of a Board shall vote 
at a meeting of  the Board or of any Committee of the Board on any question relating to his own conduct 
or vote or take part in  any discussion on any matter, other than a matter affecting generally the inhabitants 
of the cantonment, which affects his own pecunia ry interest or the valuation of any property in respect of 
which he is directly or  indirectly interested, or of any property of or for which he is a manager or agent.  
   
28 
 (2) Where any member of the  Board present at the meeting of the Board or any committee of the 
Board believes that the person presiding  over such meeting has pecuniary or other interest in any matter 
under discussion and moves a motion to that  effect, the person so presiding — 
(a) shall not be entit led to vote on such motion, and  
(b) shall, if  such motion is  carried, absent himself from the meeting during such discussion.  
33. Liability  of members. —Every member of a Board shall be liable for the loss, waste or 
misapplication of any money or  other property belonging to, vested in, or entrusted to the management of, 
the Board if such loss, waste or  misapplication is a direct consequence of his neglect or misconduct while 
such member; and a suit for  compensation for the same may be instituted against him either by the Board  
or by the Central Gover nment.  
34. Removal of members. —(1) The Central Government may remove from a  Board any member 
thereof, who — 
(a) becomes or is found to have been at the time of his election or  nomination subject to any of 
the disqualifications specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 28 or in section 29; or  
(b) has absented himself for more than three consecutive meetings or three months (whichever is 
later) of the  Board and is unable to explain such absence to the satisfact ion of the Board.  
Explanation. —In computing the  aforesaid period of three consecutive months, no account shall 
be taken of  any period of absence with the leave of the Board; or  
(c) has knowingly contravened the provisions of section 32; or  
(d) being a legal  practitioner, acts or appears on behalf of any other person against the Board in 
any legal proceeding or against  the Government in any such proceeding relating to any matter in 
which the Board is or has been concerned or  acts or appears on behalf of any person in any criminal 
proceeding instituted by or on behalf of the Board  against such person; or  
(e) has himself done or aided or abetted encroachments and illegal constructions on  defence land 
in contravention of the provisions of this Act and the rules and bye -laws made thereunder.  
(2) The Centra l Government may remove from a Board any member who, in the opinion of the 
Central  Government, has so abused in any manner his position as a member of the Board as to render his 
continuance  as a member detrimental to the public interests.  
(3) The General Officer Commanding -in-Chief, the Command  may, on receipt of a report from the 
Officer Commanding the station remove from a Board any military officer  nominated as a member of the 
Board who is, in the opinion of the Officer Commanding the station, unable to  discharge his duties as a 
member of the Board and has failed to resign his  office.  
 (4) No member shall be removed from a Board under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of this 
section unless he has been given a  reasonable opportunity of showing cause against his removal.  
 35. Consequences of removal. —(1) A member removed under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) or under 
sub-section ( 3) of section 34 shall, if otherwise qualified, be eligible for re -election or re -nomination.  
(2) A member removed  under clau se (c) or clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 34 shall not be 
eligible for re -election or nomination  for the period during which, but for such removal, he would have 
continued in office.  
(3) A member removed  under sub -section ( 2) of section 34 shall not be eligible for re -election or 
nomination until the expiry of three  years from the date of his removal.  
36. Member of the Board to be deemed a public servant .—Every member of the Board shall be 
deemed to be a  public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and 
clause ( c) of section 2 of the  Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988  (49 of 1988) . 
Employees  
37. Disqualification of person as an employee of Board .—(1) No person who has directly or 
indirectly by himself  or his partner any share or interest in a contract with, by or on behalf of a Board, or 
in any employment under,  by or on behalf of a Board, otherwise than as an employee of the Board, shall 
become or remain an employe e of such Board.   
29 
 (2) An employee of a Board who knowingly acquires or continues to have directly or indirectly  by 
himself or his partner any share or interest in a contract with, by or on behalf of the Board or, in any  
employment under, by or on behalf of , the Board, otherwise than as an employee of the Board, shall be  
deemed to have committed an offence under section 168 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) .  
(3) Nothing in this section  shall apply to any share or interest in any contract with, by or on behalf of, 
or employment under, by or on  behalf of a Board if the same is a share in a company contracting with, or 
employed by, or on behalf of, the  Board or is a share or interest acquired or retained with the permission 
of th e General Officer Commanding -in-Chief, the Command in any lease or sale to, or purchase by the 
Board of land or building or in any agreement  for the same.  
(4) Every person applying for employment as an employee of a Board shall, if he is related by  blood 
or marriage to any member of the Board or to any person not being a lower grade employee, in receipt  of 
remuneration from the Board, notify the fact and the nature of such relationship to the appointing 
authority  before the appointment is made, and if he has failed to do so, his appoi ntment shall be invalid 
but without  prejudice to the validity of anything previously done by him.  
38. Cantonment employee  to be deemed a public servant. —Every officer or employee,  permanent 
or temporary of a Board shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of  the 
Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860)  and clause ( c) of section 2 of the Prevention of Corruption Act,                            
1988  (49 of 1988) .  
Procedure  
39. Meetings .—(1) Every Board shall meet at least once in a month to transact its business on such  
day as may be fixed by the President and in his absence by the Vice -President, and its notice shall be 
given in  such manner as may be provided in the regulations made by the Board under this Chapter.  
(2) The President  may, whenever he thinks fit, and shall, upon a requisition in writing by not less than 
one-fourth of the  members of the Board, convene a special meeting.  
(3) Any meeting may be adjourned until the next or any subsequent day, and an adjourned mee ting 
may be further adjourned in like manner but not more than twice  except in case of a public emergency.  
40. Business to be transacted. —Subject to any regulation made by the Board under this Chapter, 
any business may be transacted at any  meeting:  
Provi ded that no business relating to the imposition, abolition or modification of any tax shall be  
transacted at a meeting unless notice of the same and of the date fixed there  for has been sent to each 
member  not less than seven days before that date.  
41. Qu orum. —(1) The quorum necessary for the  transaction of business at a meeting of the Board 
shall be one -half of the number of members of the Board  holding the office:  
Provided that if the number of members of the Board holding office at a particular time is  an odd 
number, the quorum shall be one -half of the number obtained by a dding one to the number of such 
members.  
(2) If a quorum is not present, the President or in his absence, the Vice -President or in the absence  of 
both, the Member -Secretary shall adjourn the meeting and the business which would have been brought  
before the original meeting if there had been a quorum present thereat shall be brought before, and may 
be transacted at, an adjourned meeting, whether there is a quorum present or not.  
42. Presiding Officer .—In the absence of — 
(a) both the President and the Vice -President from any meeting of a  Board in which there is more 
than one elected member,  
(b) the President from a meeting of a Board  constituted under sub -section ( 6) of section 12 o r 
sub-section ( 2) of section 13,  
the members present shall elect  one from among their own members to preside.   
30 
 43. Minutes. —(1) The minutes of the  proceedings of each meeting shall be recorded in a book and 
shall be signed by the person presiding over the  meeting and the Chief Executive Officer, before the close 
of the meeting and s hall, at such times and in such place as may be fixed by the Board, be open to 
inspection free of charge by any inhabitant of the cantonment  and its authenticated copies may be m ade 
available to him on request, at a nominal cost to be decided by the  Board.  
 (2) Copies of the minutes shall, as soon as possible after each meeting, be forwarded for information 
to every Member of the Board, the General Officer Commanding -in-Chief, th e Command, the District 
Magistrate  and the Defence Estate Officer and in cantonments where Navy or Air Force stations are 
located copies of the  minutes shall be forwarded for information to the Command Headquarters of the 
Navy or, as the case may be,  the A ir Force.  
 44. Meetings to be public .—Every meeting of a Board shall be  open to the public unless in any case 
the person presiding over the meeting, for reasons to be recorded in the  minutes, otherwise directs.  
45. Method of deciding questions .—(1) All qu estions coming before a meeting shall be decided by 
the majority of the votes of the members present  and voting.  
(2) In the case of an  quality of votes, the person presiding over the meeting, shall  have a second or 
casting vote.  
(3) The dissent of  any mem ber from any decision of the Board shall, if the member so requests, be 
entered in the minutes,  together with a short statement of the ground for such dissent.  
 46. Civil area. —(1) The  Central Government may, by notification in Official Gazette, declare the 
civil area, in a cantonment, which is  inhabited largely by civil population to be the civil area for the 
purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Central  Government may in consultation with the Board undertake, as and when required and 
shall undertake after  every census, a review of the boundaries of the civil area in each cantonment.  
47. Committees for civil areas .—(1) Every Board constituted under section 12 in a cantonment shall  
appoint a committee consisting of the elected members of the Board, the Healt h Officer and the Executive  
Engineer for the administration of the civil area in the cantonment as notified under section 46 of this Act 
and may delegate its powers and duties to such committee in the manner provided in clause ( e) of                  
sub-section ( 1) of section 48.  
(2) The Vice -President of the Board shall be the Chairman of the committee appointed under                 
sub-section  (1).  
(3) The powers, duties and functions of the Board under sub -section ( 1) of section 137, section143, 
section 147, section 149 and section 262 shall be exercised or discharged in respect of a civil area by the  
civil area committee:  
Provided that if the Health Officer dissents from any decision arrived at by the committee  under                
sub-section ( 1) of section 137, section 143, section 147 and section 149 on health grounds, the matter  may 
be referred to the Board by the President for decision.  
48. Power to  make regulations. —(1) A Board may make regulations consistent with this Act and 
with the rul es made  thereunder to provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the time and place of its meetings;  
(b) the manner in which notice of the meeting shall be given;  
(c) the conduct of proceedings at meetings and the  adjournments of meetin gs; 
(d) the custody of the common seal of the Board and the purposes for which it shall  be used; and  
(e) the appointment of committees for any purpose and the determination of all matters relating to  
the constitution and procedure of such committees, and the delegation to such committees, subject to 
any conditions which the Board thinks fit to impose, of any of the powers or duties of the Board 
under this Act  other than a power to make regulations or bye -laws.   
31 
 (2) No regulation made under clause ( e) of su b-section ( 1) shall take effect until it has been approved 
by the Central Government.  
(3) No regulation made under this  section shall take effect until it has been published in such manner 
as the Central Government may direct.  
49. Joint action with other local authority. —(1) A Board may — 
(a) join with any other local authority — 
(i) in appointing a joint committee for any purpose in which they are  jointly interested and in 
appointing a chairman of such committee;  
(ii) in delegation to such committee power  to frame terms binding on the Board and such 
other local authority as to the construction and future  maintenance of any joint work or to 
exercise any power which might be exercised by the Board or by such  other local authority; and  
(iii) in making regulations for regulating the proceedings of any such committeer  relating to 
the purposes for which it has been appointed; or  
(b) with the previous sanction of the General  Officer Commanding -in-Chief, the Command, and 
the State Government concerned, ente r into an agreement  with any other local authority regarding the 
levy of any tax or toll whereby the said tax or toll respectively  leviable by the Board and by such 
other local authority may be levied together instead of separately within the  limits of the  area 
hereafter in this section referred to as the aggregate area subject to the control of the Board  and such 
other local authority.  
(2) If any difference of opinion arises between any Board and other local  authority acting together 
under this section, t he decision thereon of the Central Government or of an officer  appointed by the 
Central Government in this behalf shall be final.  
(3) When any agreement such as is referred  to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) has been entered into,  
then— 
(a) where the agre ement relates to octroi or  terminal tax or toll, the party to the agreement (the 
Board, or as the case may be, such other local authority)  which is specified in this behalf in the 
agreement ,— 
 (i) shall have the same powers to establish octroi limits and  octroi stations and places for the 
collection of octroi, terminal tax and toll within the aggregate area as it has  within the area 
ordinarily subject to its control;  
(ii) shall have the same powers of collecting such octroi,  terminal tax or toll in the ag gregate 
area and the provisions of any enactment in  force relating to the levy of  such octroi, terminal tax 
or toll by it shall apply in the same manner as if the aggregate area were comprised  within the 
area ordinarily subject to its control;  
(b) the tot al of the collection of such octroi, tax or toll made in  the aggregate area and the costs 
thereby incurred shall be divided between the cantonment fund and the fund  subject to the control of 
such other local authority, in such proportion, as may have been determined by the  agreement.  
50. Report on administration. —(1) Every Board shall, as soon  as may be after the close of the 
financial year and not later than the date fixed in this behalf by the Central  Government, submit to the 
Central Government through the General Officer Commanding -in-Chief, the  Command, a report on the 
administration of the cantonment during the preceding financial year, in such form  and containing such 
details as the Central Government may direct.  
(2) The comments, if any, of the General  Officer Commanding -in-Chief, the Command, on such 
report shall be communicated by him to the Board  which shall be allowed a reasonable time to furnish a 
reply thereto, and the comments together with the reply,  if any, shall be forwarded to the Cent ral 
Government along with the report.  
   
32 
 Control  
 51. Power of Central Government to require production of  documents .—The Central 
Government or such officer or authority as may be authorised by the Central  Government in this behalf 
may at any time require a Board — 
(a) to produce any record, correspondence, plan or  other document in its possession or under its 
control;  
(b) to furnish any return, plan, estimate, statement,  account or statistics relating to its proceedings, 
duties or works;  
 (c) to furnish or  obtain and furnish any report.  
52. Inspection .—The Central Government or the General Officer Commanding -in-Chief,  the 
Command or the Director General or the Principal Director, may depute any person in the service of the  
Government to inspect or examine a ny department of the office of, or any service or work undertaken by, 
or thing belonging to, a Board, and to report thereon, and the Board and its officers and employees shall 
be bound  to afford the person so deputed access at all reasonable times to the p remises and property of the 
Board and to  all records, accounts and other documents the inspection of which he may consider 
necessary to enable him to  discharge his duties.  
53. Power to call for documents .—The General  Officer Commanding -in-Chief, the Comma nd or the 
Principal Direc tor, may, by order in writing, — 
(a) call for  any book or document in the possession or under the control of the Board;  
(b) require the Board to furnish such  statements, accounts, reports and copies of documents 
relating to its proceedings, duties or works as he thinks  fit. 
 54. Power to require execution of work, etc .—If, on  receipt of any information or report obtained 
under section 51 or section 52 or section 53, the Central  Government or the General Officer 
Commanding -in-Chie f, the Command or the Director General or the  Principal Director is of opinion — 
(a) that any duty imposed on a Board by or under this Act has not been  performed or has been 
performed in an imperfect, inefficient or unsuitable manner; or  
(b) that adequate  financial provision has not been made for th e performance of any such duty,  
it or he may direct the Board,  within such period as it or he thinks fit, to make arrangements to its or his 
satisfaction for the proper  performance of the duty, or as the case may  be, to make financial provision to 
its or his satisfaction for the  performance of the duty:  
Provided that unless in the opinion of the Central Government or the General Officer                
Commanding -in-Chief, the Command or the Director General or the Principal Director, as the case may 
be, the  immediate execution of such order is necessary, it or he shall, before making any direction under 
this section,  give the Board an opportunity of showing cause why such direction should not be made.  
55. Power to provide for enforcement of direction  under section 54 .—If, within the period fixed 
by a direction made under section 54, any action the taking of  which has b een directed under that section 
has not been duly taken, the Central Government or the General  Officer Commanding -in-Chief, the 
Command or the Director General, or the Principal Director, as the case  may be, may make arrangements 
for the taking of such action, and may direct that all expenses connected  therewith shall be defrayed out 
of the cantonment f und. 
56. Power to override decision of Board .—(1) If the President dissents from any decision of the 
Board which he  considers prejudicial to the health, welfare, discipline or security of the Forces in the 
cantonment, he may, for  reasons to be recorded in the minutes, by order in writing, direct the suspension 
of action thereon for any  period not exceeding one month and, if he does so, shall forthwith refer the 
matter to the General Officer  Commanding -in-Chief, the Command.  
(2) If the District Magistrate considers any decision of a Board to be  prejudicial to the public health, 
safety or convenience, he may, after giving notice in writing of his intention to  the Board, refer the matter  
33 
 to the Central Government, and pending the disposal of the reference to the Central  Government no action 
shall be taken on the decision.  
(3) If any Magistrate who is a member of a Board, being  present at a meeting, dissents from any 
decision which he considers prejudicial to the public health, safety or  convenience, he may, f or reasons to 
be recorded in the minutes and after giving notice in writing of his  intention to the President, report the 
matter to the District Magistrate; and the President shall, on receipt of  such notice, direct the suspension 
of action on the decision  for a period sufficient to allow of a communication  being made to the District 
Magistrate and of his taking proceedings as provided in sub -section ( 2).  
(4) If the  Chief Executive Officer considers any decision of the Board taken at a meeting, to be in 
contravention of the  provisions of this Act, rules, regulations or bye -laws made there  under and the 
general guidelines issued by the  Central Government from time to time in this regard, he may, for reasons 
to be recorded in writing and after  informing the P resident in this behalf, forthwith refer the matter to the 
Principal Director who shall if  considered appropriate direct the suspension of action on the said decision 
for a period not exceeding one  month.  
(5) The Principal Director shall, for reasons to b e recorded in writing on the reference made under 
sub-section ( 4), refer the matter to the General Officer Commanding -in-Chief, the Command along with  
recommendation on whether or not the said decision of the Board should be revoked and inform the 
matter t o Director General Defence Estates.  
57. Power of Central  Government to review .—The Central Government may, at any time, review 
any decision or order of the Board  or the General Officer Commanding -in-Chief, the Command, and pass 
such orders thereon as it may deem fit:  
Provided that where it is proposed to modify a decision or order of the Board reasonable opportunity 
shall be  given to the Board to show cause why the decision or order in question should not be modified.  
58. Power of General Officer Comman ding-in-Chief, the Command, on r eference under section 
56 or  otherwise. —(1) The General Officer Commanding -in-Chief , the Command, may at any time — 
(a) direct that any  matter or any specific proposal other than one which has been referred to the 
Central Gover nment under sub -section  (2) of section 56 be considered or reconsidered by the Board; 
or 
 (b) direct the suspension, for such  period as may be stated in the order, of action on any decision 
of a Board, other than a decision which has been  referred to him u nder sub -section ( 1) of section 56, 
and thereafter cancel the suspension or after giving the  Board a reasonable opportunity of show  in 
cause why such direction should not be made, direct that the  decision shall not be carried into effect 
or that it shall b e carried into effect with such modifications as he may  specify.  
(2) When any decision of a Board has been referred to him under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 4) of            
section  56, the General Officer Commanding -in-Chief, the Com mand, may, by order in writing, — 
 (a) cancel the order  given by the President directing the suspension of action; or  
(b) extend the duration of the order for such period  as he thinks fit; or  
(c) after giving the Board a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why such directio n should 
not be made, direct that the decision shall not be carried into effect or that it shall be carried into 
effect  by the Board with such modifications as he may specify.  
59. Power of Central Government on a reference made under section 56 .—(1) When any 
decision of a Board has been referred to the Central Government under sub -section ( 2) of section  56, the 
Central Government may, after consulting the General Officer Commanding -in-Chief, the Command,  by 
order in writing, — 
 (a) direct that no action be taken on the decision; or  
(b) direct that the decision be carried  into effect either without modification or with such 
modifications as it may specify.   
34 
 60. Supersession of Board .—(1) If, in the opinion of the Central Government , any Board is not  
competent to perform or persistently makes default in the performance of the duties imposed on it by or 
under  this Act or otherwise by law, or exceeds or abuses its powers, the Central Government may by an 
order  published, together with the statement of the reasons there  for, in the Official Gazette, declare the 
Board to be  incompetent or in default or to have exceeded or abused its powers, as the case may be, and 
supersede it for  such period as  may be specified in the order:  
Provided that no Board shall be superseded unless a reasonable  opportunity has been given to it to 
show cause against the supersession.  
 (2) When a Board is superseded by an  order under sub -section ( 1)— 
(a) all members of the Board shall, on such date as may be spe cified in the order,  vacate their 
offices as such members but without prejudice to their eligibility for election or nomination under  
clause ( c); 
 (b) during the supersession of the Board, all powers and duties conferred and imposed upon the  
Board by or un der this Act shall be exercised and performed by the Officer Commanding the station, 
or by  such officer as may be authorised by the Central Government, subject to such reservation if any, 
as the Central  Government may prescribe in this behalf; and  
 (c) bef ore the expiry of the period of supersession elections shall  be held and nominations made 
for the purpose of reconstituting the Board.  
Validity of proceeding s 
61. Validity of proceedings, etc .—(1) No act or proceeding of a Board or of any committee of a 
Board  shall be invalid by reason only of the existence of a vacancy in the Board or committee.  
(2) No disqualification  or defect in the election, nomination or appointment of a person acting as the 
President or a member of a Board  or of any such committee  shall vitiate any act or proceeding of the 
Board or committee if the majority of the  persons present at the time of the act being done or the 
proceeding being taken were duly qualified members  thereof.  
(3) Any document or minutes which purport to be the record of the proceedings of a Board or any  
committee of a Board shall, if made and signed substantially in the manner prescribed for the making and  
signing of the record of such proceedings, be presumed to be a correct record of the proceedings of a duly  
convened meeting, held by a duly constituted Board or committee, as the case may be, whereof all the  
members were duly qualified.  
CHAPTER IV  
DUTIES AND  DISCRETIONARY FUNCTIONS  OF BOARDS  
62. Duties of Board .—It shall be the duty of every Board, so far as the funds at its disposal permit, to 
make  reasonable prov ision within the cantonment for — 
(i) lighting streets and other public places;  
(ii) watering streets and other public places;  
(iii) cleansing streets, public places and drains, abating nuisances and removing noxious 
vegetation;  
(iv) regulating offensive, dangerous or obnoxious trades, callings and practices;  
(v) removing, on the ground of public safety, health or convenience, undesirable obstructions and  
projections in streets and other public places;  
(vi) securing or removing dangerous buildings and places;  
(vii) acquiring, maintaining, changing and regulating places for the disposal of the dead;  
(viii) constructing, altering and maintaining streets, culverts, bridges, causeways, markets, 
slaughter -houses, latrines, privies, urinals, drains, drainage works and sewerage works and regulating 
their use;   
35 
 (ix) planting and maintaining trees on roadsides and other public places;  
(x) providing or arranging for a sufficient supply of potable water, where such supply does not 
exist,  guarding from pollution water used for human consumption, and preventing polluted water 
from being so  used;  
(xi) registering births and deaths;  
(xii) preventing and checking spread of dangerous diseases; establishing and maintaining a 
system of public  vaccination and inoculation for the said objective;  
(xiii) establishing and maintaining or supporting public  hospitals, maternity and child welfare 
centres and dispensaries, and providing public medical relief;  
(xiv) establishing and ma intaining or assisting primary schools;  
(xv) rendering assistance in extinguishing fires, and  protecting light and property when fire 
occurs;  
 (xvi) maintaining and developing the value of property vested  in, or entrusted to, the 
management of the Board;  
(xvii) establishing and maintaining civil defence services;  
(xviii) preparing and implementing town planning schemes;  
(xix) preparing and implementing plans for  economic development and social justice;  
(xx) naming and numbering of streets and premises;  
(xxi) according  or refusing permission to erect or re -erect building;  
(xxii) organising, promoting or supporting cultural and  sports activities;  
(xxiii) celebrating Independence Day and Republic Day and incurring expenditure thereon;  
(xxiv) fulfilling any  other obligation imposed upon it by or under this Act or any other law for the 
time being in  force.  
63. Power to manage property .—A Board may, subject to any  conditions imposed by the Central 
Government, manage any property entrusted to its management by the Central Government on such terms 
as to the sharing of rents and profits accruing from such property as may be  determined by rule made 
under section 346.  
64. Discretionary  functions of Board. —(1) A Board may, within the cantonment, make provision 
for— 
(i) laying out in areas,  whether previously built upon or not, new streets, and acquiring land for 
that purpose and for the construction  of buildings, and compounds of buildings, to ab out on such 
streets;  
(ii) constructing, establishing or maintaining  public parks, gardens, offices, dairies, bathing or 
washing places, drinking fountains, tanks, wells and other  works of public utility;  
(iii) reclaiming unhealthy localities;  
(iv) furthering educational objects by measures  other than the establishment and m aintenance of 
primary schools;  
(v) setting up or supporting higher schools,  colleges and vocational, professional and special 
education;  
(vi) constructing, and maintaining works and  structures, including rainwater harvesting, for 
providing supply of wate r for public and private purposes;  
(vii) constituting, maintaining and managing supply and distribution of electricity, including by 
exploiting non -conventional  energy sources, to public and private premises;   
36 
 (viii) taking a census and granting rewards f or information which may tend to secure the correct 
registration of vital statistics;  
(ix) making a survey;  
(x) giving  relief on the occurrence of local epidemics, floods, famines or other natural calamities 
by the establishment or  maintenance of relief w ork or otherwise;  
(xi) securing or assisting to secure suitable places for the carrying on  of any offensive dangerous 
or obnoxious trade, calling or occupation;  
(xii) establishing and maintaining a farm  or other place for the disposal of sewage;  
(xiii) constructing, subsidising or guaranteeing tramways or other  means of locomotion, and 
electric lighting or electric power work;  
(xiv) establishing and maintaining cattle  pounds;  
(xv) arranging for civic reception with prior approval of the Officer Command ing the Station;  
(xvi) providing housing accommodation for any class of inhabitants;  
(xvii) conservation and maintenance of ancient  and historical monuments, archaeological sites 
and remains or place of public importance in the cantonment;  
(xviii) develop ing land resources under the management of the Board;  
(xix) preparing and implementing group  housing schemes;  
(xx) establishing and undertaking remunerative projects;  
(xxi) developing small -scale and  cottage industries;  
(xxii) developing expertise in different areas of urban governance and local self -government  to 
and able to provide consultancy to other Municipal and Development Authorities;  
 (xxiii) adopting any  measure, other than a measure specified in section 62 or in the foregoing 
provisions of t his section likely to  promote the safety, health or convenience of the inhabitants of the 
cantonment;  
(xxiv) establishing and  maintaining or supporting libraries, museums, art galleries, botanical or 
zoological collections;  
(xxv) establishing and maintaining or supporting stadia, gymnasia, akharas and places for sports 
and games;  
(xxvi) establishing theatres and cinemas;  
(xxvii ) organising and managing fairs and exhibitions;  
(xxviii ) constructing  and maintaining: — 
(a) rest -house s;  
(b) poor -houses;  
(c) infirmaries;  
(d) children's home;  
(e) houses for deaf and  dumb and for disabled and handicapped children;  
(f ) shelters for destitute and disabled persons;  
(g) asylums  for persons of unsound  mind;  
(h) old age homes;  
(i) working women's hostels;   
37 
 (xxix) establishing and  managing chemical or bacteriological laboratories for the examination or 
analysis of water, food and drugs for  the detection of diseases or research connected with the public 
health or medical relief;  
(xxx) providing relief  to destitute and disabled persons;  
(xxxi) establishing and maintaining veterinary hospitals;  
(xxxii ) constructing  and maintaining warehouses and godowns;  
(xxxiii ) constructing and managing garages, sheds and stands for  vehicles and cattle sheds;  
(xxxiv ) constructing and managing community halls and convention halls;  
(xxxv) holding seminars, workshops, public debates, and similar activi ties particularly on issues 
and rules and  regulations of civic importance.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of clause ( xvii)— 
 (a) “conservation ” means the  supervision, management and maintenance of a place to retain its 
historical, architectural, aesthetic or cultural  significance or of environment and includes the 
protection, improvement, preservation, restoration,  reconstruction and adoption or a combination of 
more than one of these activities, and the use of such place in  a way that ensures the social as well as 
economic benefits;  
 (b) “ancient and historical monuments,  archaeological si tes and remains or place of public 
importance ” include buildings, arte  facts, structures, areas,  or precincts of historical or aesthetical or 
educational or scientific or cultural or environmental significance,  and those natural features of 
environmental s ignifcance or scenic beauty, as may be declared by the Board.  
(2) A Board may, either within or outside the cantonment, make provision for the doing of anything 
on which  expenditure is declared by the Central Government, or by the Board with the sanction of the 
Central  Government, to be an appropriate charge on the cantonment fund or the cantonment development 
fund.  
65. Power of  expenditure of educational, health and other purposes outside the cantonment .—A 
Board may make  provision subjec t to availability of funds for — 
(i) educational objects in a cantonment;  
(ii) the objectives of  public health and medical care;  
(iii) works relating to water -supply, drainage and lighting;  
(iv) the preservation,  improvement and upgradation of environment,  
outside the ca ntonment, if it is satisfied that the interests of the  residents of the cantonment will be served 
thereby.  
CHPTER V  
TAXES  AND FEES  
Imposition of taxation  
66. General power of taxation .—(1) The Board shall, with the previous sanction of the Central 
Government,  impose the following taxe s for the purposes of this Act: — 
(a) property tax; and  
(b) tax on trades, professions  callings and employments.  
 (2) In addition to the taxes specified in sub -section ( 1) the Board may, for the  purposes of this Act, 
impose any tax which under any enactment for the time being in force may be imposed in  any 
municipality in the State in which the cantonment is situated:   
38 
 Provided that the Board shall revise every  five years, the rates of taxes imposed under                            
sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2): 
Provided further that the Board shall not  abolish any tax imposed under this section or vary it to the 
Board's financial disadvantage without the prior  sanction of the Central Government and the tax 
mentioned in sub -section ( 2) shall not exceed the ceiling  prescribed in this behalf by clause ( 2) of               
article 276 of the Constitution.  
(3) The taxes specified in sub -sections  (1) and ( 2) shall be imposed, assessed and collected in 
accordance with the provisio ns of this Act, rules and the  bye-laws made thereunder.  
(4) Any tax imposed under this section shall take effect from the date of its  notification in the Official 
Gazette or where any later date is specified in this behalf in the notification, from  such l ater date.  
 67. Charging of fees .—The Board shall, for the purposes of this  Act, char ge the following fees, 
namely: — 
(a) licence fee on vehicles and animals;  
(b) licence fee on  advertisements other than advertisements in newspapers;  
(c) fee relating to maintenance of property records;  
(d) processing fee on buildings payable along with application for sanction of the building plan;  
(e) licence fee on  entry of vehicles;  
(f) betterment fee on the increase in land value caused by the execution of any develo pment  work; 
and  
(g) such other fee which the Board may by regulation specify:  
Provided that the fee charged under  clause (g) of this section shall not be less than the cost incurred 
by the Board for or in connection with the  specific service to which the  fee relates.  
 68. Norms of property tax .—Save as  otherwise provided in this Act, the property tax shall be levied 
on lands and buildings in the cantonment and  shall consist of not less than ten and not more than thirty 
per cent . of the annual rateable value of lands and  buildings:  
Provided that the Board may, when fixing the rate at which the property tax shall be levied during  any 
year, determine that the rate leviable in respect of lands and buildings or portions of lands and buildings 
in which any particular class of trade or business is carried on shall be higher than the rate determined in 
respect  of other lands and buildings or portions of other lands and buildings by an amount not exceeding 
one half of  the rate so fixed:  
Provided further that the tax may be levied on graduated scale, if the Board so determines.  
Explana tion.—Where any portion of a land or building is liable to a higher rate of the tax such 
portion shall be  deemed to be a separate property for the purpose of municipal taxation alone.  
69. Framing of preliminary proposals .—When a resolution has been passed by the Board 
proposing  to impose a tax under section 66, the Board shall in the manner prescribed in section 319 
publish a notice  specifying — 
(a) the tax which it is proposed to impose;  
(b) the persons or classes of persons to be made liable  and the description of the property or other 
taxable thing or circumstance in respect of which they are to be  made liable; and  
(c) the rate at which the tax  is to be levied.  
70. Objections and disposal thereof. —(1) Any inhabitant of the cantonment may, within thirty days 
from the  publication of the notice under section 69, submit to the Board an objection in writing to all or 
any of the  proposals contained t herein and the Board shall take such objection into consideration and pass 
orders there  on by special resolution.   
39 
 (2) Unless the Board decides to abandon its proposals contained in the notice published  under              
section 69, it shall submit to the  Central Government through the General Officer Commanding -in-Chief, 
the Command, all such proposals along with the objections, if any, received in connection there  with 
together with its opinion thereon and any modifications proposed in accordance with su ch opinion and the  
notice published under the said section.  
71. Imposition of tax. —The Central  Government may authorise the Board to impose the tax either in 
the original form or, if any objection has been  submitted, in that form or any such modified form  as it 
thinks fit.  
72. Power of Central Government to  issue directions to the Board. —(1) Where  the Central 
Government is of opinion that for securing adequate financial provision for the efficient discharge  of the 
duties and functions of a Board it is necessary so to do, it may issue direc tions to the Board requiring it to 
impose within the cantonment area any tax which it is empowered under this Act to impose and which is 
not already imposed within the said area or to enhance any existing tax in such a  manner or to such an 
extent as the  Central Government considers fit and the Board shall, in accordance with the direction, 
forthwith impose or  enhance such tax in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter:  
Provided that — 
(a) no such directions shall  be issued without giving the Board and the inhabitants of the 
cantonment area, an opportunity of showing  cause why such directions should not be issued;  
(b) the Central Government shall take int o consideration any objection which the Board or any 
inhabita nt of the cantonment area may make against the imposition or  enhancement of such tax;  
(c) it shall not be lawful for the Board to modify or abolish such tax when imposed or  enhanced 
without the sanction of the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Government  may, at any time,  cancel or modify any direction issued by it under                   
sub-section ( 1) with effect from such date as may be specified  in the direction and on and from the date so 
specified the imposition or enhancement of such tax, shall ce ase or  be modified accordingly.  
73. Definition of “annual rateable  value”.—For the purposes of this Chapter , “annual rateable 
value ” means — 
(a) in the case of hote ls, colleges, schools, hospitals, factories and any other buildings which the 
Chief Executiv e Officer decides to assess under  this clause, one -twentieth of the sum obtained by 
adding the estimated present cost of erecting the building to  the estimated value of the land 
appertaining thereto; and  
(b) in the case of building or land not assessed under  clause ( a), the gross annual rent for which 
such building exclusive of furnitu re or machinery therein or such land is actually let or, where the 
building or land is not let or in the opinion of the Chief Executive Officer is let  for a sum less than i ts 
fair letting value, might reasonably be ex pected to let from year to year :  
Provided that,  where the annual rateable value of any building is, by reason of exceptional 
circumstances, in the opinion of the President Cantonment Board, excessive if calcula ted in the aforesaid 
manner, the President Cantonment  Board may fix the annual rateable value at any less amount w hich 
appears to him to be just.  
74. Incidence of taxation. —(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in the notification imposing  
the tax, ever y tax assessed on the annual rateable value of buildings or lands or of both shall be leviable  
primarily upon the actual occupier of the property upon which the said tax is assessed, if he is the owner 
of the  buildings or land or holds them on a building o r other lease granted by or on behalf of the 
Government or the Board or on a building lease from any person.  
 (2) In any other case, the tax shall be primarily leviable as  follows, namely : — 
(a) if the property is let, upon the lessor;  
(b) if the property is sub -let, upon the superior  lessor;  
(c) if the property is unlet, upon the person in whom the right to let the same vests.   
40 
 (3) The liability of  the several owners of any building which is, or purports to be, severally owned in 
parts or flats or rooms or  separate tenements for the payment of such tax or any instal lment thereof 
payable during the period of such  ownership shall be joint and several.  
(4) On failure to recover any sum due on account of such tax from the  person primarily liable, these 
may be recovered from the occupier of any part of the buildings or lands in  respect of which the tax is due 
such portion of the sum due as bears to the whole amount due the same ratio which the rent annually 
payable by such occupier bears to the aggregate amount of rent so payable in respect of  the whole of the 
said buildings or lands, or to the aggregate amount of the letting value thereof, if any, stated in  the 
authenticated assessment list.  
(5) An occupier who makes any payment for which he is not primarily li able under this section shall, 
in the absence of any contract to the contrary, be e ntitled to be reimbursed by the person primarily liable 
for the payment, and, if so entitled, may deduct the amount so paid from the amount of  any rent from time 
to time bec oming due from him to such person.  
Assessment list  
75. Assessment  list.—When a tax assessed on the annual rateable value of buildings or lands or both 
is imposed, the Chief  Executive Officer shall cause an assessment list of all buildings or lands in the 
cantonment, or of both, as the  case may be, to be prepared in such form and in such manner as the Central 
Government may by rule prescribe.  
76. Revision of assessment list. —(1) The Chief Executive Officer shall,  at the same time, give public 
notice of a da te, not less than one month thereafter, when he shall proceed to  consider the valuation and 
assessments entered in the assessment list, and, in all cases in which any property is  for the first time 
assessed or the assessment is increased shall also give wr itten notice thereof to the owner and  to any 
lessee or occupier of the property.  
(2) Any objection to a valuation  or assessment shall be made in writing to the Chief Executive Officer 
before the date fixed in the notice, and shall state in what respect th e valuation or assessment is disputed, 
and all objections so made shall be recorded in a register to be kept for the  purpose by the Chief 
Executive Officer.  
(3) The objections shall be inquired into and investigated, and the  persons making them shall be 
allowed an opportunity of being heard either in person or by authorised agent by  the Chief Executive 
Officer.  
77. Authentication of assessment list. —(1) When all objections made under section 76 have been 
disposed of, and the revision of the valuation and  assessment has been completed, the assessment list 
shall be authenticated by the signatures of the Chief  Executive Officer and the President Cantonment 
Board, who shall, certify that except in the cases if any, in  which amendments have been made as shown 
therein no valid objection has been made to the annual rateable  value or any other matters entered in the 
said list:  
Provided that whenever the General Officer Commanding -in-Chief , the Command or the Principal 
Director comes to the conclusion that the asse ssment lists or any entries  therein have not been correctly 
prepared and are prejudicial to the interests of the Board or of the Central  Government, they may          
suo moto  re-open the said assessment and issue such directions a s deemed fit.  
(2) The  assessment list so authenticated shall be deposited in the office of the Board, and shall there 
be open, free of  charge, during office hours to all owners lessees and occupiers of property comp rised 
therein or the authorised agents of such persons, and a publ ic notice that it is so open shall forthwith be 
published.  
78. Evidential value of assessment list .—Subject to such alterations as may thereafter  be made in 
the assessment list under the provisions of this Chapter and to the result of any appeal made  thereunder, 
the entries in the assessment list authenticated and deposited as provided in section 77 shall be  accepted 
as conclusive evidence — 
(a) for the purposes of assessing any tax imposed under this Act, of the  annual rateable value or 
other valuation  of all buildings and lands to which such entries respectively refer; and   
41 
 (b) for the purposes of any tax imposed on buildings or lands, of the amount of each such tax 
leviable thereon  during the year to which such list relates.  
79. Amendment of  assessmen t list. —(1) The Chief Executive Officer may after obtaining the 
approval of President Cantonment  Board amend t he assessment list at any time — 
(a) by inserting or omitting the name of any person whose name  ought to have been or ought to 
be inserted or omitted; or  
(b) by inserting or omitting any property which ought  to have been or ought to be inserted or 
omitted; or  
(c) by altering the assessment on any property which has  been erroneously valued or assess ed 
through fraud, accident or mistake whether on the part of administration or  assessees; or  
(d) by revaluing or re -assessing any property the value of which has been increased; or  
 (e) in the  case of a tax payable by an occupier, by changing the name of the occupier:  
Provided that no person shall by  reason of any such amendment become liable to pay any tax or 
increase of tax in respect of any period prior to  the commencement of the year in whi ch the assessment is 
made.  
(2) Before making any amendment under sub -section  (1) the Chief Executive Officer shall give to any 
person affected by the amendment, notice of not less  than one month that he proposes to make the 
amendment.  
 (3) Any person interested in any such amendment  may tender an objection to the Chief Executive 
Officer in writing before the time fixed in the notice, and shall  be allowed an opportunity of being heard 
in support of the same in person or by authorised agent.  
80. Prep aration of new assessment list. —The Chief Executive Officer shall  prepare a new 
assessment list at least once in every three years, and for this purpose the provisions of sections  75 to 79 
shall apply in like manner as they apply for the purpose of the prepar ation of an assessment list for the  
first time.  
81. Notice of transfers. —(1) Whenever the title of any person  primarily liable for the payment of a 
tax on the annual rateable value of any building or land to or over such  building or land is transferred, t he 
person whose title is transferred and the person to whom the same is  transferred shall, within three months 
after the execution of the instrument of transfer or after its registration, if  it is registered, or after the 
transfer is effected, if no instru ment is executed, give notice of such transfer to the  Chief Executive 
Officer.  
(2) In the event of the death of any person primarily liable as aforesaid, the person on  whom the title 
of the deceased devolves shall give notice of such devolution to the Chi ef Executive Officer  within            
six months from the death of the deceased.  
(3) The notice to be given under this section shall be in such  form as may be determined by rules 
made under section 346, and the transferee or other person on whom the  title devolves shall, if so 
required, be bound to produce before the Chief Executive Officer any documents  evidencing the transfer 
or devolution.  
 (4) Every person who makes a transfer as aforesaid without giving such  notice to the Chief Executive 
Officer shall  continue liable for the payment of all taxes assessed on the property  transferred until he 
gives notice or until the transfer has been recorded in the registers of the Board, but nothing  in this section 
shall be held to affect the liability of the transfe ree for the payment of the said tax.  
 (5) The Chief  Executive Officer shall record every transfer or devolution of title notified to him 
under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section  (2) in the assessment list and other tax registers of the Board.  
(6) Any failure to comply with the  provisions contained in sub -sections ( 1) to ( 3) shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to ten thousand  rupees.   
42 
 82. No tice of erection of buildings. —(1) If any building is  erected or re -erected within the meaning 
of section 235, the owner shall give notice thereof to the Chief  Executive Officer within thirty days from 
the date of its completion or occupation, whichever is earlier.  
(2) Any person failing to give the notice required by sub -section ( 1) shall be punishable with fine 
which may  extend to five thousand or ten times the amount of the tax payable on the said building, as 
erected or re -erected,  as the case may be, in respect of a period of three months, whichever is greater.  
Remission and refund  
83. Demolition, etc., of buildings .—If any building is wholly or partly demolished or destroyed or  
otherwise deprived of value, the Board may, on the application in writing of the owner or occupier, remit 
or refund such portion of any tax assessed on the annual rateable value ther eof as it thinks fit but no 
remission or  refund shall take effect in respect of any period commencing more than two months before 
the delivery of such  application . 
84. Remission of tax. —In a cantonment when any building or land has  remained vacant and 
unproductive of rent for sixty or more consecutive days the Chief Executive Officer shall  remit or refund, 
as the case may be, one -half of such portion of any tax assessed on the annual rateable value  thereof as 
may be proportionate to the number of days d uring which the said building or land has remained  vacant 
and unproductive of rent:  
Provided that in any cantonment which the Central Government, by  notification in the Official 
Gazette, has declared to be a hill cantonment and in respect of which the Cent ral Government by the same 
or a like notification has declared a portion of the year to be the season for the  cantonment — 
(a) when any building or land is leased for occupation through the season only, but the rent  
charged is the full annual rent, no remis sion or refund shall be admissible under this section in respect 
of anytime outside the season during which the building or land remains vacant;  
 (b) when such building or land has  remained vacant and unproductive of rent, in respect of any 
time, not being  less than sixty consecutive days  during which within the season, the Chief Executive 
Officer shall remit or refund one -half of such portion of  any tax assessed on the annual rateable value 
thereof as bears to the whole of the tax so assessed the same  proportion as the number of days during 
which the building or land has remained vacant and unproductive of  rent bears to the total length of 
the season.  
85. Power to require entry in assessment list of details of buildings .—(1) For the purpose of  
obtaining a partial remission or refund of tax, the owner of a building composed of separate tenements 
may request the Chief Executive Officer at the time of the assessment of the building, to enter in the 
assessment list,  in addition to the annual rateable value of t he whole building, a note recording in detail 
the annual rateable  value of each separate tenement.  
 (2) When any tenement, the annual value of which has been thus separately  recorded, has remained 
vacant and unproductive of rent for sixty or more consecuti ve days one -half of such  portion of any tax 
assessed on the annual rateable value of the whole building shall be remitted or refunded as  would have 
been remitted or refunded if the tenemen t had been separately assessed.  
86. Notice to be given of the  circum stances in which r emission or refund is claimed. —No 
remission or refund under section 84 or section 85  shall be made unless notice in writing of the fact that 
the building, land or tenement has become vacant and  unproductive of rent, has been given to the Chief 
Executive Officer and no remission or refund shall take effect  in respect of any period commencing more 
than fifteen days before the delivery of such notice.  
87. What buildings, etc., are to be deemed vacant. —(1) For the  purposes of sections 84 and 85 no 
building, tenement or land shall be deemed vacant if maintained as a resort  or town or country house or be 
deemed unproductive of rent if let to a tenant who has a continuing right of  occupation thereof, whether 
he is in actual occupation or not.   
43 
 (2) The burden of proving all facts entitling any  person to claim relief under section 83 or section 84 
or section 85 shall be upon him.  
88. Notice to be given of every occupation of vacant  building or house. —(1) The owner of any 
building, tenement or land in respect of which a remission or refund  of tax has been given under                
section 84 or section 85 shall give notice of the re -occupation of such building,  tenement or land within 
fifteen days of such re -occupation.  
 (2) Any owner failing to giv e the notice required by  sub-section ( 1) shall be punishable with fine 
which shall not be less than twice the amount of the tax payable  on such building, tenement or land in 
respect of the period during which it has been re -occupied and which  may extend to  two thousand five 
hundred rupees, or to ten times the amount of the said tax, whichever sum is  greater.  
 
Charge  on immovable property  
89. Tax on buildings and land to be a  charge thereon. —A tax assessed on the annual rateable 
value of any building or land shall, subject to the prior  payment of the land -revenue, if any, due to the 
Government thereon, be a first charge upon the building or  land.  
Octroi, terminal tax and toll  
90.  Inspection of imported  goods, octroi, terminal tax and toll, etc .—Every person bringing or 
receiving any goods, vehicles or animals  within the limits of any cantonment in which octroi or terminal 
tax or toll is leviable shall, when so required by  an officer duly authorised by the Chief Executive Officer 
in this behalf, so far as may be necessary for  ascertaini ng the amount of tax chargeable — 
 (a) permit that officer to inspect, examine or weigh such goods,  vehicles or animals; and  
 (b) communicate to that officer any information, and exhibit to him any bill, in  voice  or 
documen t of a like nature, which such person may possess relating to such goods, vehicles or animals.  
91. Power to seize, etc .—(1) Any person who takes or attempts to take past any octroi  station or any 
other place appointed within a cantonment for the collectio n of octroi, terminal tax or toll any  goods, 
vehicles or animals, on account of which octroi, terminal tax or toll is leviable and thereby evades, or  
attempts to evade, the payment of such octroi, terminal tax or toll and any person who abets any such 
evasion or attempt at evasion, shall be punishable with fine which may extend either to ten times the 
value of such  octroi, terminal tax or toll, or to two thousand five hundred rupees, whichever is greater, 
and which shall not be  less than twice the value of such octroi, terminal tax or toll, as the case may be.  
 (2) In case of non -payment of  any octroi or terminal tax or toll on demand, the officer empowered to 
collect the same may seize any goods,  vehicles or animals on which the octroi, terminal tax or toll  is 
chargeable or any part or number thereof which  is of sufficient value to satisfy the demand and shall give 
a receipt specifying the items seized.  
 (3) The Chief  Executive Officer, or an officer of the Board authorised by him, after the lapse of            
five days from the seizure,  and after the issue of a notice in writing to the person in whose possession the 
goods, vehicles or animals were  at the time of seizure, fixing the time and place of sale, may cause the 
property so seized, or so much thereof  as may be necessary, to be sold by auction to satisfy the demand 
and meet expenses occasioned by the seizure,  custody and safe thereof, unless the demand and expenses 
are in the meantime paid:  
Provided that the Chief  Executive Officer may, in any case, o rder that any article of a perishable 
nature which cannot be kept for five  days without serious risk of damage, or which cannot be kept safe at 
a cost which, together with the amount of  octroi, terminal tax or toll, is likely to exceed its value, shall be 
sold after the lapse of such shorter times as he  may, having regard to the nature of the article, think 
proper.   
44 
  (4) If, at any time before the sale has begun, the  person whose property has been seized tenders to the 
Chief Executive Officer the amount of a ll expenses  incurred and of the octroi, terminal tax or toll, the 
Chief Executive Officer shall release the property seized.  
 (5) The surplus, if any, of the sale proceeds shall be credited to the cantonment fund, and shall, on 
application  made to the Chie f Executive Officer within six months after the sale, be paid to the person in 
whose possession  the property was at the time of seizure, and, if no such application is made, shall 
become the property of the  Board.  
92. Lease o f octroi, terminal tax or toll .—It shall be  lawful for the Chief Executive Officer, with the 
previous sanction of the Board to lease the collection of any  octroi, terminal tax or toll for any period not 
exceeding one year; and the lessee and all persons employed by  him in the management and collection of 
the octroi, terminal tax or toll shall, in respect thereof, — 
 (a) be bound  by any orders made by the Chief Executive Officer for their guidance;  
 (b) have such powers exercisable by  officers or employees of the Board  under this Act as the 
Board may confer upon them; and  
(c) be entitled to the  same remedies and be subject to the same responsibilities as if they were 
employed by the Board for the  management and collection of the octroi, terminal tax or toll, as the 
case may be:  
Provided that no article  distrained may be sold except under the orders of the Chief Executive 
Officer.  
Appeals  
93. Appeals against assessment. —(1) An appeal against the assessment or levy of, or against the  
refusal to refund, any tax under this Act shall lie to the District Court.  
(2) If the  District Court, on the hearing of an appeal under this section, entertains reasonable doubt on 
any question as to the liability to, or the  principle of assessment of, a tax, the Court may, either on its own 
motion or on the application of the appellant,  draw up statement of the facts of the case and the point on 
which doubt is entertained, and refer the statement  with its opinion on the point for the decision of the 
High Court.  
(3) On a reference being made under sub -section  (2), the subsequent proceedings in the case shall be, 
as nearly as may be, in conformity with the rules  relating to references to the High Court contained in 
order XLVI of the First Schedule to the Co de of Civil  Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) . 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section and se ctions 94, 95, 96, 97 and 102, “District  Court ”, 
in relation to a cantonment, means the Principal Civil Court of original j urisdiction having jurisdiction 
over the  area in which that cantonment is situated, and includes such other Civil Court having jurisdiction 
over that area as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this 
behalf, in  consultation with the High Court having ju risdiction over that area.  
94. Costs of  appeal. —In every appeal the costs shall be in the discretion of the District Court hearing 
the appeal.  
95. Recovery of costs from Board .—(1) If the Board fails to pay any cost  awarded to an appellant 
within ten day s after the date of the order for payment thereof, the District Court  awarding the costs may 
order the person having the custody of the balance of the cantonment fund to pay the  amount.  
 (2) Where the appellant fails to pay any costs awarded to the Board w ithin ten days after the date of  
the order for payment thereof, the same shall be recoverable by the Boa rd in the same manner as moneys 
recoverable by the Board under section 324.  
96. Conditions of right to  appeal. —No appeal shall be heard or determ ined under this Chapter 
unless — 
(a) the appeal is, in the case of a tax  assessed on the annual rateable value of buildings or lands or 
both, brought within thirty days next after the  date of the authentication of the assessment list under 
section 77 (exclusive of the time required for obtaining a  copy of the relevant entries therein), or, as  
45 
 the case may be, within thirty days of the date on which an  amendment is finally made under           
section 79 and in the case of any other tax, within thirty days next af ter the  date of the receipt of the 
notice of assessment or of alteration of assessment or, if no notice has been given,   within thirty days 
next after the date of the presentation of the first bill in respect thereof:  
Provided that an  appeal may be admitt ed after the expiration of the period prescribed there  for by 
this section if the appellant  satisfies the District Court before whom the appeal is preferred that he had 
sufficient cause for not preferring it  within that period;  
(b) the amount including the  assessed tax or duty, if any, in dispute in the appeal shall be  
deposited by the appellant every year on or before the due date in the office of the Board till the 
appeal is decided by the District Court.  
97. Finality of appellate orders. —The order of a District Court confirming, setting aside or 
modifying an order in respect of any valuation or  assessment or liability to assessment or taxation shall be 
final: 
Provided that it shall be lawful for the District  Court, upon application or on its own motion, to 
review any order passed by it in appeal if application in this  behalf is made within three months from the 
date of the original order.  
Payment and recovery of taxes  
98. Time and manner of  payment of taxes .—Save as otherwise expressly provided under this Act, 
any tax imposed under the provisions  of this Act shall be payable on such dates and in such manner, as 
the Chief Executive Officer may, by public  notice, direct.  
99. Public notice for taxes due. —(1) When any tax has become due the Chief Executive Officer 
shall cause a separate bill and public notice to be issued as well as  published in a local newspaper 
specifying the tax and the period for which it is due for payment.  
 (2) The tax shall become due for payment from the date of issue of pu blic notice under                   
sub-section ( 1) above.  
(3) Any non -receipt  of a Bill by a person shall not be a cause for non -payment of the tax notified 
under sub -section ( 1).  
100. Notice of demand .—(1) If the amount of tax for which public notice h as been  issued or a bill 
has been presented is not paid within thirty days from the issue of public notice or presentation  of the bill, 
as the case may be, the Chief Executive Officer may cause to be served upon the person liable for  the 
payment of the sam e a notice of demand in the form set forth in Schedule I.  
 (2) For every notice of demand  which the Chief Executive Officer causes to be served on any person 
under this section, a fee of such amount,  not exceeding two hundred rupees as shall in each case be fixed 
by the Chief Executive Officer, shall be  payable by the said person and shall be included in the costs of 
recovery.  
 101. Recovery of tax. —(1) If the person liable for the payment of any tax does not, within thirty 
days from the  service of the not ice of demand, pay the amount due, or show sufficient cause for                   
non-payment of the same to  the satisfaction of the Chief Executive Officer, such sum, with all costs of 
recovery, may be recovered under a  warrant, issued in the form set for th in Schedule II, by distress and 
sale of the movable property or attac hment and sale of the immov able property of the defaulter:  
Provided that the Chief Executive Officer shall not recover  any sum the liability for which has been 
remitte d on appeal under  this Chapter:  
Provided further that the sale of any immovable property attached under this sub -section shall not be 
made save under the orders of the Board.  
(2) Every warrant issued under this section shall be signed by the Chief Executive Officer.  
102. Interest payable on taxes due. —(1) If a person on whom a notice of demand has  been served 
under section 100, does not, within thirty days from the service of such notice, pay the sum  demanded in  
46 
 the notice, he shall be liable to pay by way of interest, in a ddition to the sum and other charges  due one 
per cent., of the sum due for each complete month from the date of expiry of the period of thirty days  as 
aforesaid.  
(2) The amount of interest shall be recoverable in the same manner as moneys recoverable by the 
Board under section 324.  
Provided that — 
(a) where no appeal has been preferred, the Chief Executive officer  with the previous sanction of 
the Board; and  
(b) in any other case, the District Court hearing the appeal under  section 93,  
may remit the who le or any part of the interest payable in respect of any period.  
103. Distress. —(1) It shall be lawful for any official of the Board to whom a warrant issued under  
section 101 is addressed to distrain, wherever it may be found in the cantonment, any movable property of 
or standing timber, growing crops or grass belonging to the person therein named as defaulter, subject to 
the following conditions, ex ceptions and exemption, namely: — 
(a) the following pr operty shall not be distrained — 
(i) the necessary wearing apparel and bedding of the defaulter or of his wife or of his 
children;  
(ii) tools of artisans;  
(iii) books of account; or  
(iv) when the defaulter is an agriculturist, his implements of husbandry,  seed-grain, and such 
cattle as may  be necessary to enable the defaulter to earn his livelihood;  
(b) the distress  shall not be excessive, that is to say, the property distrained shall be as nearly as 
possible equal in value to the  amount recoverable under the warrant, and if any property h as been 
distrained which, in the opinion of the  Chief Executive Officer, should not have been distrained, it 
shall forthwith be returned.  
 (2) The person charged  with the execution of a warrant of distress shall forthwith make an inventory 
of the property which he seizes  under such warrant, and shall, at the same time, give a written notice in 
the form in Schedule III to the person  in possession thereof at the time of seizure that the said property 
will be sold as therein mentioned.  
104. Disposal of distra ined property. —(1) When the property seized is subject  to speedy and 
natural decay, or when the expense of keeping it in custody is, when added to the amount to be  recovered, 
likely to exceed its value, the Chief Executive Officer shall give notice to the person in whose  possession 
the property was at the time of seizure that it will be sold at once, and shall sell it accordingly by  public 
auction unless the amount mentioned in the warrant is forthwith paid.  
(2) If the warrant is not in the  meantime suspended by the Chief Executive Officer, or discharged, the 
property seized shall, after the expiry  of the period named in the notice served under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 103, be sold by public auction by  order of the Chief Executive Officer.  
 (3) For every distraint made under this Chapter a fee of such amount, not  exceeding two hundred 
rupees, as shall in each case be fixed by the Chief Executive Officer shall be charged,  and the said fee 
shall be included in the costs of recovery.  
105. Attachment and  sale of immovable property .—(1) When a warrant is issued for the 
attachment  and sale of immovable property, the attachment shall be made by an order prohibiting the 
defaulter from  transferring or charging the property in any way, and all persons from taki ng any benefit 
from such transfer or  charge, and declaring that such property would be sold unless the amount of tax due 
with all costs of recovery  is paid in the office of the Board within fifteen days from the date of 
attachment.  
(2) An order under sub -section  (1) shall be displayed at some place on or adjacent to such property by 
pasting the same conspicuously  and by publishing the same in a newspaper having circulation in the area  
47 
 in which the property is situated or by  any other means or mode as may be considered appropriate by the 
Chief Executive Officer.  
(3) Any transfer of  or charge on the property attached or any interest thereon made without the 
written permission of the Chief  Executive Officer shall be void as against all claims of the Board 
enforceable under the attachment.  
(4) Where  the sum due to the Board with the cost incurred by the Board in the sale of the property, 
including publication  of notice in newspaper and a sum equal to five per cent. of the purchase money for 
payment to the pu rchaser is  paid by the defaulter, before the confirmation of the sale under                            
sub-section ( 5), the attachment, if any, of the  immovable property shall be deemed to have been removed.  
(5) After the sale of the property by auction as  aforesaid, it shall be confirmed in writing by the Chief 
Executive Officer who shall put the person declared to  be the purchaser in possession of the same and 
shall grant him a certificate to the effect that he has purchased  the property to which the cert ificate refers.  
(6) The Central  Government may make rules for — 
(a) regulating the  manner of execution of warrants for the attachment and sale of immovable 
property;  
(b) charging of fees for  the attachment and sale of immovable property, to be included in t he cost 
of recovery of the tax due;  
(c) summary determination of any claim made by any person other than the person liable for the 
payment of any  tax, in respect of any property attached in execution of warrant under this section.  
106. Recovery from a person  about to leave cantonment and refund of surplus sale proceeds, if 
any.—(1) If the Chief Executive Officer has  reason to believe that any person from whom any sum is due 
or is about to become due on account of any tax  is about to move from the canton ment, he may direct the 
immediate payment by such person of the sum so due  or about to become due, and cause a notice of 
demand for the same to be served on such person.  
(2) If, on the  service of such notice, such person does not forthwith pay the sum so due or about to 
become due, the amount  shall be leviable by distress and sale of movable property or attachment and sale 
of immovable property in the  manner hereinbefore provided in this Chapter, and the warrant of such 
distress and sale or attachment and sale may be issued and executed without any delay.  
 (3) The surplus of the sale proceeds arising out of section 104,  section 105 and this section, if any, 
shall immediately after the sale of the property, be credited to the  cantonment fund, and the notice of such 
credit shall immediately be given to the person whose property has  been sold, or to his legal 
representative and, if such money is claimed, within a period of one year from the  date of notice, a refund 
thereof shall be made to the said person or hi s representative.  
 (4) Any surplus of the  sale proceeds not claimed within one year as aforesaid shall be the property of 
the Board.  
107. Power to institute suit for recovery .—Instead of proceeding against a defaulter  by distress and 
sale of movable property or attachment and sale of immovable property as hereinbefore  provided in this 
Chapter, or after a defaulter has been so proceeded against unsuccessfully or with only partial  success, 
any sum due or the balance of any sum due, as the case may be, f rom such defaulter on account of a  tax 
may be recovered from him by a suit in any court of competent jurisdiction.  
Special provision s relating to taxation, etc  
108. Board to be a Municipality for taxation purposes .—A Board shall be deemed to be a 
municipa l committee for the purposes of taxation as per the Municipal Taxation Act, 1881  (11 of 1881) .  
109. Payment to be made to  a Board as service charges by Central Government or State 
Government .—The Central or the State  Government, as the case may be, shall pay to a Board annually 
service charges for providing collective  municipal services or development work in a cantonment where  
48 
 the Central or the State Government properties  are situated as worked out by the Board based on the 
guidelines issued in this beha lf by the Central  Government or the State Government.  
110. Power to make special provision fo r conservancy in certain cases. —A Board may make 
special  provisions for the cleansing of any factory, hotel, club or group of buildings or lands used for any 
one purpose  and under one management, and may fix a special rate and the dates and other conditions for 
periodical  payment thereof, which shall be determined by a written agreement with the person liable for 
payment of the  conservancy or scavenging tax in resp ect of such factory, hotel, club or group of buildings 
or lands:  
Provided  that, in fixing the amount, proper regard shall be had to the probable cost to the Board of the 
services to be  rendered.  
111. Exemption in case of buildings .—(1) When in  pursuance of section 110, a Board has fixed a 
special rate for the cleansing of any factory, hotel, club or group  of buildings or lands, such premises shall 
be exempted from the payment of conservancy or scavenging tax  imposed in the cantonment.  
(2) The following b uildings and lands shall be exempt from any property tax other  than tax imposed 
to cover the cost of specific services rendered by the Board, namel y:— 
(a) places set apart for  public worship and either actually so used or used for no other purpose and 
rendering services free of cost  without deriving any income whatsoever;  
(b) buildings used for educational purposes, public libraries, playgrounds and dharamshalas 
which are open to the public and from which no income is derived;  
(c) hospitals and  dispen saries maintained wholly by charitable contributions;  
(d) burning and burial grounds, not being the  property of the Government or a Board, which are 
controlled under the provisions of this Act;  
(e) buildings or  lands vested in a Board; and  
(f) any buildi ngs or lands, or portion of such buildings or lands, which are the  property of the 
Government.  
112. General Power o f exemption. —The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, exempt, either wholly or in part from the  payment of any ta x imposed under this Act, any person, 
or class of persons or any property or goods or class of  property or goods.  
113. Exemption of poor persons .—A Board may  exempt, for a period not exceeding one year at a 
time from the payment of any tax, or any portion  of a tax  imposed under this Act, any person who in its 
opinion is by reason of poverty unable to pay the same.  
114. Composition .—(1) The Board may, with the previous sanction of the General  Commanding 
Officer -in-Chief, the Command, allow any person to com pound for any tax.  
(2) Every sum due  by reason of the composition of a tax under sub -section ( 1) shall be recoverable as 
if it were a tax.  
115. Irrecoverable debts .—The Board may write off any sum due on account of any tax or  rate or of 
the costs of recovering any tax or rate if such sum is, in its opinion, irrecoverable:  
 Provided that,  where the sum written off in favour of any one person exceeds two thousand and five 
hundred rupees, the  sanction of the General Officer Commanding -in-Chief, the Comma nd shall be first 
obtained.  
116. Obligation to disclose liability .—(1) The Chief Executive Officer, may,  by written notice, call 
upon any inhabitant of the cantonment to furnish such information as may be necessary  for the purpose of 
ascertaining — 
(a) whet her such inhabitant is liable to pay, or has correctly paid, any tax  imposed under this Act;  
(b) at what amount he should be assessed; or   
49 
 (c) the annual value of the building or  land which he occupies and the name and address of the 
owner or lessee thereof.  
 (2) If any person, when called  upon under sub -section ( 1) to furnish information, neglects to furnish 
it within the period specified in this  behalf by the Chief Executive Officer or furnishes information which 
is not true to the best of his knowl edge or  belief, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 
five thousand rupees and shall also be liable to be  assessed at such amount on account of tax as the Chief 
Executive Officer may deem proper, and the assessment  so made shall, subject to the provisions of this 
Act, be final.  
117. Immaterial error not to affect liability .—No assessment and no charge or demand on account 
of any tax or  fee shall be impeached or affected by reason only of any mistake in the name of any person 
liable to pay su ch tax or fee, or in the description of any property or thing, or any mistake in the amount 
of the assessment,  charge or demand, if the directions contained in this Act and the rules and bye -laws 
made thereunder have in  substance and effect been complied w ith; but any person who sustains any 
special damage by reason of any  such mistake shall be entitled to recover such compensation for the 
same, as the Board may decide.  
118. Distraint not to be invalid by reason of  immaterial defect .—No distress levied or attachment 
made under this Chapter shall be deemed unlawful, nor  shall any person making the same be deemed a 
trespasser, on account only of any defect of form in the notice  of demand, warrant of distress or 
attachment and sale or other proceeding relating  thereto; nor shall any such  person be deemed a trespasser 
ab initio  on account of any irregularity afterwards committed by him; but any  person who sustains any 
special damage by reason of any such irregularity shall be entitled to recover such  compensation for the 
same, as the Board may decide.  
CHAPTER VI  
CANTONMENT  FUND  AND  PROPERTY  
Cantonment fund and cantonment development fund  
119. Cantonment fund and cantonment development fund. —(1) There shall be formed for every 
cantonment a  cantonment fu nd and there shall be placed to the credit there of the following sums, 
namely: — 
(a) the balance if  any, of the cantonment fund formed for the cantonment under the Cantonmen ts 
Act, 1924  (2 of 1924) ; 
(b) all sums  received by or on behalf of the Board.  
(2) There shall also be formed for every cantonment, a cantonment  development fund and there shall 
be placed to the credit, there of the following sums, namely: — 
(i) any sum  received from the Central Government or the Government of any State by way of 
contribut ions, grants,  subsidies or by any other way for the implementation of any specific scheme or 
for the execution of any  specific project;  
(ii) any sum received from any individual or association of individuals by way of gift or  deposit; 
and  
(iii) any sum r aised or borrowed under section 121 for the execution of specific development  
projects.  
120. Custody of cantonment fund and cantonment development fund. —(1) The cantonment fund 
and the cantonment development fund shall be kept in separate accounts which  shall be maintained in 
State Bank of India or any of its subsidiary banks or any nationalised bank or  any scheduled commercial 
bank having its branch either in the cantonment or in the municipal area  adjoining the cantonment.  
Explanation. —In this section, — 
(i) “nationalised bank ” means corresponding  new bank specified in the First Schedule to the 
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of  Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970)  or the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act,1980  (40 of 1980) ;   
50 
  (ii) “State Bank of India ” means the State Bank of India constituted under the State Bank of India  
Act, 1955  (23 of 1955) ;  
(iii) “subsidiary bank ” means a subsidiary bank as defined in the State Bank of India              
(Subsidiary Banks ) Act, 1959  (38 of 1959) .  
(2) The Chief Executive Officer may with the previous sanction of the  President Cantonment Board 
may invest any portion of cantonment fund or cantonment development  fund in securities of Central 
Government or in such securities, including fixed deposits in banks in the  best interest of the Board and 
may dispose of such investments or vary them for others of a like nature.  
(3) The income resulting from any fixed deposit or from any such securities as is referred to in                
sub-section  (2) or from the proceeds of the sale of any such security shall be credited to the cantonment  
fund or, as the case may be, the cantonment development fund.  
(4) Every action taken under sub -sections  (2) and ( 3) may b e subsequently brought to the next 
meeting of the Board.  
121. Power of Board to borrow money. —A Board may from time to time by a resolution passed in 
this behalf borrow money from another Board, on mutually agreeable terms any  sum of money which 
may be req uired for the schemes or projects covered under this Act.  
property  
122. Property. —Subject to any special reservation made by the Central Government all  property of 
the nature hereinafter in this section specified which has been acquired or provided or is  maintained by a 
Board shall vest in and belong to that Board, and shall be under its direction,  manageme nt and control, 
that is to say, — 
(a) all markets, slaughter -houses, manure and night -soil depots, and buildings of every 
description;  
(b) all water -works for the supply, storage or distribution of  water for public purposes and all 
bridges, buildings, engines, materials, and things connected there  with or appertaining thereto;  
(c) all sewers, drains, culverts and water -courses, and all works, mat erials and  things appertaining 
thereto;  
(d) all dust, dirt, dung, ashes, refuse, animal matter, filth and rubbish of  every kind, and dead 
bodies of animals collected by the Board from the streets, houses, privies, sewers,  cesspools or 
elsewhere, or deposited in places appointed by the Board for such purposes;  
(e) all lamps  and lamp -posts and apparatus connected therewith or appertaining thereto;  
(f) all lands or other  property transferred to the Board by the Central or a State Government, or by 
gift, purchase or  otherwise for local public purposes; and  
 (g) all streets and the pavements, stones and other materials  thereof, and also all trees, erections, 
materials, implements, and things existing on or appertaining to  stree ts. 
123. Application of cantonment fund, cantonment development fund and property .—The 
cantonment fund,  cantonment development fund and all property vested in a Board shall be applied for 
the purposes,  whether express or implied, for which, by or under this Act or any other law for the time 
being in force,  powers are conferred or duties or obligati ons are imposed upon the Board:  
Provided that the Board  shall not incur any expenditure for acquiring or renting land beyond the 
limits of the cantonment or fo r constructing any  work beyond such limits except — 
 (a) with the sanction of the Central Government, and  
(b) on such terms and conditions as the Central Government may impose:  
Provided further that priority  shall be given in the order hereinafter set fort h to the following 
liabilities and obligations of a Board,  that is to say, — 
(a) to the liabilities and obligations arising from a trust legally imposed upon or accepted  by the 
Board;   
51 
 (b) to the repayment of, and the payment of interest on, any loan incurr ed under the  provisions of 
the Local Authorities Loan Act, 1914  (9 of 1914)  or under the provisions of this Act.  
(c) to the  payment of establishment charges;  
(d) to the payment of any sum the payment of which is expressly  required by the provisions of 
this Act or any rule or bye -law made thereunder.  
124. Acquisition of immovable property .—When there is any hindrance to the  permanent or 
temporary acquisition upon payment of any land required by a Board for the purposes of  this Act, the 
Central Government may, on the recommendation of the Board, procure the acquisition  there  of under the 
provisions of  the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894) , and  on payment by the Board of the  
compensation  awarded under that Act and of the charges incurred by the Government in connection  with 
the proceedings, the land shall vest in the Board.  
125. Power to make rules regarding  cantonment fund, cantonment develpment fund and 
property .—The Central Government may make  rules consistent with thi s Act to provide for all or any of  
the following matters, namely: — 
 (a) the conditions on which property may be acquired by Boards or on which property vested in a 
Board may  be transferred by sale, mortgage, lease, exchange or otherwise; and  
(b) any other  matter relating to the  cantonment fund or cantonment development fund or 
cantonment property, in respect of which no  provision or insufficient provision is made by or under 
this Act and provision is, in the opinion of the  Central Government necessary.  
CHA PTER VII  
CONTRACTS  
126. Contracts by whom to be executed .—Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, every Board 
shall be  competent to enter into and perform any contract necessary for the purposes of this Act.  
127. Sanction. —(1) Every contract — 
(a) for which budget provision does not exist, or  
(b) which involves  a value or amount exceeding rupees fifty thousand shall require the sanction 
of the Board.  
(2) Every  contract other than a contract such as is referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be sanctioned b y 
the Chief  Executive Officer on behalf of the Board.  
128. Execution of contract .—(1) Every contract made by or on behalf of  a Board, the value or 
amount of which exceeds fifty thousand rupees, shall be in writing, and every  such contract shall, be 
signed by two members, of whom the President or the Vice -President shall be  one, and be countersigned 
by the Chief Executive Officer and be sealed with the common seal of the  Board.  
(2) Where the Chief Executive Officer executes a contract on behalf of the Board  sanctioned  under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 127, he shall submit a report, on the execution of the contract, to the  Board at its 
next meeting.  
129. Contracts improperly executed not to be binding on a Board .—If any contract is executed by 
or on  behalf of a Board, otherwise than in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter, it shall not be  
binding on the Board.  
CHAPTER VIII  
SANITATION AND  THE  PREVENTION AND  TREATMEN T OF DISEASE  
Sanitary authorities  
130. Responsibility for sanitation. —The following officers shall, for the purposes of  sanitation, 
have control over, and be responsible for maintaining in a sanitary condition, those parts of a  cantonment, 
respectively, which are specified in the  case of each, that is to say: — 
(a) the Officer  Comman ding t he army in the cantonment —all buildings and lands which are 
occupied or used for army  purposes;   
52 
 (b) the Officer Comman ding the navy in the cantonment —all buildings and lands which are  
occupied or used for naval purposes;  
(c) the Officer Commanding the ai r force in the cantonment —all buildings and lands which are 
occupied or used for air force purposes;  
 (d) the Officer Commandi ng the station in the cantonment —all buildings and lands, occupied or 
used for any defence purpose, other than  those referred to in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c);  
(e) the head of any civil department or railway  administration occupying as such any part of the 
cantonment —all buildings and lands in his charge as  head of that department or administration;  
(f) the head of any establishment  or installation of the  Defence Research and Development 
Organisation in the cantonment —buildings and lands which are  occupied or used for the purposes of 
the Defence Research and Development Organisation in the  cantonment;  
(g) the head of a Public Sector  Undertaking —the buildings and lands belonging to such  
undertaking in the cantonment;  
(h) the Chief Executive Officer —the buildings and lands in the civil area  of the cantonment and 
all other buildings and lands not covered in clauses ( a) to ( g) above.  
131. General duties of Health Officer. —(1) The Health Officer shall be the Advisor to the Board in 
all matters relating to sanitation and exercise a general sanitary supervision over the cantonment and shall  
periodically submit a report along with his recommendations at least once in every month to the Board.  
(2) The Assistant Health Officer shall perform such duties in connection with the sanitation of the  
cantonment as are, subject to the control of the Board, allotted to him by the Health Officer.  
Conservancy and sanitation  
132. Public latrines, urinals and c onservancy establishments. —All public latrines and urinals 
provided or maintained by a Board shall be so constructed as to provide  separate compartments for each 
sex and the compartments so cons tructed shall be made accessible to and  barrier free for the persons with 
disabilities and shall be provided with all necessary conservancy  establishments, and shall regularly be 
cleansed and kept in proper order.  
133. Duty of occupier to co llect and depos it rubbish, etc. —(1) It shall be the duty of  an occupier of 
a building or land — 
(a) to make adequate arrangements for the house scavenging of the building  or land;  
(b) to provide receptacles of the type and in the manner prescribed by the Chief Executive Officer 
for the collection therein of all filth, rubbish and other offensive matter from such building or land 
and to keep  such receptacle in good condition and repair;  
(c) to cause all filth, rubbish and other offensive matter collected  in receptacles an d to be 
removed and deposited in the public receptacles, depots or places provided or  appointed under                
sub-section ( 1) of section 135.  
(2) For the purpose of  this section and section 134, “house  scavenging ” means the removal of filth, 
rubbish  or other offensive matter from a privy, latrine, urinal, drain,  cesspool or other common receptacle 
for such matter.  
134. Power of Board to undertake private conservancy arrangement .—(1) On the  application or 
with the consent of the occupier of any building or land, or, where the occupier of any building  or land 
fails to make arrangements to the satisfaction of the Chief Executive Officer for the matters referred to  in 
this section, without such consent, and after giving notice in writing to th e occu pier, the Chief Executive 
Officer may undertake the house scavenging of any building or land in the cantonment for such period as 
he thinks fit on such terms as he may specify in this behalf.  
(2) Where the Chief Executive Officer has undertaken  the duties referred to in this section, all matter 
removed in the performance of such duties shall be the property  of the Board.   
53 
 135. Deposits and disposal of rubbish, etc. —(1) Every Board shall provide or appoint, in proper 
and convenient situations, public receptac les, depots or places  for the temporary deposit or disposal of 
household rubbish, offensive matter, car  cases of dead animals and  sewage.  
(2) The Chief Executive Officer may, by public notice, issue directio ns as to the time at which, the 
manner in which,  and the conditions subject to which, any matter referred to in sub -section ( 1) may be  
removed along a street or may be deposited or otherwise disposed of.  
(3) All matter deposited in receptacles,  depots or places provided or appointed under this section shall 
be the property of the Board.  
136. Cesspools, receptacles, for filth, etc .—The Chief Executive Officer of any canton ment may, by 
notice in writing — 
(a) require any person having the control w hether as owner,  lessee or occupier of any land or 
building in  the cantonment — 
(i) to close any ce sspool appertaining to the land or building which, in the opinion of the Chief 
Executive Officer, is a nuisa nce, or  
(ii) to keep in a clean condition, in such manner as may be prescribed by notice, any receptacle 
for filth or sewage accumulating on  the land or in a building, or  
(iii) to prevent the water of any private latrine, urinal, sink or bathroom or any other offensive 
matter, from soaking, draining or flowing, or being put, from the land or building upon any  street or 
other public place, or into any water -course or into any drain not intended for the purpose, or  
(iv) to collect and deposit for removal by the conservancy establishment of the Board, w ithin 
such time and in such  receptacle or place, as may be specified in the notice, any offensive matter or 
rubbish which such person has  allowed to accumulate or remain under, in or on such building or 
land; or  
(b) require any person to desist from  makin g or altering any drain leading into a public drain; or  
(c) require any person having the control of a drain  in the cantonment to cleanse, purify, repair or 
alter the same, or otherwise put it in good order, within such time as may be specified in the noti ce.  
137. Filling up of tank, etc. —(1) Where  any well, tank, cistern, reservoir container, desert cooler or 
any other, receptacle or place in the cantonment  where water is stored or accumulated, whether within any 
private enclosure or not, is in such a con dition as to  create a nuisance or, in the opinion of the Health 
Officer, is or is likely to be a breeding place for mosquitoes,  the Board may, by notice in writing, require 
the owner, lessee or occupier thereof within such period as may be  specified in the  notice, to fill up or 
cover the well, cistern, reservoir or receptacle, or to fill up the tank, or to  drain off or remove the water, as 
the case may be.  
(2) The Board may from time to time take such measures as  are necessary in its opinion for 
prevention  of breeding of mosquitoes, insects or any bacterial or viral carriers  of disease in public places 
under the control or management of the Board.  
 (3) The Board may, if it thinks fit,  meet the whole or any portion of the expenses incurred in 
execution of wo rk mentioned in sub -sections ( 1) and  (2) of this section.  
138. Provision of latr ines, etc. —The Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the 
owner or lessee of any building or land in the cantonment to  provide, in such manner as may be sp ecified 
in the notice, any latrine, urin al, cesspool, dust -bin or other receptacle for filth, sewage, or rubbish, or any 
additional latrine, urinal, cesspool or other receptacle as  aforesaid, which should, in his opinion, be 
provided for the building or la nd.  
139. Sanitation in factories, etc .—Every person employing, whether on behalf of the Government or  
otherwise, more than ten workmen or labourers, and every person managing or having control of a 
market,  school, theatre or other place of public resort, in a cantonment shall give notice of the fact to the 
Chief  Executive Officer, and shall provide such latrines and urinals, and shall employ such number of  
54 
 sweepers, as  the Chief Executive Officer thinks fit, and shall cause the latrines and urinals to be k ept 
clean and in proper  order:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply in the case of a factory to which the Factories              
Act, 1948  (63 of 1948) applies.  
 140. Private latrines .—Subject to the provisions of the Employment of Manual Scavenger and 
Construction of Dry Latrine (Prohibition) Act, 1993  (46 of 1993) , the Chief Executive Officer or any  
official of the Board authorised by him may, by notice in writing, — 
(a) require the owner or other person having  the control of any private l atrine, or, urinal in the 
cantonment not to put the same to public use; or  
(b) where  any plan for the construction of private latrines or urinals has been approved, and 
copies thereof may be  obtained  free of charge on application — 
(i) require any person repairing or constructing any private latrine or  urinal not to allow the 
same to be used until it has been inspected by an official of the Board authorised by the  Chief 
Executive Officer, or under the direction of the Health Officer and approved by him as 
conforming with  such plan; or  
(ii) require any person having control of any private latrine or urina l to re -build or alter the 
same in accordance with such plan; or  
(c) require the owner or other person having the control of any such private  latrine or urinal 
which, in the opinion of the Chief Executive Officer, constitutes a nuisance, to remove the  latrine or 
urinal; or  
(d) require any person having the control whether as owner, lessee or occupier of any land  or 
building in the cantonment — 
(i) to have any latrines provided for the same shut out by a sufficient roof and  wall or fence 
from the view of persons passing by or dwelling in the neighborh ood, or  
(ii) to cleanse in such manner as the Chief Executive Officer may specify in the notice any 
latrine o r urinal belonging to the land or  building;  
 (e) require any person being the owner and having the control of  any drain in the cantonment to 
provide, within ten days from the service of the notice, such covering as may be specified in the 
notice.  
141. Special provisions for  collection of rubbish and solid waste management. —(1) All solid 
waste material generated in a cantonment  shall be removed by the Board and be brought to the compost 
sites or sanitary land sites or trenching sites  earmarked by it for the purpose . 
(2) The Board shall also devise schemes for collecting rubbish and garbage  from each house in the 
cantonment and may, if considers necessary, associate residents' welfare associations or  such other            
non governmental organisation for this purpose.  
(3) As far as possible the Board shall devise  appropriate system to ensure that all compostable or            
bio-degradable waste in the cantonment is recycled and  used for generating manure, bio -gas or any other 
form of energy.  
142. Remov al of congested buildings .—(1) Where it appears to a Board that any block of buildings 
in the  cantonment is in an unhealthy condition by reason of the manner in which the buildings are 
crowded together,  or of the narrowness or closeness of the street, or of the want of proper drainage or 
ventilation, or of the  impracticability of cleansing the buildings or other similar cause, it may cause the 
block to be inspected by a  committee consisting of — 
(a) the Health Officer,  
(b) the Civil Surgeon of the district  or, if his services are not  available, some other medical officer 
in the service of the Government,  
(c) the Executive Engineer or a person  deputed by the Executive Engineer in this behalf, and   
55 
 (d) two non -official members of the Board.  
(2) The  committee  shall make a report in writing to the Board regarding the sanitary condition of the 
block, and, if it  considers that the condition thereof is likely to cause risk of disease to the inhabitants of 
the building or of the  neighbourhood or otherwise to endang er the public health, it shall clearly ind icate 
on a plan verified by the Executive Engineer or the person deputed by him to serve on the committee, the 
buildings which should in its  opinion wholly or in part be removed in order to abate the un healthy 
cond ition of the block.  
(3) If, upon receipt  of such report, the Board is of opinion that all or any buildings indicated should be 
removed, it may, by notice  in writing, require the  owners thereof to remove them:  
Provided that the Board shall make compensation  as it thinks fit to the owners for any buildings so 
removed which have been erected under proper authority:  
Provided  further that the Board may if it considers it equitable in the circumstances so to do pay to the 
owners such sum  as it thinks fit as compensation for any buildings so removed which hav e not been 
erected under proper authority.  
(4) For the purposes of this section “buildings ” includes enclosure, walls and fences appertaining to  
buildings.  
 143. Overcrowding of dwelling hous es.—(1) Where  it appears to a Board that any building or part 
of a building in the cantonm ent which is used as a dwelling house is so overcrowded as to endanger the 
health of the inmates thereof, it may, after such inquiry as it thinks  fit, by notice in writing require  the 
owner or occupier of the building or part thereof, as the case may be, within  such time not being less than 
one month as may be specified in the notice, t o abate the overcrowding of the same by reducing the 
number of lodgers, tenants, or other inmates  to such number as may be specified in the  notice.  
(2) Any person who fails, without reasonable cause, to comply with a requisition made upon him 
under  sub-section ( 1) shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand five hundred 
rupees, and , in the case of a continuing offence, to an additional fine which may extend to two hundred 
fifty rupees for everyday after the first during which the failure has continued.  
144. Power to require repair or alteration of building. —(1) Where any  building i n a cantonment is 
so ill-constructed or dilapidated as to be, in the opinion of the Board, in an insanitary state, the Board 
may, by  notice in writing, require the owner, within such time as may be specified in the notice, to 
execute such repairs  or to make such alterations as it thinks necessary for the pu rpose of removing such 
defects.  
(2) A copy of every  notice issued under sub -section ( 1) shall be conspicuously pasted on the building 
to which it relates.  
(3) A notice issued under sub -section ( 1) sha ll be deemed to have been complied with, if the owner of 
the building to  which it relates has, instead of executing the repairs or making the alterations directed by 
the notice, removed  the building.  
145. Power to require land or  building to be cleansed. —(1) If any building or land, wheth er 
tenantable or otherwise, is — 
(i) in an insanitary,  filthy or unwholesome state; or  
(ii) in the opinion of the Chief Executive Officer, a nuisance to persons residing  in the 
neighbourhood; or  
(iii) overgrown with prickly -pear or rank and noisome vegetation the Chief Executive  Officer 
may, by notice in writing, require the owner, lessee or occupier of such buil ding or land to clean,        
lime-wash internally or externally, clear, or otherwise put such building or land in a proper state 
within such period as may be specified in the notice.  
(2) Any person who fails to comply with the notice issued under sub -section (1) shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, and, in the case of a cont inuing  offence, with an 
additional fine which may extend to two hundred fifty rupees for each day after the first  during which the 
offence continues.   
56 
 146. Prohibition in respect of air pollutant .—No owner, occupier, lessee or any other occupant of 
the pre mises shall allow or cause  to be allowed any air pollutant above the standards, laid down under 
clause ( g) of sub -section ( 1) of section 17  of the Air (Prevention and  Control of Pollution)                               
Act, 1981  (14 of 1981) .  
147. Power to order disuse of house. —If a Board is satisfied that any building or part of a building 
in the cantonment  which is intended for or used as a dwelling place is unfit for human habitation, it may 
cause a notice to be  pasted on some conspicuous part of the building prohibiting the owner or occupier 
thereof from using the  building or room for human habitation, or allowing it to be so used, until it has 
been rendered fit for such use to  the satisfaction of the Board.  
148. Removal of noxious  vegetation. —The Ch ief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, 
require the owner, lessee, or occupier of  any land in the cantonment to clear away and remove any thick 
or noxious vegetation or undergrowth which  appears to him to be injurious to health or offensive to 
persons residing in the neighbourhood.  
 149. Agriculture and irrigation. —Where, in the opin ion of a Board, the cultivation in the 
cantonment of any description of crop or the use therein of any kind of manure or the irrigation of any  
land therein in any spec ified manner is likely to be injurious to the health of persons dwelling in the  
neighbourhood, the Board may, by public notice, prohibit such cultivation, use or irrigation after such 
date as  may be specified in the notice, or may, by a like notice, direct  that it shall  be carried out subject to 
such conditions as the Board thinks fit : 
 Provided that if, when a notice is issued under this section, any land to  which it relates has been 
lawfully prepared for cultivation or any crop is sown therein or is standing there  on, the Board shall, if it 
directs that the notice is to take effect on a date earlier than that by which the crop would  ordinarily be 
sown or reaped, as the case may be, make compensation to all persons interested in the land or  crop for 
the loss, if any, incurred by them respectively by reason of compliance with the notice.  
Burial and burning grounds  
150. Power to call for information  regarding burial and burning grounds .—The Chief Executive 
Officer may, by notice in writing, re quire the  owner or person in -charge of any burial or burning ground 
in the cantonment to supply such information as  may be specified in the notice concerning the condition, 
management or position of such ground.  
151. Permission for use of new burial or bur ning ground .—(1) No place in a cantonment which 
has not been used as a burial or burning ground before the  commencement of this Act shall be so used 
without the permission in writing of the Board.  
(2) Such  permission may be granted subject to any conditions which the Board thinks fit to impose 
for the purpose of  preventing annoyance to, or danger to the health of, persons residing in the 
neighbourhood.  
152. Power to require closing of burial or burning ground .—(1) Where a Board, after making or 
causing to be made local inquiry, is of opi nion that any burial or burning ground in the cantonment has 
become offensive to, or dangerous to the h ealth of, persons living in the neighbourhood, it may,  with the 
previous sanction of the Central Government by no tice in writing, require the  owner or person in charge 
of such ground to close the same from such date as may be specified in the notice.  
(2) Where the Central Government sanctions the issue of any notice under sub -section ( 1) it shall 
declare the  conditi ons on which the burial or burning ground may be re -opened, and a copy of such 
declaration shall be  annexed to the notice.  
(3) Where the Central Government sanctions the issu es of any such notice, it shall require a new 
burial or burning ground to be prov ided at the expense of the cantonment fund, or, if the  community 
concerned is willing to provide a new burial or burning ground, the Central Government shall  require a 
grant to be made from the cantonment fund towards the cost of the same.   
57 
 (4) No corpse s hall be  buried or burnt in any burial or burning ground in respect of which a notice 
issued under this section is for the  time being in force.  
153. Exemption from operation of sections 150 to 152. —The provisions of sections 150, 151 and 
152 shall not apply in the case of  any burial ground which is for the time being managed by or on behalf 
of the Government.  
154. Removal of corpses. —The Board may, by public notice, prescribe routes in the cantonment by  
which alone corpses may be removed to burial or bu rning grounds.  
 
Prevention of infectious, contagious or communicable diseases  
155. Obligation concerning infectious,  contagi ous or communicable diseases. —(1) Any person 
being in charge of,  or in attendance, whether as a medical practitioner or otherwise, upon any person in a 
cantonment whom he knows or has reason to believe to  be suffering from a contagious, communicable or 
infectious disease, or being the owner, lessee or occupier of  any building in a cantonment in which he 
knows that any person is so suf fering, shall forthwith give  information to the Board respecting the 
existence of such disease.  
(2) No person shall — 
(a) knowing that he is  suffering from a contagious, communicable or an infectious disease, 
expo se other persons to the risk of infection by  his presence or conduct in any public street or public 
place;  
(b) having the care of a person whom he knows to be suffering from a contagious, communicable 
or an infectious disease cause or permit that person  to expose other persons to the risk of infecti on by 
his presence or conduct  in any such street or place as aforesaid;  
(c) place or cause to be placed in a dustbin or other receptacle for the deposit of rubbish any 
matter  which he knows or has reason to believe to have been exposed to infection from a  contagious, 
communicable  or an infectious disease and which has not been disinfected properly;  
(d) throw or cause to be thrown into any  latrine or urinal any matter which he knows or has 
reason to believe to have been exposed to infection from a  contagio us, communicable or an infectious 
disease and which has not been disinfected properly.  
(3) Nothing  contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall apply in the case of ve nereal disease 
where the person suffering there  from is under specific and adeq uate medical treatment and is by reason 
of his habits and  conditions of life and residence unlikely to spread the disease.  
(4) Whoever — 
(a) fails to give information or  gives false information to the Board respecting the existence of 
such disease as is referred to in sub -section ( 1), or 
(b) contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 2), shall be punishable with fine which may exte nd 
to one thousand rupees:  
Provided that no person shall be punishable for failur e to give information if he had reasonable c ause 
to believe that the information had already been duly given.  
156. Blood Bank .—Subject to the provisions of any Act made in this regard and the rules and 
regulation made thereunder, whoever, being in charge of a blood bank or any other establishment w hich 
collects or supplies  blood, plasma, marrow or any other substance for transfusion or treatment of patients 
or for any other medical  use, fails to take adequate precautions or exercise adequate supervision thereby 
leading to or resulting in the  supply of infected or contaminated blood, plasma, marrow or any other 
substance, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to five years or with fine which may 
extend to one lakh rupees or with both.  
157. Special measures incase of outbreak of infectious or epidemic diseases. —(1) In the event of 
a cantonment being visited or  threatened by an outbreak of any infectious or contagious disease among  
58 
 the inhabitants thereof or of any  epidemic disease among any animals therein, the Officer Commanding 
the Station, if he thinks that the  provisions of this Act or of any law for the time being in force in the 
cantonment are insufficient for the  purpose, may, with the previous sanc tion of the Central Government — 
(a) take such special measures, and  
(b) by pu blic notice, make such temporary regulations to be observed by the public or by any 
class or section of  the public, as he thinks necessary to prevent the outbreak or the spread of the 
disease:  
Provided that where in  the opinion of the Officer Commanding the Station, immediate measures are 
necessary, he may take action  without such sanction as aforesaid and, if he does so, shall forthwith report 
such action to the Central  Government.  
(2) Whoever commits a breach of any temporary regulation made under sub -section ( 1) shall be  
deemed to have committed an offence under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) .  
158. Power to require names of dairyman's customers. —Where it is certified  to the Chief 
Executive Officer by a medical practitioner that the outbreak or spread of any infectious or  contagious 
disease in the cantonment is, in the opinion of such medical practitioner, attributable to the milk  supplied 
by any dairyman, the Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the dairyman, wi th in 
such time as may be specified in the notice, to furnish him with a full and  complete list of the names and 
addresses of all his customers within the cantonment, or to give him such information as will enable him 
to trace the persons to whom the dairy man has sold milk.  
159. Power to require names of a washerman's  customers. —Where it is certified to the Chief  
Executive Officer by the Health Officer that it is desirable, with a view to prevent the spread of any 
infectious  or contagious disease in the ca ntonment, that the Health Officer should be furnished with a list 
of the customers  of any washerman, the Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the 
washerm an, within a time to be specified in the notice, to furnish the Health Officer wi th a full and 
complete list of the names and  addresses of all owners within the cantonment of clothes and other articles 
which the washerman washes or has  washed during the six weeks immediately pr eceding the date of the 
notice.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of  this section, the expression “washerman ” shall mean an individual, 
body corporate, association of persons  engaged in washing clothes in a cantonment.  
160. Power to require names of patients or customers of a  medical pract itioner or paramedical 
workers. —Where it is certified to the Chief Executive Officer by the Health  Officer or a doctor in the 
employment of the Board that there is apprehension of the outbreak or spreading of any infectious or 
contagious or communicable disease in the cantonment  because of use of contaminated needles, syringes 
or any other such equipment by a medical practitioner or by any paramedical worker, the  Chief Executive 
Officer may, by notice in writing, require the medical practitioner or the paramedical worker,  within such 
time as may be specified in the notice, to furnish him with a full and complete list of the names and  
addresses of all his customers or patients within the cantonment, or to give him such information as will 
enable  him to trace the persons whom the me dical practitioner or the paramedical worker has attended to 
or treated in  the six weeks preceding the date of issuing the notice.  
161. Report after inspection of dairy or washerman or medical  practitioner's place of 
business .—Where, after inspection the Health Officer is of opinion that any infectious,  contagious or 
communicable disease is caused or is likely to arise in the cantonment from the consumption of  the milk 
supplied from a dairy or from the washing of clothes or other art icles in any place, or from any process 
employed by a washerman, or from use of contaminated needles, syringes or other such equipment by  a 
medical practitioner or any paramedical staff, he shall report the matter to the Chief Executive Officer.  
162. Action on repo rt submitted b y Health Officer. —Upon receipt of a report submitted by the 
Health Officer under section 161, the Chief Executive Officer may,  by notice in writing, — 
(a) prohibit the supply of milk from the dairy until the notice has been withdrawn; or   
59 
 (b) prohibit the w asherman from washing clothes or other articles in any such place or by any 
such process as  aforesaid until the notice has been withdrawn or unless he uses such place in such 
manner, or washes by  process, as the Chief Executive Officer may direct in the no tice; or  
(c) prohibit the medical practitioner or the  paramedical worker from using any such needles, 
syringes or other such  equipment unless the notice is withdrawn or rectification as may be required in 
the notice is carried out.  
163. Examination of milk, washed clo thes or needles, syringes, etc. —The Health Officer or a 
doctor in the employment of the Board may take possession of any milk, clothes or  other articles which 
are or have recently been in the possession of any dairyman on whom a notice has been  served under 
section 158, or of any clothes or other articles which are or have recently bee n in the possession of any 
washerman, on whom a notice has been served under section 159, or any needles, syringes or such other  
equipment which are or have re cently been in the possession of the medical practitioner or paramedical 
worker  to whom a notice under section 160 has been issued and may subject t he same or cause the same 
to be subjected to such chemical or other process as he may think necessary; a nd the Board shall pay from 
the cantonment fund all the costs of the process and shall also pay to the owner of the milk, clothes or 
other articles such sum as compensation for any loss occasioned by such process as may  appear to it to be 
reasonable.  
164. Cont amination of public conveyance .—Whoever in a  cantonment — 
(a) uses a public conveyance while suffering from an infectious or contagious disease, or  
(b) uses  a public conveyance for the carriage of a person who is suffering from any such disease, 
or  
(c) uses a public  conveyance for the carriage of the corpse of a person who has died from any 
such disease,  
shall be bound to  take proper precautions against the communication of the disease to other persons using 
or who may there  after use the conveyance and  to notify such use to  the owner, driver or person in  charge 
of the conveyance, and  further to report without delay to the Chief Executive Officer the number of the 
conveyance and the name of  the person so notified.  
165. Di sinfection of public conveyance .—(1) Where any person suffering from, or the corpse of any 
person who has died from, an infectious,  communicable or contagious disease has been carried in a public 
conveyance which ordinarily plies in a  cantonment, the driver thereof shall forthwith report the fact to the 
Chief Executive Officer who shall forth  with cause the conveyance to be disinfected if that has not 
already been done.  
(2) No such conveyance shall be  brought again into use until the Chief Executive Officer has granted 
a certificate stating that it can be used without causing risk of infection.  
166. Penalty for failure to report .—Whoever fails to make to the Chief Executive Officer any report 
which he i s required to make by section 164  or section 165 shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees.  
167. Driver of  conveyance not bound to carry person suffering from infectious or c ontagious 
disease. —Notwithstanding  anything contained  in any law for the time being in force, no owner, driver or 
person in  charge of a public conveyance shall be bound to convey or to allow to be conveyed in such 
conveyance in or in the vicinity of a  cantonment any person suffering from an infectious or con tagious 
disease or the corpse of any person who has  died from such disease unless and until such person pays or 
tenders a sum fixed by the Chief Executive Officer  from time to time, to cover any loss and expense 
which would ordinarily be incurred in disinf ecting the  conveyance.  
168. Disinfection of building or articles  therein .—Where a Board is, upon the advice of the Health 
Officer, of opinion that the cleansing and disinfection  of any building or part of a building in the 
cantonment or of any articles in  any such building or part which are  likely to retain infection, or the 
renewal of the flooring of any such building or part of such building, wou ld tend to prevent or check the 
spread of any infectious or contagious disease, the Board may by notice in wri ting, require the owner or  
60 
 occupier to cleanse and disinfect, the said building, part or articles, as the case may be, or  to renew the 
said flooring, within such time as may be specified in the noti ce:  
Provided that where, in the opinion of the Board the owner or occupier is from poverty or any other 
cause unable effectually to carry out  any such requisition, the Board may, at the expense of the 
cantonment fund, cleanse and disinfect the building,  part or articles, or as the case may be, renew the 
flooring .  
169. Destruc tion of infectious hut or shed. —(1) Where the destruction of any hut or shed in a 
cantonment is, in  the opinion of the Board, necessary to prevent the spread of any infectious or contagious 
disease, the Board  may, by notice in writing, requi re the owner to destroy the hut or shed and th e 
materials thereof within such time as may be specified in the notice.  
 (2) Where the President of a Board is sa tisfied that the destruction of any hut or shed in the 
cantonment is immediately necessary for th e purpose of preventing the spread of any  infectious or 
contagious disease, he may order the owner or occupier of the hut or shed to destroy the same  forthwith, 
or may himself cause it to be destroyed after giving not less than two hours' notice to the own er or  
occupier thereof.  
(3) The Board shall pay compensation to the owner of any hut or shed destroyed under this  section.  
170. Temporary shelter for inmates of disinfected or destroyed building or shed .—The Board 
shall provide free of  charge temporary shelter or house accommodation for the members of any family in 
which an infectious or  contagious disease has appeared who have been compelled to leave their dwelling 
by reason of any  proceedings taken under section 168 or section 169, and who desire such shelter or 
accommodation as  aforesaid to be provided for them.  
171. Disinfection of buil ding before letting the same .—(1) Where in a cantonment any building or 
part of a building  is intended to be let, in which any person has, within six weeks immediately  preceding, 
been suffering from an  infectious or contagious disease, the person letting the building or part shall before 
doing so disinfect the same  in such manner as the Chief Executive Officer may, by public or special 
notice, direct, together with all articles  therein liable to retain infection.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, the keeper of a hotel, lodging house or  sarai shall be deemed to 
let to any person who is admitted as a guest therein tha t part of the building in which such person is 
permi tted to reside.  
172. Disposal  of infecte d article without disinfection. —No person shall, without previous 
disinfection of the same, give, lend,  sell, transmit or otherwise dispose of to another person any article or 
thing which he knows or has reason to  believe has been exposed to contamination by any infectious or 
contagious disease and is likely to be used in,  or taken into, a cantonment.  
173.  Means of disinfection. —(1) Every Board  shall— 
(a) provide proper places with necessary attendants and apparat us for the disinfection of 
conveyances,  clothing, bedding or other articles which have been exposed to infection;  
(b) cause conveyances, clothing or  other articles brought for disinfection to be disinfected either 
free of charge or on payment of such charges as  the Chief Executive Officer may fix.  
(2) The Chief Executive Officer may notify places at which articles of  clothing, bedding, 
conveyances or other articles which have been exposed to infection shall be washed, and, if  it does so, no 
person sha ll wash any such thing at any place not so not ified without having previously disinfected such 
thing.  
(3) The Chief Executive Officer may direct the destruction of any clothing, bedding or  other article in 
the cantonment likely to retain infection, and ma y give such compensation as he thinks fit for  any article 
so destroyed.  
174. Making or selling of food, etc., or wash ing clothes by infected person. —Whoever,  while 
suffering from, or  in circumstances in which he is likely to spread, any inf ectious or contagious disease ,— 
(a) makes, carries or  offers for sale in a cantonment or takes any part in the business of making, 
carryi ng or offering for sale therein any article of food or drink or any medicine or drug for human 
consumption, or any article of clot hing or  bedding for personal use or wear, or  
(b) takes any part in the business of the washing or carrying of clothes,  
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.   
61 
 175. Power to restrict or prohibit sa le of food or drink. —When a cantonment is visited or  
threatened by an outbreak of any infectious or contagious disease, the Chief Executive Officer on behalf 
of the  Board may, by public notice, restrict in such manner or prohibit for such period, as may be 
specified in the  notice, the sale or preparation of any article of food or drink for human consumption 
specified in the notice or  the sale of any flesh of any description of animals so specified.  
176. Control ov er wells, tanks, etc .—(1) If the Chief Executive Officer on the advic e given by the 
Health Officer is  of opinion that the water in any well, tank or other place is likely, if used for drin king, to 
endanger, or cause the spread of, any disease, it may, — 
(a) by public notice, prohibit the removal or use of such water for drin king;  
(b) by notice in writing, require the owner or person having control of such well, tank or place to 
take such steps as  may be directed by the notice to prevent the public from having access to or using 
such water; or  
(c) take such  other steps as it may consider expedient to prevent the outbreak or spread of any 
such disease.  
(2) In the event  of a cantonment or any part of a cantonment being visited or threatened by an 
outbreak of a ny infectious or contagious disease, the Health Off icer or any person authorised by him in 
this behalf may, without notice and  at any time, inspect and disinfect any well, tank or other place from 
which water is, or is likely to be, taken for  the purposes of drinking, and may further take such steps as he 
thinks fit to ensure the purity of the water or to  prevent the use of the same for drinking purposes.  
177. Disposal of  infectious corpse .—Where any person has died in a cantonment from any infectious 
or contagious disease, the  Chief Executive Offic er, may, by notice in writing, — 
(a) require any person  having charge of the corpse to convey the same to a mortuary, thereafter to 
be disposed of in accordance with law; or  
(b) prohibit the removal  of the corpse from the place where death occurred except for the purpose 
of being buried or burned or of being  conveyed to a mortuary.  
Hospitals and dispensaries  
178. Maintenance or aiding of hospitals or dispensaries .—(1) A Board may — 
(a) provide and maintain either within or without the cantonment as many hospital s and  
dispensaries as it thinks fit; or  
(b) make, upon such terms as it thinks fit t o impose, a grant -in-aid to any hospital or dispensary or 
veterinary hospital, whether within or without the cantonment, not maintained by it.  
(2) Every hospital or dispensary maintained or aided under sub -section ( 1) shall have attached to it a 
ward or  wards for the treatment of persons suffering from infectious or contagious diseases.  
(3) The Medical Officer  appointed by the Board shall be in  charge of every Hospita l and dispensary  
maintained or aided under this section and be responsible to the Health Officer for medical activities and 
to the Chief Executive Officer for  over all administrative activities of the hospital.  
179. Medical  supplies, appliances, etc. —(1) Every hospital or dispensary maintained or a ided under 
section 178 shall be maintained in accordance with any general or special orders of the Central 
Government for the conduct of  hospitals and dispensaries or in accordance with the said orders modifie d 
in such manner as the Central Government may think fit.  
(2) The Board shall cause every such hospital or dis pensary to be provided with all requisite drugs, 
instruments, apparatus, furniture and appliances and with sufficient cots, bedding and clothing  for                     
in-patients.  
180. Free patients .—At every hospital or dispensary maintained or  aided under section 178, the sick 
poor of the cantonment, and other inhabitants of the cantonment suffering  from infectious, communicable 
or contagious disease, and, with the sancti on of the Board, any other sick persons, may receive medical or  
62 
 surgical treatment free of cost, and, if treated as in -patients, shall be either  dieted gratuitously or, if the 
medical officer in charge so directs, shall be gran ted subsistence allowance on  such scale as the Board 
may fix.  
181. Paying patients .—Any sick person who is  ineligible to receive medical or surgical treatment 
free of cost in any hospital  or dispensary under section 180 may be admitted for treatment there in upon 
such terms as the Board thinks fit.  
182. Power to order person to attend hospital or dispensary .—(1) If the Health  Officer or the 
Medical Officer in charge of a hospital or dispensary maintained or aided under section 178 has  reason to 
believe that  any person living in the cantonment is suffering from  an infectious, communicable or 
contagious disease, he may, by notice in writing, call upon such person to attend for examination at any 
such hospital or dispensary at such time as may be specified in t he notice and not to quit it without the 
permission of  the Medical Officer in charge; and, on the arrival of such person at the hosp ital or 
dispensary, the Medical Officer in charge thereof may examine him for the purpose of satisfying himself 
whether or n ot such person is  suffering from an infectious, communicable or contagious disease:  
Provided that, if, having regard to the nature  of the disease or the condition of the person suffering 
there  from, or the genera l environment and circumstances of such per son, the Health Officer or Medical 
Officer, as the case may be, consid ers that the attendance of such person at a hospital or dispensary is 
likely to prove unnecessary or inexpedient, he shall examine such person at  such person's own residence.  
(2) If any person on examination under sub -section ( 1), is found to be suffering  from an infectious or 
contagious disease, the Health Officer or Medical Officer, as the case may be, may cause  him to be 
detained in hospital until he is free from the infection or conta gion:  
Provided that, if having regard to  the nature of the disease or the condition of the person suffering 
there  from, or the general environment and  circumstances of such person, he considers that the detention 
of such person  at a hospital or dispensary  is unnecessary or inexpedient, he shall discharge such person 
and take such measures or give such directions in  the matter as he thinks necessary.  
183. Power to exclude from cantonment persons  refusing to attend hospital or dispensary. —(1) 
If the Health Officer or the Medical Officer in charge of a hospital or dispensary maintained  or aided 
under section 178 reports in writing to the Officer Commanding the  station that any person having 
received a notice under section 182 has refused or omitted to attend at the hospital or dispensary, 
specified in  the notice, or that such person, having attended the hospital or dispensary, has quitted it 
without the permission  of such Medical Officer, or that any person has failed to comply with any 
direc tion given to him under section 182, the Officer Commanding the station may, by order in writing, 
direct such person to be removed from the  cantonment within twenty -four hours and not to re -enter it 
without his permi ssion in writing.  
 (2) No person who has under sub -section  (1) been ordered to be removed from and not to re -enter a 
cantonment shall enter  any other cantonment without the written permission of the Officer Commanding 
the station.  
Control of traffic for hygienic purposes  
184. Routes for pilgrims and others. —(1) A Board may provide or prescribe suitable routes for the 
use of  persons  assing through the cantonment — 
(a) on their way to or from fairs or places of pilgrimage or ot her places of public resort; or  
(b) during times when an infectious or contagious disease is prevalent, and may, by  public notice, 
require such persons as aforesaid to use such routes and no others.  
(2) All routes provided or  prescribed under sub -section ( 1) shall be clearly and sufficiently indicated 
by the Board.  
   
63 
 Special conditions regard ing essential services  
185. Conditions of service of safai karamcharis and others .—(1)No person employed in any 
service, or being employed in connection with the working of any system of public  conservancy or 
sanitation or water supply or hospitals or dispensaries or electric supply or public transport  services or 
such other essential services under a Board in any cantonment area, shall, in the absence of any  contract, 
resign without reasonable cause or absent himself from duty without proper authority and in case of  such 
resignation or absence from duty he shall be punishable with impri sonment which may extend to one 
month; and the conditions of service specified herein shall, invariably be mentioned in the appointment 
letter  of the persons employed to said services.  
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official  Gazette, direct that on and from such 
date as may be specified in the notification, the provisions of this section  shall apply in the case of any 
specified class of employees em ployed by a Board whose functions intimately  concern the public health 
or safety.  
CHAPTER IX  
WATER -SUPPLY, DRAINAGE AND SEWAGE COLLECTION  
Water -supply  
186. Maintenance of water -supply. —(1) In every cantonment where a sufficient supply of potable 
water for  domestic use does not exist, the Board shall provide or arrange for the provision of such a 
supply.  
 (2) The  Board shall, as far as possible, make adequate provision that such supply shall be continuous 
throughout the  year, and that the water shall be at a ll times fit for human consumption.  
(3) It shall be the duty of every Board  to practise and propagate the scientific methods of water 
harvesting including harvesting of rain water for use  and make arrangement for recharging the sources of 
ground water inc luding underground aquifers and to  preserve rivers, streams, springs and other natural 
sources of water within and in the vicinity of the  cantonment.  
187. Terms of water -supply. —In this Chapter, unless the  context otherwise requires, the following 
words a nd expression in relation  to water supply shall have the respective meanings given below, 
namely: — 
(1) “communication pipe ” means :— 
(a) where the premises  supplied with water abut on the part of the street in which the main is laid, 
and the service pipe enters those  premises otherwise than through the outer wall of a building abutting 
on the street and has a stopcock placed in  those premises and as near to the boundary of that street as 
is reasonably practicable, so much of the service  pipe as lies betwee n the main and that stopcock;  
(b) in any other case, so much of the service pipe as lies  between the main and the boundary of 
the street in which the main is laid, and includes the ferrule at the  junction of the service pipe with the 
main, and also, — 
(i) where the communication pipe ends at in a stopcock,  that stopcock, and  
(ii) any stopcock fitted on the communication pipe between the end thereof and the main.  
(2) “main ” means a pipe laid by the Board for the purpose of giving a general supply of water as 
distinct from a  supply to individual consumers and includes any apparatus used in connection  with such a 
pipe.  
(3) “service pipe” means so much of any pipe for supplying water from a main to any premises as is 
subject to water  pressure from that main, or would be so subject but for the closing of some t ap.  
(4) “supply pipe ” means so much of any service pipe as is not a communicatio n pipe.  
   
64 
 (5) “trunk main ” means a main constructed for the  purpose of conveying water from a source of 
supply to a filter or reservoir or from one filter or reservoir to  another filter or reservoir, or for the purpose 
of conveying water in bulk from one part of the limits of supply to  another part of those limits, or for the 
purpose of giving or taking a supply of water in bulk.  
(6) “water fittings ” includes pipes (other than mains), taps, cocks, valves, ferrules, meters, ci sterns, 
baths and other similar apparatus used in connection with the supply and use of water.  
188. Board to carry out survey and formulate proposals. —(1) The Board may, when so  
required, — 
(a) carry out a survey of the existing consumption of and demand f or water supplies in 
cantonment  and of the water resources in or likely to be made available in the cantonment;  
(b) prepare an estimate of the  future water supply requirements of the cantonment;  
(c) carry out a survey of the existing quantity of sewage  collection;  
(d) formulate proposals as to — 
(i) the existing or future water supply requirements of the  cantonment;  
(ii) the existing or future sewage collection requirement in cantonment including proposals 
for the  manner in which and the place or places at which sewage should be carried, collected and 
treated.  
(2) If the  Board is of the opinion that the works and other properties for the time being vested in the 
Board, are  inadequate for the purpose of sufficient s upply of water or for the purpose of  efficient 
collection of sewage under this Act it may take steps in accordance with the provisions of this Act for the 
construction of additional  works, whether within cantonment or outside the cantonment with the approv al 
of the Principal Director and for the acquisition of additional properties for such works.  
189. Control over sources of public water -supply. —(1) The Board may, with the previous sanction 
of the Central Government, by public notice, declare any lake, str eam, spring, well, tank, reservoir or 
other  source, whether within or without the limits of the cantonment other than a source of water -supply 
under the  control and in use of the Military Engineer Services or the Public Works Department from 
which water is  or may be made available for the use of the public in the cantonment to be source of public 
water -supply.  
(2) Every such source shall be under the control of the Board and it shall be the du ty of the Board to 
preserve and maintain such source.  
190. Powe r to require maintenance or closing of private source of public drinking                  
water -supply .—The Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner or any person 
having the  control of any source of public water -supply which  is used for drinking purposes — 
(a) to keep the same in good  order and to clear it from time to time of silt, refuse and decaying 
vegetation; or  
(b) to protect the same from contamination in such manner as the Chief Executive Officer may 
direct; or  
(c) if the water therein is proved to  the satisfaction of the Chief Executive Officer to be unfit for 
drinking purpose s, to take such measures as may be specified in the notice to prevent the public from 
having access to or using such water:  
Provided that, in  the case of a well, such person as aforesaid may, instead of complying with the 
notice, signify in writing his desire  to be relieved of all responsibility for the proper maintenance of the 
well and his readiness to place it under the  control and supervisi on of the Board for the use of the public, 
and, if he does so,  he shall not be bound to carry out the requisition, and the Board shall undertake the 
control and supervision of the well.  
   
65 
 191. Supply of water .—(1) Subject to the guidelines made by the Board in this regard, the Chief  
Executive Officer may permit the owner, lessee or occupier of any building or land to connect the 
building or  land with a source of public water -supply by means of communication pipes of such size and 
description as  may be s pecified for the purpose of obtaining water for domestic use.  
(2) The occupier of every building so connected with the water -supply shall be entitled to have for 
domestic use, in return for the water tax, if any,  such quantity of water as the Chief Execut ive Officer may 
determine.  
(3) All water supplied in excess of the  quantity to which such supply is limited under sub -section ( 2) 
and, in a cantonment in which a water tax is not  imposed, all water supplied under this section, shall be 
paid for at such ra te as the Board may fix keeping in  view its financial viability.  
(4) The supply of water for domestic use shall not be deemed to include any supply for— 
(a) animals or for washing vehicles where such animals or vehicle are kept for sale or hire;  
(b) any trade,  manufacture or business;  
(c) fountains, swimming baths or any ornamental or mechanical purpose;  
(d) gardens  or for purposes of irrigation;  
(e) making or watering roads or paths; or  
(f) building purposes.  
192. Power to require water -supply to be  taken.—If it appears to the Chief Executive Officer that 
any building or land in the cantonment is without a proper supply of potable water, the  Chief Executive 
Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner, lessee or occupier of the building or la nd to obtain 
from a source of public water -supply such quantity of water, as is, adequate to the requirements of the  
persons usually occupying or employed upon the building or land, and to provide communication pipes of 
the prescribed size and description,  and to take all necessary steps for the above purposes.  
193. Supply of water under agreement .—(1) Subject to the gu idelines made by the Board in this 
regard, the Chief Executive Officer may, by agreement, supply, from any source of public water supply , 
the owner, lessee or occupier of any building or land in the cantonment with any water for any purpose,  
other than a domestic purpose, on such terms and conditions, consistent with this Act and the rules and 
bye laws made thereunder, as may be agreed upon be tween the Chief Executive Of ficer and such owner, 
lessee or occupier.  
(2) The Chief Executive Officer may withdraw such supply or curtail the quantity thereof at any time  
if it should appear necessary to do so for the purpose of maintaining sufficient supply of water for 
domestic use  by inhabitants of the cantonment.  
194. Board not liable for  failure of supply .—Notwithstanding any obligation imposed on Boards 
under  this Act, a Board shall not be liable to any forfeiture, penalty or damages for failure to supply water 
or for cur tailing the quantity thereof if the failure or curtailment, as the case may be, arises from accident 
or from drought or other unavoidable cause  unless, in the case of an agreement for the supply of water 
under section 193, the Boa rd has made express  provision for forfeiture, penalty or damages in the event of 
such failure or curtailment.  
195. Conditions of universal application .—Notwithstanding anything herein  before  contained or 
contained in any agreement under section 193, the s upply of water by a Boar d to any building or land 
shall be, and shall be deemed to have been granted subject to th e following conditions, namely: — 
 (a) the  owner, lessee or occupier of any building or land in or on which water supplied by the 
Board is wast ed by  reason of the pipes, drains or other works being out of repair shall, if he has 
knowledge thereof, give notice of  the same to such officer as the Chief Executive Officer may appoint 
in this behalf;  
(b) the Chief Executive  Officer or any other officer or employee of the Board authorised by him 
in writing in this behalf may enter into  or on any premises supplied with water by the Board, for the  
66 
 purpose of examining all pipes, taps, works and  fittings connected with the supply of water and of 
ascertaining whether there is any waste or misuse of such  water;  
(c) the Chief Executive Officer may, after giving notice in writing, cut off the connection between 
any source of public water -supply and any building or land to which water is supplied for any purpose 
there  from,  or turn off  such supply if — 
(i) the owner or occupier of the building or land neglects to pay the water tax or  water rate or 
other charges connected with the water supply within one month from the date on which such tax  
or rate or charg e falls due for payment;  
(ii) the occupier refuses to admit the Chief Executive Officer or other  authorised officer or 
employee of the Board into the building or land for the purpose of making any  examination or 
inquiry authorised by clause ( b) or prevent s the making of such examination or inquiry;  
(iii) the occupier wilfully or negligently misuses or causes waste of water;  
(iv) the o ccupier wilfully or negligently injures or damages his meter or any pipe or tap 
conveying water from the water works;  
(v) any pipes, taps,  works or fittings connected with the supply of water to the building or 
land are found, on examination by any  other officer or employee of the Board authorised by the 
Chief Executive Officer in writing in this behalf, to be  out of repair to such an extent as to cause 
waste of water;  
(d) the expense of cutting off the connection or of  turning off the water in any case referred to in 
clause ( c) shall be paid by the owner or occupier of the building  or land;  
(e) no action taken under or in pursuance of clause ( c) shall relieve  any person from any penalty 
or liability which he may otherwise have incurred.  
196. Supply to persons outside cantonment .—A Board may allow any person not residing within 
the limits of the  cantonment to take or be sup plied with water for any purpose from any source of public 
water supply on such  terms as it may prescribe, and may at any time withdraw or curtail such supply.  
197. Penalty .—Whoever — 
(a) uses for other than domestic purposes any water supplied by a Board for domestic use;  or  
(b) where water is supplied by agreement with a Board for a specified purpose, uses that water for 
any other  purposes shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand five hundred 
rupees, and in addition,  the Board shall be entitled to recover from him the cost of the water misused.  
Water , Drainage  and other connections  
198. Power of Board to lay wires, connections, etc .—A Board may carry any cable,  wire, pipe, 
drain, se wer or channel of any kind, — 
(a) for  the purpose of carrying out, establishing or maintaining  any system of water -supply, 
lighting, drainage, or sewerage, through, across, under or over any road or street  or any place laid out 
or intended as a road or street, or, after giving reasonable noti ce in writing to the owner or  occupier, 
into, through, across, under or over any land or building, or up side of any building, situated within  
the cantonment; or  
(b) for the purpose of supplying water or of the introductio n or distribution of outflow of water or 
for the removal or outflow of sewage, after giving reasonable notice in writing to the owner or  
occupier, into, through, across, under or over any land or building, or up side of any building, situated 
outside  the cantonment and may at all times do  all acts and things which may be necessary or 
expedient for repairing  or maintaining any such cable, wire, pipe, drain, sewer or channel in an 
effective state for the purpose for which the same may be used or is intended to be used:  
Provided that no nuis ance shall be caused in excess of what is reasonably necessary for the proper 
execution of the work:   
67 
 Provided further that compensation shall be  payable to the owner or occupier for any damage 
sustained by him which is directly occasioned by the carrying  out of any such operation.  
199. Wires, etc., laid above surface of ground .—In the event of any cable, wire, pipe, drain, sewer 
or channel being laid or carried above the  surface of any land or through, over or up side of any building, 
such cable, wire, pipe, drain sewer or channel  shall be so laid or carried as to interfere as little as possible 
with the rights of the owner or occupier to the due  enjoyment of such land or building, and compensation 
shall be payable  by the Board in respect of any substant ial interference with the right to any such 
enjoyment.  
 200. Connection with main not to be made without permission. —No person shall, for any  
purpose whatsoever, without the permission of the Board at any time make or cause to be made any 
connection  or co mmunication with any cable, wire, pipe, drain, sewer or channel constructed or 
maintained by, or vested  in, a Board.  
201. Power to prescribe  ferrules and to establish meters, etc .—The Chief Executive Officer may 
prescribe the size of the ferrules to be  used for the supply of gas, if any, and may establish meters or other 
appliances for the purpose of measuring  the quantity of any water or gas or testing the quality thereof 
supplied to any premises by the Board.  
202. Power of inspection .—The ferrules, communication pipes, connections, meters,  stand pipes and 
all fittings thereon or connected therewith leading from water mains or from pipes, drains,  sewers or 
channels into any house or land, to which water or gas is supplied by a Board, and the pipes, fi ttings,  and 
works inside any such house or within the limits of any such land, shall in all cases be installed or 
executed  subject to the inspection and to the satisfaction of the Chief Executive Officer.  
203. Power to fix rates and charges .—A Board may fi x the charges to be made for the  
establishment by them or through their agency or communications from, and connections with, mains, or 
pipes  for the supply of water, or gas, or for meters or other appliances for measuring the quantity, or 
testing the  quant ity thereof supplied, and may levy such charges accordingly.  
Application of this Chapter to Government water -supplies  
204. Government water -supply. —(1) Where in any cantonment there is a water -supply (other than a 
public water -supply  under the control of the Board) under the control of the Military Engineer Services or 
the Public Works  Department, the Officer of the Military Engineer Services or of the Public Works 
Department, as the case maybe, in charge of such water -supply (hereafter in this Chapter ref erred to as the 
Officer) may publish in the  cantonment in such manner as he thinks fit a notice declaring any lake, 
stream, spring, well, tank, reservoir or  other source, whether within or without the limits of the 
cantonment other than a source of public water -supply  and the officer may, for the purpose of keeping 
any such source in good order or of protecting it from  contamination or from use, require the Board to 
exercise any power conferred upon it by section 190.  
(2) In the  case of any water -supply such as is referred to in sub -section ( 1), the following provisions 
of this Chapter,  namely, the provisions of sections 191, 193, 194, 195, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202 and 
203 shall, as far as  may be, be applicable in respect of the supply of water to the  cantonment, and for the 
purpose of such  application references to the Board shall be construed as references to the Officer, and 
references to the Chief  Executive Officer or other officer or employee of the Board shall be construed as 
references to such p erson as  may be authorised in this behalf by the Officer.  
(3) The provisions of section 193 shall be applicable in respect  of the supply of water by agreement to 
the Board by the Officer for use for any purpose other than a domestic  purpose in like manner  as they are 
applicable to such supply to the owner, lessee or occupier of any building or  land in the cantonment.  
(4) In order to preserve the underground water level, the Board may make regulations  for the digging 
or use of bore wells in the cantonment.   
205. Water -supply for domestic consumption. —(1) Where it appears to the Chief Executive 
Officer that any  dwelling house in the cantonment is without supply of water for domestic consumption 
and that such a supply  can be given from mains which is not more  than one hundred feet distance from  
68 
 any part of such dwelling  house, the Chief Executive Officer may by notice require the owner to obtain 
supply and to execute all such  works as may be necessary for this purpose.  
 (2) It shall not be lawful for the owner  of any premises which may  be constructed or reconstructed, to 
occupy it or cause or permit it to be occupied until he has obtained a  certificate from the Chief Executive 
Officer that there is provided within, or within a reasonable distance of,  the house supply of wholesome 
water as appears to the Chief Executive Officer to be sufficient for domestic  consumption and use of the 
inmates of the house.  
206. Recovery of charges .—In any case in which the provisions of section 204 apply and in which 
the Board is not receiving a bulk supply  of water under section 207, the water -tax, if any, imposed in the 
cantonment and all other rates arising out of  the supply of water which may be imposed under the 
provisions of this Chapter as applied by section 204 shall  be rec overed by the Board, and all monies so 
recovered, or such proportion thereof as the Central Government  may in each case determine, shall be 
paid by the Board to the Officer.  
207. Supply of water from Government water -supply to the Board. —(1) Where in any 
cantonment there is a water -supply such as is referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 204, the  Board may, 
and so long as the Board is unable to provide a water -supply of its own, it shall receive from the  Military 
Engineer Services or the Public Works Dep artment, as the case may be, at such point or points as may  be 
agreed upon between the Board and the Military Engineer Services or Public Works Department, a supply  
of water adequate to t he requirements for domestic use  of all persons in the cantonment oth er than entitled  
consumers.  
(2) Any supply of water received under sub -section ( 1) shall be a bulk supply, and the Board shall  
make such payments to the Military Engineer Services or Public Works Department for all water so 
received as  may be agreed upon between the Board and the Military Engineer Services or Public Works 
Department, or, in  default of such agreement, as may be determined by the Central Government to be 
reasonable having regard to  the actual cost of supplying the water in the cantonment and  the rate charge 
for water in any adjacent  municipality:  
Provided that, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Board shall not charge for the  
supply to persons in the cantonment of water received by the Board under this section a rate calculated to  
produce more than the sum of the payments made to the Military Engineer Services or Public Works  
Department for water received and the actual cost of the supply thereof by the Board to consumers.  
(3) If any  dispute arises between the Board a nd the Military Engineer Services or Public Works 
Department regarding  the rate and amount of water adequate to the requirements of persons in the 
cantonment other than entitled  consumers, the disputes shall be referred to the Central Government whose 
decision shall be final.  
208. Functions of the Board in relation to  distribution of bulk supply. —Where under the 
provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 207 a bulk supply of  water is received by the Board, the Board 
shall be solely responsible for the supply  of water to all persons in  the cantonment other than entitled 
consumers; and the provisions of this Act shall apply as if such bulk supply  were a source of public 
water -supply under  the control of the Board and as if the communications from and  connection s with such 
bulk supply for the purpose of supplying water to such persons were a system of water  supply  established 
and maintained by the Board.  
209. Special provisions concerning drainage and sewage. —(1) All public drains, all drains in,  
alongside or und er any public street, except those vesting in the Military Engineer Services or any 
Department  of the Central Government or a State Government or any autonomous body under the Central 
Government or a  State Government and all sewage collection works, whethe r constructed out of the 
cantonment fund or  otherwise and all works, material and things appertaining thereto, which are situated 
in the cantonment shall  vest in the Board.  
(2) All public and other drains, which are vested in the Board are hereafter in this Act  referred to as 
cantonment drains.   
69 
 (3) For the purposes of enlarging, deepening or otherwise repairing or  maintaining any such drain or 
sewage collection work so much of the sub -soil appertaining thereto as may be  necessary for the said 
purpose sh all be deemed also to vest in the Board.  
(4) All drains and ventilation shafts,  pipes and all appliances and fittings connected with drainage 
works constructed, erected or set up out of the  cantonment fund in or upon premises not  belonging to the 
Board wh ether — 
(a) before or after the  commencement of this Act; and  
(b) for the use of the owner or occupier of such premises or not, shall unless  the Board has 
otherwise determined, or does at any time otherwise determine, vest and be deemed always to   have 
vested in the Board.  
210. Construction of and control of drains and sewage collection and disposal works .—(1) All  
cantonment drains, all sewage collection and all works, materials and things appertaining thereto shall be 
under  the control of the Board.  
 (2) The Chief Executive Officer shall maintain and keep in repair all cantonment  drains and sewage 
collection and sewage disposal works when authorised by the Board.  
 (3) The Board shall  construct as many new drains and sewage collection and sewage disposal works 
as may from time to time be  necessary for effectual drainage and sewage collection.  
 (4) The Board shall ensure that the sewage effluents are  treated in accordance with the norms laid 
down under the relevant laws relating to pollution before it is  dispersed into a river, stream, lake or open 
land.  
211. Certain matters not to be passed into cantonments drains .—No person shall throw, empty or 
turn into any cantonment drain or into any drain commun icating with a cantonment drain — 
(a) any matter likely t o injure the drain or to interfere with the free flow of its contents, or to 
affect prejudicially the treatment and  disposal of its contents; or  
 (b) any chemical, refuse or waste stream, or any liquid of a temperature higher than  forty -five 
degrees centig rade, being refuse or stream which, or liquid which when so heated is, either alone or  in 
combination with the contents of the drain be dangerous, or the cause of a nuisance, or prejudicial to 
health;  or  
(c) any dangerous petroleum.  
Explanation. —In this section, the expression “dangerous petroleum ” has the  same meaning as in the 
Petroleum Act, 1934  (3 of 1934) . 
212. Application by owners and occupiers to drain into cantonment drains .—(1) Subject to  such 
conditions as may be prescribed by bye -laws m ade in this behalf, the owner or occupier of any premises  
having a private drain, or the owner of any private drain within cantonment may apply to the Chief 
Executive  Officer to have his drain made to communicate with the cantonment drains and thereby to 
discharge foul water  and s urface water from those premises  or that private drain:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall  entitle a ny person — 
(a) to discharge directly or indir ectly into any cantonment drain — 
(i) any trade effluent from  any trade premises except in accordance with bye -laws made in 
this behalf; or  
(ii) any liquid or other matter  the discharge of which into cantonment drains is prohibited by 
or under this Act or any other law; or  
(b) where  separate cantonment drains are pr ovided for foul water and for surface water to 
discharge directly or indirectly — 
(i) foul water into a drain provided for the surface water; or   
70 
 (ii) except with the permission of the Chief  Executive Officer, surface water into a drain 
provided for foul water; or  
(c) to have his drains made to  communicate directly with a storm -water overflow drain.  
(2) Any person desirous of availing himself of the  provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall give t o the Chief 
Executive Officer notice of his proposals, and at any time  within one month after receipt thereof, the 
Chief Executive Officer may by notice to him refuse to permit the  communication to be made, if it 
appears to him that the mode of construction or condition of the drain is such  that the making of the 
communication would be prejudicial to the drainage system, and for the purpose of  examining the mode 
of construction and condition of the drain he may, if necessary, require it to be lai d open  for inspection.  
 (3) The Chief Executive Officer may, if he thinks fit, construct such parts of the work necessary  for 
having a private drain made to communicate with a cantonment drain, as is in or under a public street and  
in such a case, the expe nses incurred by the Chief Executive Officer shall be paid by the owner or 
occupier of  the premises, or as the case may be, the owner of the private drain and shall be recoverable 
from the owner or  occupier  as an arrears of tax under this  Act. 
213. Drainag e of undrained premises .—(1) Where any premises are in the opinion of the Chief 
Executive Officer, without  sufficient means of effectual drainage and a cantonment drain or some place 
approved by the Chief Executive  Officer for the discharge of filth and ot her polluted and obnoxious 
matter is situated at a distance of not  exceeding thirty metres from any part of the said premises, he may, 
by written notice, require the owner of the  said pre mises — 
(a) to make a drain emptying into such cantonment drain or pla ce; 
(b) to provide and set up all  such appliances and fittings as may appear to the Chief Executive 
Officer necessary for the purposes of  gathering and receiving the filth and other polluted and 
obnoxious matter from, and conveying the same off,  the said premises and of effectually flushing 
such drain and every fixture connected therewith;  
(c) to remove  any existing drain or other appliance or thing used or intended to be used for 
drainage which is injurious to  health;  
(d) to provide a closed dr ain in substitution of an open drain or to provide such other appliance or 
thing  either newly or in substitution of any existing appliance or thing or to provide both a close drain 
and such other  appliance or thing in substitution of the existing open drai n and other appliance or 
thing, which is or is likely to  be injurious to health;  
(e) to provide and set up all such appliances and fitting as may appear to the Chief  Executive 
Officer to be necessary for the purpose of gathering and receiving the waste wa ter from floors and  
galleries of buildings when they are washed, and conveying the same through spouts, by down -take 
pipes so as  to prevent such waste water from discharging directly on streets or inside any lower 
portion of the premises;  
(f) to carry out  any work to improve or re -model an existing drain which is inadequate, 
insufficient or faulty.  
(2) Where in any case not provided for in sub -section ( 1) any premises are, in the opinion of the   
Chief Executive  Officer, without sufficient means of effectu al drainage, he may, by written notice, require 
the owner of the  premises — 
(a) to construct a drain up to a point to be prescribed in such notice but not at a distance or more 
than thirty meters from any part of the premises; or  
(b) to construct a closed cesspool or soakage pit and drain or  drains emptying into such cesspool 
or soakage pit.  
(3) Any requisition for the construction of any drain under  sub-section ( 2) may contain any of the 
details specified in sub -section ( 1). 
   
71 
 214. New premises not to be erected without drains. —(1) It shall not be lawful to erector to           
re-erect any premises in a cantonment or to o ccupy any such premises unless — 
(a) a drain be constructed  of such size, materials and description, at such level and with such fall 
as shall appear to the Chief Executive  Officer to be necessary for the effectual drainage of such 
premises;  
 (b) there have been provided and set up on  such premises such appliances and fittings as may 
appear to the Chief Executive Officer to be necessary for  the purposes of gathering or receiving the 
filth and other polluted and obnoxious matter from, and conveying the  same off, the said premises 
and of effectually flushing the drain of the said premises and every fixture  connected therewith.  
(2) The drain so  constructed shall empty into a cantonment drain situated at a distance of  not 
exceeding thirty meters from the premises; but if no cantonment drain is situated within that distance then  
such drain shall empty into a cesspool situated within that distance to be specified by the Chief Executive  
Officer for the purpose.  
215. Power to drain group or block of premises by combined operations .—(1) If it appears to the 
Chief Executive  Officer that any group or block of premises may be drained more economically or  
advantageously in  combination than separately, and a cantonment drain of sufficient size already exists or 
is about to be  constructed within thirty metres of any part of that group or block of premises, the Chief 
Executive Officer  may cause that group or block of premises to be drained by a combined operation.  
(2) The expenses incurred in  carrying out any work under sub -section ( 1) in respect of any group or 
block of premises shall be paid by the  owners of such premises in such proportions as the Chief Exe cutive 
Officer may determine and shall be  recoverable from them as an arrears of tax under this Act.  
(3) Not less than fifteen days before any such work  is commenced, the Chief Executive Officer  shall 
give to each such owner — 
(a) written notice of the natu re of the proposed work; and  
(b) an estimate of the expenses to be incurred in respect thereof and of the proportion  of such 
expenses payable by him.  
(4) The Chief Executive Officer may require the owners of such groups or  block or premises to 
maintain the work executed under this section.  
216. Power to close or limit the use of private drains in certain cases .—Where a drain connecting 
any premises with a cantonment drain is sufficient for the effectual drainage of such  premises and is 
otherwise unobjectionable but is not in the opinion of the Chief Executive Officer, adapted to  the general 
system of drainage in the cantonment, he may, by written notice addressed to the owner of the  premises, 
direct — 
(a) that such drain be c losed, discontinued or destroyed and that any work necessary for that  
purpose be done; or  
(b) that such drain shall, from such date as may be specified in the notice in this behalf, be  used 
for filth and polluted water only or for rain water and unpollute d sub -soil water only:  
Provide d that — 
(i) no drain may be closed, discontinued or destroyed by the Chief Executive Officer under           
clause ( a) except on  condition of his providing another drain equally effectual for the drainage of the 
premises and communicating  with any cantonment drain which he thinks fit; and  
 (ii) the expenses of the construction of any drain so  provided by the Board and of any work done 
under clause ( a) may be paid out of the cantonment fund.  
217. Use of drain by a person other  than the owner .—(1)Where the Chief Executive Officer either 
on receipt of an application from the owner of any premises or  otherwise is of the opinion that the only, or 
the most convenient means of effectual drainage of the premises  into a cantonment drain is through a 
drain belonging to another person, the Chief Executive Officer may by  notice in writing require the owner 
of such a drain to show cause within a period specified in the notice as to  why an order under this section 
should not be made.   
72 
  (2) Where no cause is shown within the specified period  or the cause shown appears to the Chief 
Executive Officer invalid or insufficient, the Chief Executive Officer  may by order in writing either 
authorise the owner of the premises to use the drain or decl are him to be a joint  owner thereof.  
 (3) An order made under sub -section ( 2) may contain directions as to — 
(a) the payment of rent or  compensation by the owner of the premises;  
(b) the construction of a drain for the premises for the purpose of  connectin g it with the aforesaid 
drain;  
(c) the entry upon the land in which the aforesaid drain is situate with  assistants and workmen at 
all reasonable hours;  
(d) the respective responsibilities of the parties for  maintaining, repairing, flushing, cleaning and 
emptying the aforesaid drain.  
218. Sewage and rain water drains to be distinct .—Wherever  it is provided in this Chapter that 
steps shall or may be taken for the effectual drainage of any premises, it shall  be competent to the Chief 
Executive Officer to req uire that there shall be one drain for filth and polluted water  and an entirely 
distinct drain for rain water and unpolluted sub -soil water or both rain water and unpolluted  sub-soil 
water, each emptying into separate cantonment drains or other suitable pl aces.  
219. Power to require owner to carry out certain works for satisfactory drainage. —For the 
purpose of efficient  drainage of any premises, the Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in w riting, — 
(a) require any courtyard,  alley or passage between two o r more buildings to be paved by the 
owner or owners of such buildings with  such materials and in such manner as may be approved by the 
Chief Executive Officer; and  
(b) require such  paving to be kept in proper repair.  
220. Appointment of places for the emptying of drains and collection of sewage .—The Chief 
Executive Officer  may cause any or all of the cantonment drains to empty into, and all sewage to be 
collected of at, such place or  places as he considers suitable:  
Provided that no place which has not  been before the commencement of this  Act used for any of the 
purposes specified in this section shall, after such commencement be used there  for without the approval 
of the Board:  
Provided further that on and after such date as may be appointed by the  Central Government in this 
behalf no sewage shall be discharged into any water course until it has been so  treated as not to affect 
prejudicially the purity and quality of the water into which it is discharged.  
Miscellaneous  
221. Connection with water work s and drains not to be made without permission .—Without the  
written permission of the Chief Executive Officer, no person shall, for any purpose whatsoever, at any 
time make or cause to be made any connection or communicate with any drain referred to in sec tion 210 
or any  water works, constructed or maintained by, or vested in, the Board.  
222. Buildings, railways and private streets not to be erected or constructed over drains or 
water works without  permission. —(1)(a) No railway works shall be constructed on  any cantonment 
drain or any water works  constructed or maintained by, or vested in the Board, without the approval of the 
Central Government.  
(b) If any railway works are constructed on any drains or water works as aforesaid without the written 
permissio n of the Central Government, the Chief Executive Officer may remove or otherwise deal with 
the same as he thinks  fit.  
(2)(a) No private street shall be constructed and no building, wall, fence or other structure shall be 
erected  on any cantonment drain or  on any water works constructed or maintained by, or vested in, the 
Board without  the approval of the Board.   
73 
 (b) If any private street is constructed or any building, wall, fence or structure  erected on any drain or 
water works as aforesaid without the wri tten permission of the Board, the Chief  Executive Officer may 
remove or otherwise deal with the same as he may think fit.  
(3) The expenses incurred  by the Chief Executive Officer in doing so shall be paid by the owner of 
the private street or of the buildi ng, fence wall or other structure or, as the case may be, by the railway 
administration or the person offending and  shall be recoverable as an arrears of tax under this Act.  
223. Rights of user of property for aqueducts, lines, etc .—(1) The Chief Executiv e Officer may 
place and  maintain aqueducts, conduits and lines of mains or pipes or drains over, under, along or across 
any immovable  property whether within or without the local limits of the cantonment without acquiring 
the same, and may at  any time for the purpose of examining, repairing, altering or removing any 
aqueducts, conduits or lines of  mains or pipes or drains, enter on any property over, under, along or across 
which the aqueducts, conduits or  lines of mains or pip es, or drains  have been placed:  
Provided that the Board shall not acquire any right other  than a right of user in the property over, 
under, along or across which any aqueduct, conduit or line of mains or  pipes, or drain is placed.  
(2) The power conferred under sub -section ( 1) shall not be exercisable in respect of  any property 
vested in the Union or under the control or management of the Central Government or railway  
administration or vested in any local authority save with the permission of the Central Government or 
railway  administrati on or the local authority, as the case may be, and in accordance with any bye -laws 
made in this  behalf:  
Provided that the Chief Executive Officer may, without such permission, repair; renew, or amend any  
existing works of which the character or position i s not to be altered if such repair, renewal or amendment 
is urgently necessary in order to maintain without interruption the supply of water, drainage or collection 
of sewage or is such that delay would be dangerous to health, human life or property.  
(3) In exercise of the  powers conferred upon him by this section, the Chief Executive Officer shall 
cause as little damage and  inconvenience as may be possible, and shall make full compensation for any 
damage or inconvenience caused  by him.  
224. Power of owner  of premises to place pipes and drains through land belonging to other 
persons. —(1) If it  appears to the Chief Executive Officer that the only or most convenient means of 
water supply to, and drainage  of, any premises is by placing or carrying any pipe or drains over, under, 
along or across the immovable  property of another person, the Chief Executive Officer may, by order in 
writing, authorise the owner of the  premises to place or carry such pipe or drain over, under, along or 
across such immovable propert y:  
Provided  that before making any such order the Chief Executive Officer shall give to the owner of the 
immovable  property a reasonable opportunity of showing cause within such time as may be prescribed by 
bye-laws made  in this behalf as to why the order  should not be made:  
Provided further that the owner of the premises shall not  acquire any right other than a right of user in 
the property over, under, along or across which any such pipe or  drain is placed or carried.  
(2) Upon the making of an order, under sub -section ( 1), the owner of the premises  may, after giving 
reasonable notice of his intention so to do, enter upon the immovable property with assistants  and 
workmen at any time between sunrise and sunset for the purpose of placing a pipe or drain over, under,  
along or across such immovable property or for the purpose of repairing the same.  
(3) In placing or carrying a  pipe or drain under this section, as little damage as possible shall be done 
to the immovable property and the  owner of the premises shall — 
(a) cause the pipe or drain to be placed or carried with the least practicable delay;  
(b) fill in, re -instate and make good at his own cost and with the least practicable delay, any land 
opened,  broken up or removed for the purpose of placi ng or carrying such pipe or drain; and  
(c) pay compensation to  the owner of the immovable property and to any other person who 
sustains damage by reason of the placing or  carrying of such pipe or drain.   
74 
 (4) If the owner of the immovable property, over, und er, along or across which a  pipe or drain has 
been placed or carried under this section whilst such immovable property was not built upon,  desires to 
erect any building on such property, the Chief Executive Officer, shall, by notice in writing, require  the 
owner of the premises to close, remove or divert the pipe or drain in such manner as shall be approved by  
him and to fill in, re -instate and make good the immovable property as if the pipe or drain had not been 
placed  or carried over, under, along or acro ss the same:  
Provided that no such requisition shall be made unless in the  opinion of the Chief Executive Officer it 
is necessary or expedient for the construction of proposed building or  the safe enjoyment thereof that the 
pipe or drain should be closed,  removed or diverted.  
225. Power to require railway level, etc., to be raised or  lowered .—If the Board places or carries 
any pipe or drain or does any other work connected with the water  supply or drainage across any railway 
line, it may, with the sanction  of the Central Government and at the cost  of the cantonment fund, require 
the railway administration to raise or lower the level thereof.  
226. Power to execute work after giving notice to the person liable .—(1) When under the 
provisions of this  Chapter, any person may be required or is liable to execute any work, the Chief 
Executive Officer may, in  accordance with the provisions of this Act and of any bye -laws made in this 
behalf, cause such work to be  executed after giving such person an opportunity of e xecuting the same 
within such time as may be specified  by him for this purpose.  
(2) The expenses incurred or likely to be incurred by the Chief Executive Officer in  the execution of 
any such work shall be payable by the said person and the expenses incurr ed by the Chief  Executive 
Officer in connection with the maintenance of such work or the enjoyment of amenities and  conveniences 
rendered possible by such work shall be payable by the person or persons enjoying such  amenities and 
conveniences.  
(3) The exp enses referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall be recoverable from the  person or persons liable 
there  for as an arrears of tax under this Act.  
227. Power to affix shafts, etc., for ventilation of drain or cesspool .—For the  purpose of 
ventilating any drain or cesspool, whether vested in the Board or not, the Chief Executive Officer  may, in 
accordance with bye -laws made in this behalf, erect upon any premises or affix to the outside of any  
building or to any tree any such shaft or pipe as may appear to him to be  necessary.  
228. Power to examine and test drains, etc., believed to  be defective .—(1) Where it appears to the 
Chief Executive Officer that there are reasonable grounds for  believing that a private drain or cesspool is 
in such condition as to be prejudici al to health or a nuisance or that  a private drain communicating 
directly or indirectly with a cantonment drain is so defective as to admit sub  soil water, he may examine 
its condition, and for that purpose may apply any test, other than a test by water  under pressure, and if he 
deems it necessary, open the ground.  
(2) If on examination the drain or cesspool is  found to be in proper condition, the Chief Executive 
Officer shall, as soon as possible, re -instate any ground  which has been opened by him and mak e good 
any damage done by him.  
229. Bulk delivery of sewage by the Board. —(1) The Board shall deliver in bulk all the sewage  to, 
the authority prescribed by the Central Government or the State Government, subject to such charges for 
the delivery of sewage  of the area of cantonment as may be determined by means of an agreement entered 
into between that other authority and the Board.  
(2) The agreement mentioned in sub -section ( 1) shall provide also  for a stipulation therein that in case 
of any dispute about  the payments to be made to that other authority by the  Board, the matter shall be 
referred to the Central Government whose decision thereon shall be final and  binding on both parties.  
230. Employment of  Government agencies for repair, etc .—The Central Gov ernment may, for 
reason to be recorded, direct that any  specified work, repair, renewal or replacement which is to be 
undertaken by or for the Board under this  Chapter, shall be carried out on behalf of the Board by the 
Central Government and the Board sha ll pay the  charges there  for at the rates and subject to the terms for  
75 
 the time being applicable in the case of works  constructed by that Government on behalf of a local 
authority.  
231. Works  to be done by licensed plumber. —(1) No person other than a lice nsed plumber shall  
execute any work described in this Chapter and no person shall permit any such work to be executed 
except by  a licensed plumber:  
Provided that if, in the opinion of the Chief Executive Officer, the work is of a trivial  nature, he may 
grant permission in writing for the execution of such work by a person other than a licensed lumber.  
(2) Every person who employs a licensed plumber to execute any work shall, when so required,  
furnish to the Chief Executive Officer the name of such plumber.  
(3) When any work is executed except in  accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1), such 
work shall be liable to be dismantled at the discretion  of the Chief Executive Officer without  prejudice to 
the right of the Board to prosecute under this Act the  person at whose instan ce such work has been 
executed.  
(4) The Board may make bye -laws for the guidance of  licensed plumbers and a copy of all such               
bye-laws shall be attached  to every licence granted to a plumber by  the Board.  
(5) The Board may, from time to time, prescribe the charges to be paid to licensed plumber for any  
work done by them under or for any of the purposes of this Chapter.  
(6) No licensed plumber shall, for any work referred to in sub -section ( 5), demand or receive more 
than the charges prescribed there  for, under that  sub-section.  
(7) The Board shall make bye -laws prov iding for — 
(a) the exercise of adequate control on all  licensed plumbers;  
(b) the inspection of all works carried out by them; and  
(c) the hearing and disposal of  complaints made by the owners or occupiers of premises with 
regard to the quality of work done, material  used, delay in execution of work, and the charges made, 
by a licensed plumber.  
(8) No licensed plumber shall  contravene any of the bye -laws made under this section or execute 
carelessly or negligently any work under  this Act or make use of bad mat erials, appliances or fittings.  
(9) If any licensed plumber contravenes sub -section (8), his licence may be suspended or cancelled 
whether he is prosecuted under this Act or not.  
232. Prohibition of certain  acts. —(1) No person shall — 
(a) wilfully obstruct any  person acting under the authority of the Board, or the Chief Executive 
Officer, in setting out the lines of any  works or pull up or remove any pillar, post or stake fixed in the 
ground for the purpose of setting out lines of  such work, or deface or destroy any works made for the 
same purpose; or  
(b) wilfully or negligently b reak,  injure, turn on, open, close, shut off or otherwise interfere with 
any lock, cock, valve, pipe, meter or other work  or apparatus belonging to the Board; or  
(c) unlawfully obstruct the flow of or flush, draw off, or divert, or take  water from any wat er 
work belonging to the Board; or  
(d) unlawfully obstruct the flow of or flush, draw off, or  divert, or take sewage from any sewage 
work belonging to the Board or break or damage any electrical  transmission line maintained by the 
Board; or  
(e) obstruct any officer or other employee of the Board in the  discharge of his duties under this 
Chapter or refuse or wilfully neglect to furnish him with the means necessary  for the making of any 
entry, inspection, examination or inquiry thereunder in relation to any  water or sewage  work; or  
 (f) bathe in, at or upon any water work or wash or throw or cause to enter therein any animal, or  
throw any rubbish, dirt or filth into any water work or wash or clean therein any cloth, wool or leather  
76 
 or the  skin of any animal,  or cause the water of any sink, or drain or any steam -engine or boiler or any 
polluted water  to turn or be brought into any water work, or do any other act whereby the water in any 
water work is fouled or  likely to be fouled.  
(2) Nothing in clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) shall apply to a consumer closing the stopcock  fixed on 
the service pipe supplying water to his premises so long as he has obtained the consent of any other  
consumer whose supply will be af fected thereby.  
CHAPTER X  
TOWN  PLANNING  AND   CONTROL OVER BUILDINGS, ETC.  
233. Preparation of land use plan .—(1) On the commencement of this Act, the Chief Executive 
Officer shall  with the approval of the Board, cause to be prepared a spatial plan for land use to be 
followed in the  cantonment which s hall include — 
(a) earmarking of zones for residential, institutional, commercial and other  activities; and  
(b) improvement schemes for areas considered sub -standard on account of narrowness of streets,  
poor lighting, poor ventilation or irregular  line of b uildings in a street.  
(2) The Board shall give publicity to the  land use plan prepared under sub -section ( 1), by publishing a 
gist of the plan in a local newspaper.  
234. Sanction for building. —No person shall erect or re -erect a building on any land in  a 
cantonment — 
(a) in an area, other than the civil area, except with the previous sanction of the Board;  
(b) in a civil area, except with the previous sanction of the Chief Executive Officer,  
nor otherwise than in accordance  with the provisions of this C hapter and of the rules and bye -laws made 
under this Act relating to the erection  and re -erection of buildings:  
Provided that if an erected or re -erected building is meant for public purposes,  then it shall be made 
accessible to and barrier free for the pe rsons with disabilities.  
235. Notice of new buildings. —(1) Whoever intends to erect or re -erect any building in a  
cantonment shall apply for sanction by giving not ice in writing of his intention — 
(a) where such erection or re  erection  is in an area, other  than the civil area, to the Board;  
(b) where such erection or re -erection is in a civil  area, to the Chief Executive Officer.  
(2) For the purposes of this Act, a person shall be deemed to erect or re -erect  a building who — 
(a) makes any material alteration  or enlargement of any building; or  
(b) converts into a  place for human habitation any building not originally constructed for human 
habitation;  
(c) converts into  more than one place for human habitation a building originally constructed as 
one such plac e; or  
(d) converts  two or more places of human habitation into a greater number of such places;  or 
(e) converts into a stable, cattle -shed or cow -house any building originally constructed for human 
habitation; or  
(f) converts into a  dispensary, stall, shops, warehouse, godown, factory or garage any building 
originally constructed for human habitation; or  
(g) makes any alteration which there is reason to believe is lik ely to affect prejudicially the 
stability or safety of any building  or the condition of any building in respect of drainage, sanitation or 
hygiene;  or  
77 
  (h) makes any alteration to any building which increases or diminishes the height of, or area 
covered by, or  the cubic capacity of, the building, or which reduces the cubi c capacity of any room in 
the building below the  minimum prescribed by any bye -law made under this Act.  
236. Conditions of valid notice. —(1) A person giving the notice required by section 235 shall 
specify the purpose  for which it is intended to use the bu ilding to which such notice relates.  
(2) No notice shall be valid until the  information required under the sub -section ( 1) and any further 
information and plans and undertakings which  may be required under bye -laws made under this Act have 
been furnished to the satisfaction of the Chief Executive Officer, along with the notice.  
237. Powers of Board under certain sections exercisable by Chief Executive  Officer. —The 
powers, duties and functions of the Board under section 238, sub -section (1) of section 241  section 243, 
section 245 and section 248 excluding the provisions to sub -section ( 1) and the proviso  to                        
sub-section  (2) of the said section 248 shall be exercised or discharged in a civil area by the Chief 
Executive  Officer.  
238. Po wer of Board to sanction or refuse. —(1) The  Board may either refuse to sanction the 
erection or re -erection, as the case may be, of the building, or may  sanction it either absolutely or subject 
to such directions as it thinks fit to make in writing in resp ect of all or  any of  the following matters, 
namely: — 
(a) the free passage or way to be left in front of the building;  
(b) the space to be left about the building to secure free circulation of air and facilitate scavenging 
and the prevention  of fire;  
(c) the ventilation of the building, the minimum cubic area of the rooms and the number of height 
of the  storeys of which the building may consist;  
 (d) the provis ion and position of drains, latrines, urinals, cesspools or  other receptacles for filth;  
(e) the  level and width of the foundation, the le vel of the lowest floor and the stability of the 
structure;  
(f) the line of frontage with neighbouring buildings if the building abuts on a street;  
 (g) the means to be provided for egress from the building in cas e of fire;  
(h) the materials and method of  construction to be used for external and party walls for rooms, 
floors, fire -places and chimneys;  
(i) the height and slope of the roof above the uppermost floor upon which human beings are to 
live or cooking ope rations are  to be carried on; and  
(j) any other matter affecting the ventilation and sanitation of the buildings, and the  person 
erecting or re -erecting the building shall obey all such written directions in every particular.  
(2) The  Board may refuse to s anction the erection or re -erection of any building o n any grounds 
sufficient in the opinion of the Board affecting the particula r building:  
Provided that the Board shall refuse to accord sanction  the erection or re -erection of any building if 
such erectio n or re -erection is not in conformity with any general  scheme sanctioned under section 240.  
(3) The Board, before sanctioning the erection or re -erection of a  building on land which is under the 
management of the Defence Estates Officer, shall refer the a pplication to  the Defence Estates Officer for 
ascertaining whether there is any objection on the part of the Government to  such erection or re -erection; 
and the Defence Estates Officer shall return the application together with his  report thereon to the Board 
within thirty days after it has been received by him.  
(4) The Board may refuse to  sanction the erection or re-erection of any building — 
(a) when the land on which it is proposed to erect or re -erect  the building is held on a le ase from 
the Government, if the erection or re -erection constitutes a breach of the terms of the lease; or   
78 
 (b) when the land on which it is proposed to erect or re -erect the building is entrusted  to the 
management of the Board by the Government if the erec tion or re -erection constitutes a breach of the  
terms of the entrustment of management or  contravenes any of the instru ctions issued by the 
Government regarding the management of the land by the Board; or  
(c) when the land on which it is proposed to erect or re -erect  the building is not held on a lease 
from the Government, if the right to build on such land is in dispute  between the person applying for 
sanction and the Government.  
(5) If the Board decides to refuse to sanction  the erection or re -erection o f the building, it shall 
communicate in writing the reasons for such refusal to the  person by whom notice was given.  
(6) Where the Board neglects or omits, for one month after the receipt of a  valid notice, to make and 
to deliver to the person who has giv en the notice any order of any nature specified in  this section, and 
such person thereafter by a written communication sent by registered post to the Board calls  the attention 
of the Board to the neglect or omission, then, if such neglect or omission conti nues for a further  period of 
fifteen days from the date of such communication the Board shall be deemed to have given sanction  to the 
erection or r e-erection, as the case may be:  
Provided that, in any case to which the provisions of sub -section  (3) apply, the period of one month 
herein specified shall be reckoned from the date on which the Board  has received the report referred to in 
that sub -section.  
239. Order of stoppage of building or works in certain cases  and disposal of things removed .—
(1) Where the erection of any building or execution of any work has been  commenced or is being carried 
on without or contrary to the sanction, but has not been completed, referred to  in section 238 or in 
contravention of any condition subject to which such s anction has been accorded or in contravention of 
any provision of this Act or bye -laws made thereunder, the Chief Executive Officer may in  addition to 
any other action that may be taken under this Act, by order require the person at whose instance the  
building or the work has been commenced or is being carried on to stop the same forthwith.  
(2) If an order  made by the Chief Executive Officer under sub -section ( 1) directing any per son to stop 
the erection of any building or execution of any work is not complied with, the Chief Executive Officer 
may require any police  officer to remove such person and all his assistants and workmen from the 
premises or to seize any  construction material, tool, machinery, scaffolding or other things used in the 
erection of any building o r execution of any work within such time as may be specified in the requisition 
and such police officer shall  comply with the requisition a ccordingly.  
(3) Any of the things caused or to be seized by the Chief Executive  Officer under sub -section ( 2) shall 
be disposed of by him in a manner specifi ed in sub -sections ( 6) and ( 7). 
(4) After the requisition under sub -section ( 2) has been complied with the Chief Executive Officer 
may, if he  thinks fit, depute by a written order a police officer  or an officer or a n emp loyee of the Board 
to watch the premises in order to ensure that the erection of the building or the execution of work is not 
continued.  
(5) Where a police officer or an officer or an employee of the Board has been deputed under                   
sub-section ( 4) to watch the premises, the cost of such deputation shall be paid by the person at whose 
instance  such erection or execution is being continued or to whom notice under sub -section ( 1) was given 
and shall be  recoverable from such person as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
(6) Any of the things caused to be removed by  the Chief Executive Officer under this section shall 
unless the owner thereof turns up to take back such things  and pays to the Chief Executive Officer 
charges for removal and storage of such things be disposed of by the  Chief Executive Officer by a public 
auction or in such  other manner as he thinks fit:  
Provided that such things  shall only be disposed of by the Chief Executive Officer on the exp iry of 
fifteen days in case of non perishable  things and twenty -four hours in case of perishable things from the 
date and time of seizure.  
(7) The charges for  removal and storage and sale of things sold under sub -section ( 6) shall be paid out 
of the proce eds of the sale  thereof and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the owner of the things sold on  
79 
 a claim being made therefor  within a period of one year from the date of sale and if no such claim is made 
within the said period, shall be  credited to the ca ntonment fund.  
240. Power to sanction general scheme for prevention of overcrow ding, etc. —The General 
Officer Commanding -in-Chief the Command in Consultation with the Principal Director may sanction a 
general  scheme of erection or re -erection of buildings within such limits as may be specified in the 
sanction for the  prevention of overcrowding or for purpose of sanitation, or in the interest o f persons 
residing within those limits or for any other purpose, and may, in pursuance of such scheme, impose 
restri ctions on the erection or  re-erection of  buildings within those limits:  
Provided that no such scheme shall be sanctioned by the General  Officer Commanding -in-Chief, the 
Command unless an opportunity has been given by a public notice to be  published locally  by the Chief 
Executive Officer requiring persons affected or likely to be affected by the  proposed scheme, to file their 
objections or suggestions in the manner specified  in the notice, within a period of thirty days of the 
publication of such notice, and  the Chief Executive Officer shall after considering such  objections and 
suggestions, if any, forward the same along with his recommendations to the Principal Director.  
241. Compensation .—(1) No compensation shall be claimable by any person for  any damage or loss 
which he may sustain in consequence of the refusal of the Board of sanction to the erection  of any 
building or in respect of any direction issued by it under sub -section ( 1) of section 238.  
(2) The Board shall make compensation to the owner of any  building for any actual damage or loss 
sustained by him inconsequence of the prohibition of the re -erection of any building or of its requiring 
any land belonging to him  to be added to  the street:  
Provided that the Board shall not be liable to make any co mpensation in respect of the  prohibition of 
the re -erection of any building which for a period of three years or more immediately preceding  such 
refusal has not been in existence or has been unfit for human habitation.  
242. Completion notice .—Every person  to whom sanction for the erection or re -erection of any 
building in any  area in a cantonment has been given under section 237 or section 238 by the Chief 
Executive Officer or, as the  case may be, by the Board shall, within thirty days after completion of the 
erection or re -erection of the building give a notice of completion in writing to the Chief Executive 
Officer or the Board, as the case may be,  and the Chief Executive Officer or the Board shall on receipt of 
such notice cause the building to be inspec ted in order to ensure that the building has been completed in 
accordance with the sanction given by the Chief  Executive Officer or the Board, as the case may be.  
243. Lapse of sanction .—Every sanction for the erection or re -erection of a building given o r 
deemed to have been given as herein  before  provided shall be available for two years from the date on 
which it is given, and, if the building so sanctioned  is not begun by the person who ha s obtained the 
sanction or some one lawfully claiming under him wi thin that  period, it shall not thereafter be begun 
unless the Chief Executive Officer, on application made there  for has  allowed an extension of that period.  
244. Restrictions on use of  buildings. —(1) No person shall, without the written permission of the  
Board or otherwise than in conformity  with the condition s, if any, of such permission, — 
(a) use or permit to be used for human habitation any part of a  building not originally erected or 
authorised to be used for that purpose or not used for that purpose before any  alteration has been 
made therein by any work executed in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the  bye-laws 
made thereunder;  
(b) change or allow the change of the use of any l and or building;  
(c) convert or allow the conversion of one kind of tenement into another kind.  
(2) Any person who contravenes the  provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall on conviction be punishable 
with a fi ne which may extend to one lakh rupees and in the case of continuing contravention with an 
additional fine of ru pees ten thousand for every day  during which the contravention continue s after the 
date it comes to the  notice.  
245. Period for completion  of building .—A Board, when sanctioning the erection or re -erection of  a 
building as hereinbefore provided, shall specify a reasonable period after the work has commenced within   
80 
 which the erection or re -erection is to be completed, and, if the erection or re -erection is not completed 
within  the period so fixed, it shall not be continued thereafter without fresh sancti on obtained in the 
manner  hereinbefore provided, unless the Board on application made therefor has allowed an extension of 
that period:  
Provided that not more than two such extensions, each for not more than one year,  shall be allowed 
in any case.  
246. Co mpletion certificate .—The Chief Executive Officer shall on receipt  of the notice under 
section 242 of this Act cause the building to be inspected either by himself or by the officer  authorised by 
him in his behalf in order to ensure that the building has been completed in accordance with the  sanction 
given and issue completion certificate provided that the person seeking the completion certificate shall  
assist the Chief Executive Officer in inspection of such building:  
Provided  that the building shall not be occupied for habitation unless a certificate is issued by the 
Chief Executive Offi cer or an officer authorised by him in this behalf:  
Provided further that if the Chief Executive Officer fails within a period of thirty days after  the receipt 
of the not ice of completion, to communicate his refusal to issue such certificate, such certificate  shall be 
deemed to have been granted.  
247. Illegal erection and re -erection .—Whoever begins, continues or completes the erectio n or            
re-erection of a build ing— 
(a) without having  given a valid notice as required by sections 235 and 236, or before the 
building has been sanctioned or is deemed to have been sanctioned; or  
(b) without complying with any direction made under sub -section ( 1) of section 238; or  
(c) when sanction has been refused, or has ceased to be available or has been suspended by the  
General Officer Commanding -in-Chief, the Command, under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of               
section 58,  
shall  be punishable with fine which may extend  to fifty thousand rupees and the cost of sealing the illegal 
construction and its demolition.  
248. Power to  stop erection or re -erection or to demolish .—(1) A Board may, at any time, by 
notice in writing, direct the  owner, lessee or occupier of any land in the cantonment to stop the erection or 
re-erection of a building in any  case in which the Board considers that such erection or re -erection is an 
offence under section 247 and may, in  any such case or in any other case in which the Board considers 
that the erection or re-erection of a building is an offence under section 247,  within twelve months of the 
completion of such erection or re -erection in like  manner, direct the alteration or demolition, as it thinks 
necessary,  of the building, or any part t hereof, so  erected or re -erected:  
Provided that the Board may, instead of requiring the alter ation or demolition of any such building or 
part thereof, accept by way of composition su ch sum as it thinks reasonable:  
Provided further that  the Board shall not,  without the previous concurrence of the General Officer 
Commanding -in-Chief, the  Command, accept any sum by way of composition under the foregoing 
proviso in respect of any building on  land which is not und er the management of the Board.  
(2) A Board shall  by notice in writing direct the owner,  lessee or occupier of any land in the 
cantonment to stop the erection or re -erection of a building in any case in  which the order under                
section 238 sanctioning the erection or re -erection has been susp ended by the                                                                 
General  Officer   Commanding -in-Chief, the Command, under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 58, 
and shall in  any such case in like manner direct the demolition or alteratio n, as the case may be, of the 
building or any part  thereof so erected or re -erected where the General Officer Commanding -in-Chief, the 
Command, thereafter  directs that the order of the Board sanctioning the erection or re -erection of th e 
building shall not  be carried into effect or shall be carried into effect with modifications specified by him:  
Provided that the Board shall pay  to the owner of the building compensation for any loss actually 
incurred by him in consequence of the  demolition or alteration o f any building which has been erected or  
81 
 re-erected prior to the date on which the  order of the General Officer Commanding -in-Chief, the 
Command, has been communicated to him.  
249. Power to se al unauthorised constructions .—(1) It shall be  lawful for the Chief Executive 
Officer, at any time, before or after making an order of demolition under section  248 or of the stoppage of 
erection of any building, or execution of any work, to make an order directing the  sealing of such erection 
or work or of the premis es in which such erection or work is being carried on or has  been completed at 
the cost of the offender in such manner as may be prescribed by rules for the purpose of  carrying out the 
provisions of this Act or for preventing any dispute as to the nature a nd extent of such erection  or work.  
(2) Where any erection or work or any premises in which any erection or work is being carried on,  
has or, has been sealed, the Chief Executive Officer may, for the purpose of demolishing such erection or 
work  in accorda nce with the provisions of this Act, order such seal to be removed.  
(3) No person shall remove such  seal except — 
(a) under an order made by the Chief Executive Officer under sub -section ( 2); or 
(b) under an  order of an appellate authority in  an appeal made under this Act.  
(4) Any person who contravenes the  provisions contained in sub -section ( 3) shall be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to six months  or with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees, 
or with both.  
250. Courts not to entertain proceedings in certain cases .—(1) After the  commencement of this 
Act, no court shall entertain any suit, application or other proceedings in respect of any  order or notice 
unless an appeal under section 340 is preferred and the same  is disposed of by the appellate  authority 
under sub -section (3) of section 343 of this Act.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section  (1), every suit, application or other 
proceedings pending in any court immediately before the  commencement of  this Act shall continue to be 
dealt with and disposed of by that court as if the said section  has not been brought into force.  
251. Power to make bye -laws .—A Board  may make bye -laws prescribing — 
(a) the manner in which notice of the intention to erect or re-erect a building  in the cantonment 
shall be given to the Board or, as the case may be, the Chief Executive Officer and the  information 
and plans to be furnished with the notice;  
(b) the manner in which and the form in which a notice  of completion of er ection or re -erection of 
any building in the cantonment shall be given to the Board or, as  the case may be, the Chief Executive 
Officer and the information and plans to be furnished with the notice;  
 (c) the type or description of buildings which may or ma y not, and the purpose for which a 
building may or may  not, be erected or re -erected in the cantonment or any part thereof;  
(d) the minimum cubic capacity of any  room or rooms in a building which is to be erected or              
re-erected;  
(e) the fees payable on provision by the Board  of plans or specifications of the type of buildings 
which may be erected in the cantonment or any part thereof;  
(f) the circumstances in which mosque, temple or church or other sacred building may be erected 
or re-erected;  and 
(g) with reference to the erection or re -erection of buildings, or of any class of buildings, or  any 
of the following matters, namely: — 
(i) the line of frontage where the building abuts on a street;  
(ii) the space to be left  about the building to secure free circulation of air and facilities for 
scavenging and for the prevention of fire;  
(iii) the materials and method of construction to be used for external and  party walls, roofs 
and floors;   
82 
 (iv) the  position, the materials and the method of constr uction of stair -cases, fire places, 
chimneys, drains, latrines,  privies, urinals and cess -pools;  
(v) height and slope of the roof above the uppermost floor upon which human  beings are to 
live or cooking operations are to be carried on;  
(vi) the level and width of the foundation, the  level of the lowest floor, the stability of the 
structure and the protection of building from dampness arising  from sub -soil; 
(vii) the number an d height of the storeys of which  the building may consist;  
(viii) the means to  be provided for egress from the building in case of  fire;  
(ix) the safeguarding of wells from pollution; or  
(x) the materials and method of construction to be used for godowns  intended for the storage 
of food  grains in excess of eighteen quintals in order t o render them rat proof.  
252. Prohibition of structures or fixtures which  cause obstruction in streets .—(1) No person 
shall, except with the permission of the Chief Executive Officer, erect or set up any wall, fence,  nail, post, 
step, booth or other structure whether fixed or movable or whether of a permanent or temporary  nature, or 
any fixture in or upon any street so as to form an obstruction to , or an encroachment upon, or a projection 
over, or to occupy any portion of such street, channel, drain, well or tank.  
(2) The Chief Executive  Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner or occupier of any such 
building to alter or remove any such projection or encroachment as aforesaid:  
 Provided that, in the case of any projection or encroachment  lawfully in existence at the 
commencement of this Act, the Chief Executive Officer shall make compensation  for any damage caused 
by the removal or alteration.  
(3) The Chief Executive Officer may, by order in writing,  give permission to the owners or occupi ers 
of buildings in any particular street to put up open verandahs,  balconies or rooms projecting from any 
upper storey thereof to an extent b eyond the line of the plinth or basement wall at such height from the 
level ground or street as may be specified i n the order.  
253. Unauthorised  buildings over drains, etc. —The Chief Executive  Officer may, by notice in 
writing require any person who has, without his permission in writing, newly erected  or re -erected any 
structure over any public sewer, drain, culvert, water -course or water -pipe in the cantonment  to pull down 
or otherwise deal with the same as he thinks fit.  
254. Dr ainage and sewer connections. —(1) The Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, 
require the  owner or lessee of any buildin g or land in any street, at his own expense and in such manner as 
he thinks fit, to  put up and keep in good condition, proper troughs and pipes for receiving a nd carrying 
rain water from the building or land and for discharging the same or to establish and  maintain any other 
connection or  communication between such buildings or land and a drain or sewer or a water harvesting 
structure or facility.  
(2) For the purpose of efficiently draining any building or land in the cantonment, the Chief Executive 
Officer  may, by notice in writing, require the owner or lessee of the building or land — 
(a) to pave, with such materials  and in such manner as he thinks fit, any courtyard, alley or 
passage between two or more buildings; or  
(b) to keep any such paving in proper repair; or  
(c) to make such arrangements as may be specified by the Board  under bye -laws to deliver rain 
water from roof top to the water harvesting facility created or arranged by the  Board.  
255. Power to attach brackets for  lamps and other accessories .—The Chief Executive Officer may 
attach to the out side of any building, or to any tree in the cantonment, brackets for lamps or any 
accessories for non -conventional sources of energy in such  manner as not to occasion injury thereto or 
inconvenience .  
83 
 256. Maintenance of r oads .—(1) All roads in the civil area of a cantonment shall be maintained by 
the Board.  
(2) All roads outside the civil area as have been vested in the Board shall also be maintained by the 
Board.  
Streets  
257. Temporary occupation of street, land, etc. —(1) The Chief  Executive Officer may, by order in 
writing, permit the temporary occupation of any street, or of any land  vested in the Board, for the purpose 
of depositing any building materials or making any temporary excavation  therein or erection thereon, 
subject to such conditions as the Board may prescribe for the safety or convenience  of the public, and 
may charge a fee for such permission and may in his discretion withdraw such permission.  
(2) Where any article or thing is placed on  any street or land under the management of the Board or 
the Defence  Estates Officer so as to form an obstruction thereto or any encroachment thereon, the Chief 
Executive Officer  or, as the case may be, the Defence Estates Officer, may cause such article o r thing to 
be removed and recover  from the person who placed such article or thing the expenses incurred in that 
behalf in the same manner as  moneys recoverable by the Board under section 324 and may also, if such 
person fails to offer satisfactory  explana tion, order the confiscation of such article or thing.  
258. Closing and opening of streets. —(1) A Board may open any street for pu blic use.  
(2) A Board shall not permanently close any street without the prior permission of the General Officer 
Commanding in  Chief, or the  Principal Director:  
Provided that no such street shall be closed for reasons othe r than the security reasons and without 
giving a public notice inviting objections and sugge stions from the general public.  
(3) The Chief  Executive Officer may,  by public notice, temporarily close any street or any part of a 
street for repair or for the  purpose of carrying out any work connected with drainage, water -supply or 
lighting or any other work which  he is by or under this  Act requ ired or permitted to car ry out:  
Provided th at where, owing to any works or repairs or from any other cause, the condition of any 
street or of any water -works, drain, culvert or premise vested in the Board, is such as to be likely to cause 
danger to the public, the Board shall — 
(a) take all reasonable  means for the protection of the adjacent buildings and land and provide 
reasonable means of access thereto;  
(b) cause sufficient barriers or fences to be erected for the security of life and property, and cause 
such barriers or  fences to be sufficiently lighted from sunset to sunrise.  
259. Names of streets and numbers of buildings .—(1) A Board may determine the name or number 
by which  any area, street or public place in the cantonment shall be known and may cause name or 
number t o be affixed  on any building in the cantonment in such place as it thinks fit and may also cause a 
number to be affixed to  any such building.  
(2) Whoever destroys, pulls down, defaces or alters any such name or  number or puts up any name or 
number differin g from that put up by the order of the Board shal l be punishable with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees.  
(3) When a name or number has been affixed to any building under sub -section  (1), the owner of the 
building shall maintain the name or numbe r in order, and shall replace it if  removed or defaced, and if he 
fails to do so the Chief Executive Officer may b y notice in writing require him to replace it.  
260. Group Housing Schemes .—A Board, may in  accordance with the bye -laws framed for the 
purpos e, allow the Group Housing Schemes for construction of  houses.  
261. Boundary walls, hedges and fences. —(1) No boundary wall, hedge or fence of any material or 
description shall be erected in a cantonment without the  permission in writing of the Chief Executive 
Officer .  
84 
 (2) The Chief Exec utive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner or lessee of any land in 
the cantonmen t— 
(a) to remove from the land any boundary  wall, hedge or fence which is in his opinion unsuitable, 
unsightly or otherwis e objectionable; or  
(b) to construct on the land sufficient boundary walls, hedges or fences of such material, 
description or dimensions as  may be specified in the notice; or  
(c) to maintain the boundary walls, hedges or fences of such lands in good  order:  
Provided that in the case of any such boundary wall, hedge or fence which was erected with the 
consent  or under the orders of the Chief Executive Officer or which was in existence at the 
commencement of this Act,  the Board shall make compensation f or any damage caused by the 
removal thereof.  
(3) The Chief Executive  Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner, lessee or occupier of 
any such land to cut or trim any hedge on the land in such manner and within such time as may be 
specified in the notice.  
262. Felling, lopping and trimming of trees .—(1) Where, in the opinion of a  Board, the felling of 
any tree of mature growth standing in a private enclosure in the cantonment is necessary  for any reason, 
the Board may, by notice in writing, req uire the owner, lessee or occupier of the land to fell the  tree 
within such time as may be specified in the notice.  
(2) A Board may — 
(a) cause to be lopped or trimmed  any tree standing on land in the cantonment which belongs to 
the Government; or  
(b) by public notice require  all owners, lessees or occupiers of land in the cantonment, or by 
notice in writing require the owner, lessee or  occupier of any such land, to lop or trim, in such manner 
as may be specified in the notice, all or any trees standing on  such land or to remove any dead trees 
from such land.  
263. Digging of public land. —Whoever, without the permission in writing of the Chief Executive 
Officer, digs up  the surface of any open space in the cantonment, which is not private property, shall be 
punishable with fine  which may extend to two thousand five hundred rupees and in the case of a 
continuing offence, with an  additional fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every day after 
the first during which the offence  continues.  
264. Impro per use of land .—(1) If, in the opinion of the Chief Executive Officer, the working of a 
quarry in the cantonment, or the removal of stone, earth or other material  from the soil in any place in the 
cantonment, is dangerous to persons residing in or frequenting the  neighbourhood or such quarry or place, 
or creates, or is likely to create, a nuisance, the Chief Executive Officer  may, by notice in writing, 
prohibit the owner, lessee or occupier of such quarry or place or the person  responsible for such working 
or removal, from continuing or permitting the working of such quarry or the  moving of such material, or 
require him to take such steps in the matter as he may direct for the purpose of  preventing danger or 
abating the nuisance arisin g or likely to arise therefrom.  
(2) If, in  any case referred to in sub-section ( 1), the Chief Executive Officer is of opinion that such a 
course is necessary in order to prevent  imminent danger, he may, by order in writing, require a proper 
hoarding or fence to be put up  for the  protection of passers -by. 
CHAPTER XI  
MARKETS, SLAUGHTER -HOUSES, TRADES  AND  OCCUPATIONS  
265. Public markets and slaughter -houses .—(1) A Board may provide and maintain, on the land 
under its  control, public markets and public slaughter -houses, to such number as it thinks fit , together 
with stalls, shops, sheds, pens and other buildings or conveniences for the use of persons carrying on 
trade or business in or  frequenting such markets or slaughter -houses, and may provide and maintain in  
85 
 any such mar ket buildings,  places, machines, weights, scales and measures for the weighment or 
measurement of goods sold therein.  
(2)When such market or slaughter -house is situated beyond cantonment limits, the Board shall have 
the same  power for the inspection and p roper regulation of the same as if it were situated within those 
limits.  
(3) The  Board may at any time, by public notice, close any public market or public slaughter -house or 
any part thereof.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise the es tablishme nt of a public market or public  
slaughter -house within the limits of any area administered by any local authority other than the Board, 
without  the permission of such local authority or otherwise than on such conditions as such local 
authority may  approve.  
266. Use of public market. —(1) No person shall, without the general or special  permission in 
writing of the Chief Executive Officer, sell or expose for sale any animal or article in any public  market.  
(2) Any person contravening the provisions of  this section, and any animal or article exposed for sale  
by such person, may be summarily removed from the market by or under the orders of the Chief 
Executive  Officer or any official of the Board authorised by him in this behalf.  
267. Power to tra nsfer by public auction, etc .—(1) The Board may transfer by public auction, for  
any period not exceeding five years at a time, the right to occupy or use any stall, shop, standing, shed or 
pen in a public market, or public slaughter -house or the right to expose goods for sale in a public market 
or the  right to weigh or measure goods sold therein, or the right to slaughter animals in any public 
slaughter -house:  
Provided that where the Board is of opinion that such transfer of the aforesaid rights by public auction  
is not  considered desirable or expedient, it may, with the previous sanction of the  General Officer 
Commanding -in-Chief, the Command or in his ab sence, the Principal Director, — 
(a) either levy such stallages, rents or fees as it  thinks fit; or  
(b) farm t he stallages, rents and fees leviable under clause ( a) for any period not exceeding one 
year at a time:  
Provided further that the enjoyment of any such aforesaid right by any person for any length of  time 
shall never be deemed to create or confer any tenancy right in such stall, shop, standing, shed, pen, public  
market or public slaughter -house.  
(2) The Board may transfer by public auction or otherwise any immovable  property other than in a 
public market or a public slaughter house if such property is capable of being put to  remunerative use for 
such period and on such terms and conditions as may be approved by the General Officer                
Commanding -in-Chief, the Command or in his absence, the Principal Director.  
268. Stallages, rents, etc., to b e published .—A copy of the table of stallages, rents and fees, if  any, 
leviable in any public market or public slaughter -house, and of the bye -laws made under this Act for the  
purpose of regulating the use of such market or slaughter -house, printed in Engl ish language or in such 
other  language or languages as the Board may direct, shall be affixed in some conspicuous place in the 
market or  slaughter -house.  
269. Private markets and slaughter -houses. —(1) No place in a cantonment other than a public 
market sha ll be used  as a market, and no place in a cantonment other than a public slaughter -house shall 
be used as a slaughter -house, unless such place has been  licensed as a market or slaughter -house, as  the 
case may be, by the Board:  
Provided that nothing in this sub-sections  shall apply in the case of a                                                      
slaughter -house established and maintained by the Central Government or  the State Government, as the 
case may be.  
   
86 
 (2) Nothing in s ub-section ( 1) shall be deemed — 
(a) to restrict thes e slaughter of any animal in any place on the occasion of any festival or 
ceremony, subject to such conditions as  to prior or subsequent notice as the Chief Executive Officer 
with the previous sanction of  the District  Magistrate may, by public or special notice, impose in this 
behalf; or  
(b) to prevent the Chief Executive  Officer, with the sanction of the Board, from setting apart 
places for the slau ghter of animals in accordance with religious custom.  
(3) Whoever omits to comply with any condition imposed by the Chief Executive  Officer under 
clause (a) of sub -section ( 2) shall be punishable with fine wh ich may extend to five thousand rupees and, 
in the case of continuing offence, with an additional fine wh ich may extend to one thousand rupees  for 
every day after the first during which the offence is continued.  
270. Conditions of grant of licence for private market or slaughter -house. —(1) A Board may 
charge such fees as it thinks fit to impose for the grant of a licence to any person to open a  private market 
or private slaughter -house in the cantonment, and may grant such  licence subject to such conditions, 
consistent with this Act and any bye -laws made thereunder, as it thinks fit to impose.  
(2) The Board  may refuse to grant any such licence without giving reasons for such refusal.  
271. Penalty for keeping market or slaughter -house open  without licence, etc. —(1) Any person 
who keeps open for public use any market or slaughter -house in respect  of which a licence is required by 
or under this Act, without obtaining licence therefor, or while the licence  therefor is suspended, or after 
the same has been cancelled, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to  five thousand rupees and, 
in the case of a con tinuing offence, with an additional fine which may extend to five  hundred rupees for 
every day after the first during which the offence is continued.  
(2) When a licence to open a  private market or private slaughter -house is granted or refused or is 
suspen ded or cancelled, the Board shall  cause a notice of the grant, refusal, suspension or cancellation to 
be pasted  in English or such language or languages as it thinks necessary in some conspicuous place by or 
near the entrance to the place to which the  notice relates.  
272. Penalty for using unlicensed market or slaughter -house .—Whoever, knowing that any 
market or slaughter -house has been opened  to the public without a licence having been obtained therefor 
when such licence is required by or under this  Act, o r that the licence granted therefor is for the time 
being suspended or that it has been cancelled, sells or  exposes for sale any article in such market, or 
slaughters any animal in  such slaughter -house, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fiv e 
thousand rupees and, in the case of a continuing offence, with  an additional fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees for every day a fter the first during which the offence is continued.  
273. Prohibition and restriction of use of slaughter -house. —(1) Where, in the opinion of the Chief 
Executive Officer, it is necessary  on sanitary grounds so to do, he may, by public notice, prohibit for such 
period n ot exceeding one month, as may be specified in the notice, or for such further period not 
exceeding on e month, as he may specify by a like  notice, the use of any private slaughter -house specified 
in the notice, or the slaughter therein of any animal of  any description so specified.  
(2) A copy of every notice issued under sub -section ( 1) shall be conspicuo usly pasted in the 
slaughter -house to which it relates.  
274. Power to  inspect slaughter -houses .—(1) Any official of a Board, authorised by order in 
writing in this behalf by the  Chief Executive Officer or the Health Officer, may, if he has reason to 
believe that any animal has been, is  being, or is about to be slaughtered in any place in contravention of 
the provisions of this Chapter, enter into  and inspect any such place at any time, whether by day or by 
night.  
(2) Every such order shall specify th e place  to be entered and the locality in which the same is 
situated and the period, which shall not exceed seven days  for which the order is to remain in force.  
   
87 
 275. Power to  regulate certain activities .—A Board may, by order, regulate all or any of t he 
following matters, namely :— 
(a) the days on, and the hours during, which any private market or private slaughter -house may be 
kept open for  use;  
(b) the regulation of the design, ventilation and drainage of such mark et or slaughter -houses, and 
the material to be used in the construction thereof;  
(c) the keeping of such markets and slaughter -houses and lands  and buildings appertaining thereto 
in a clean and sanitary condition, the removal  of filth and refuse therefrom, and the supply therein of 
pure water and of a sufficient number of latrines and urinals for the use of persons  using or 
frequenting the same;  
(d) the manner in which animals shall be stalled at a slaughter -house;  
(e) the manner in which animals may be slaughtered;  
(f) the disposal or  destruction of animals offered for slaughter  which are, from disease or any 
other cause, unfit for human consumption;  
(g) the destruction of carcasses  which from disease or any other cause are found after slaughter to 
be unfit for human consumption; and  
(h) any other matter with respect to the regulation of such markets and slaughter -houses.  
Trade and occupations  
276. Provision of washing places. —(1) A Board may provide suitable places for the exercise  by 
washermen of their calling, and may require paymen t of such fees for the use thereof as it thinks fit.  
(2) Where the Board has provided such places as aforesaid it may, by public notice, prohibit the 
washing of  clothes by washermen at any  other place in the cantonment:  
Provided that such prohibition shall  not be deemed  to apply to the washing by a washerman of his 
own clothes or of the clothe s of any other person who is an occupier of the place at which they are 
washed.  
(3) Whoever contravenes any prohibition contained in a notice  is sued under sub -sectio n (2) shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
277. Licences required for carrying on of certain  occupations. —(1) No person of any of  the 
following classes, namely: — 
(a) butchers and vendors of poultry,  game or fish;  
(b) persons keeping pigs for profit, and dealers in the flesh of pigs which have been slaughtered  
within or without cantonment;  
(c) persons keeping milch cattle or milch goats for profit;  
(d) persons keeping  for profit any animals other than pigs, milch catt le or milch goats;  
(e) dairymen, buttermen and makers and  vendors of ghee;  
(f) makers of bread, biscuits or cake and vendors of bread, biscuits or cake made within or  
without cantonment;  
(g) vendors of fruits or vegetables;  
(h) manufacturers of aerated  or other potable waters or  of ice or ice -cream, and vendors of the 
same;  
 (i) vendors of any medicines, drugs or articles of food or drink  for human consumption                  
(other than the flesh of pigs, milk, butter, bread, bis cuits, cake, fruit, ve getables, aerated or other 
potable waters or ice or ice -cream) which are of a perishable nature;  
(j) vendors of spirituous  liquor;  
(k) vendors of water to be used for drinking purposes;   
88 
 (l) washermen;  
(m) dealers in hay, straw, wood,  charcoal or other i nflammable material;  
(n) dealers in fire -works, keros ene oil, petroleum or any other inflammable oil or spirit;  
(o) tanners and dyers;  
(p) persons carrying on any  trade or occupation from which offensive or unwholesome smells 
arise;  
(q) vendors of wheat, rice and other grain or of flour;  
(r) makers and  vendors of sugar or sweetmeats;  
(s) barbers and keepers of shaving saloons;  
(t) any other person carrying on  such other trade, calling or occupation as the Central Government 
may, by n otification in the Official Gazette,  specify in this behalf,  
shall carry on his trade, calling or occupation in any par t of a cantonment unless he has applied for and 
obtained a licence in this behalf from the Board.  
(2) A licence granted under sub-section ( 1) shall be valid until the end of the year in which it is issued 
and the grant of such licence shall not be withheld  by the Board unless it has reason to believe that the 
business which it is in tended to establish or maintain would be offensi ve or dangerous to the public or 
that the premises in which the business is intended to be  established or maintained are unfit or unsuitable 
for the purpose.  
(3) Notwit hstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1),— 
(a) no person who was, at the commencement of this Act, carrying on his trade, calling or  
occupation in any part of a cantonment shall be bound to apply for a licenc e for carrying on such 
trade or occupation in that part until he has received from the Board not less than three month‟ s notice 
in writing of his  obligation to do so, and if the Board refuses to grant him a licence, it shall pay 
compensation for any loss  incurred by reason of such refusal;  
(b) no person shall be required to take out a licence for the sale or storage of  petro leum or for the 
sale or possession for sale of poisons or white arsenic in any case in which he is required  to take out a 
licence for such sale, storage, or possession for sale by or under the Petroleum Act,                            
1934  (30 of 1934)  or the Poisons Act, 1919  (12 of 1919).  
(4) The Board may charge for the grant of licences, under this section such reasonable fees,  as it may 
fix keeping in view the fees levied in this regard in a municipality in the State wherein such  cantonment is 
situated .  
278. Power to stop use of premises used in contravention of licences .—If the Chief Executive 
Officer is of opinion  that any eating house, lodging house, hotel, boarding house, tea shop, coffee house, 
café, restaurant,  refreshment room or other place where public is admitted for repose or for consumption 
of any food or drink or  where food is sold or prepared for sale or any theatre, cinema hall, circus, dancing 
hall or similar other place of  public resort, recreation or amusement is kept open without a  license or 
otherwise than in conformity with the  terms of a license granted in respect thereof, he may stop the use of 
any such premises for any such purpose for  a specified period by such means as he may consider 
necessary.  
279. Conditions whi ch may be attached to licence s.—A licence granted to any person under            
section 277 shall specify the part of the cantonment in which the licensee may carry on his trade, calling  
or occupation, and may regulate the hours and manner of transport within the cantonment of any specified 
articles  intended for human consumption, and may contain any other conditions which the Board thinks 
fit to impose  in accordance with bye -laws made under this Act.  
 
  
89 
 General provision s 
280. Power to vary licence. —If the Board is  satisfied that any place used under a licence granted  
under this Chapter is a nuisance or is likely to be dangerous to life, health  or property, the Board may, by 
notice in writing, require the owner, lessee or occupier thereof to discontinue the use of s uch place or to 
effect  such alternations, additions, or improvements as will, in the opinion of the Board, render it no 
longer a  nuisance or dangerous.  
281. Carrying on trade, etc., without licence or i n contravention of section 280. —Whoever 
carries any trade,  calling or occupation for which a licence is required without obtaining a licence therefor 
or while the licence  therefor is suspended or after the same has been cancelled, and whoever, after 
receiving a notice under section  280, uses or allows to be  used any building or place in contravention 
thereof, shall be punishable with fine  which may extend to five thousand rupees and, in the case of a 
continuing offence, with an additional fine  which may extend to five hundred rupees for every day after 
the first during which the offence is continued.  
282. Feeding animals on dirt, etc. —Whoever feeds or allows to be fed on  filthy or deleterious 
substances any animal, which is kept for the purpose of supplying milk to, or which is  intended to be used 
as food for , the inhabitants of a cantonment or allows it to graze in any place in which grazing has, for 
sanitary reasons, been prohibited by public notice by the Board shall be punishable with fine  which may 
extend to one thousand rupees.  
Entry, inspection and seiz ure 
283. Powers of entry and  seizure. —(1) The President or the Vice -President, the Chief Executive 
Officer, the Health Officer, the Assistant  Health Officer, or any other official of a Board authorised b y it 
in writing in this behalf — 
(a) may at any time  enter into any market, building, shop, stall or other place in the cantonment 
for the purpose of inspecting, and  may inspect, any animal, article or thing intended for human food 
or drink or for medicine, whether exposed or  hawked about for sale or deposit ed in or brought to any 
place for the purpose of sale, or of preparation for sale,  or any utensil or vessel for preparing, 
manufacturing or containing any such article, or thing, and may enter  into and inspect any place used 
as a slaughter -house and may ex amine  any animal or article therein;  
(b) may  seize any such animal, article or thing which appears to him to be diseased, or 
unwholesome or unfit for human  food or drink or medicine, as the case may be, or to be adulterated 
or to be not what it is represen ted to be, or  any such utensil or vessel which is of such a kind or in 
such a state as to render any article prepared,  manufactured or contained therein unwholesome or 
unfit for human food, drink or medicine, as the case may  be. 
(2) Any article seized unde r sub -section ( 1) which is of a perishable nature may, under the orders of 
the Health Officer or the Assistant Health Officer, forthwith be destroyed if, in his opinion, it is diseased,  
unwholesome or unfit for human food, drink or medicine, as the case ma y be.  
(3) Every animal, article, utensil,  vessel or other thing seized under sub -section ( 1) shall, if it is not 
destroyed under sub -section ( 2), be taken  before a Magistrate who shall give orders as to its disposal.  
(4) The owner or person in possession , at the time  of seizure under sub -section ( 1), of any animal or 
carcass which is diseased or of any article or thing which is  unwholesome or unfit for human food, drink 
or medicine, as the case may be, or is adulterated or is not what it  is represented to  be, or of any utensil or 
vessel which is of such kind or in such state as is described in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, and the animal,  article, utensil, vessel or 
other thing shall be liable to be forfeited to the Board or to be destroyed or to be so  disposed of as to 
prevent it being exposed for sale or used for the preparation of food, drink or medicine, as the   case may 
be.  
90 
 Explanation I .—If any such article, having been exposed or stored in, or brought to, any place  
mentioned in sub -section ( 1) for sale as ghee, contains any substance not exclusively derived from milk, it 
shall  be deemed, for the purposes of this section, to be an article which is not what it is represented to be . 
Explanation II .—Meat subjected to the process of blowing shall be deemed to be unfit for human 
food.   
Explanation III. —The article of food or drink shall not be deemed to be other than what it is 
represented to be  merely by reason of the fact that there has been added to it some substance not injurious 
to health:  
Provided  that— 
(a) such substance has been added to the article because the same is required for the preparation 
or production thereof as an article of commerce in a state fit for carriage or co nsumption and not 
fraudulently to  increase the bulk, weight or measure of the food or drink or conceal the inferior 
quality thereof; or  
(b) in the  process of production, preparation or conveyance of such article of food or drink, the 
extraneous substance has unavoidably become intermixed therewith; or  
(c) the owner or person in possession of the article has given  sufficient notice by means of a label 
distinctly and legibly written or printed thereon or therewith, or by other  means of a public 
description, that such substance has been added; or  
(d) such owner or person has purchased  the article with a written warranty that it was of a certain 
nature, substance and quality and had no reason to  believe that it was not of such nature, substance 
and quality, and has exposed it or hawked it about or brought  it for sale in the same state and by the 
same description as that in and by which he purchased it.  
Import of cattle and flesh  
284. Import of cattle and flesh .—(1) No person sh all, without the permission in  writing of the Chief 
Executive Officer, bring into a cantonment any animal intended for human consumption,  or the flesh of 
any animal slaughtered outside the cantonment otherwise than in a slaughter -house maintained  by the 
Central Government or the  State Government or the Board:  
Provided that the Chief Executive Officer  shall not grant such permission unless he has considered 
the recommendation of the Health Officer made this behalf.  
(2) Any animal or flesh brought into a cantonment in contravention of sub -section ( 1) may be  seized 
by the Chief Executive Officer or by any official of the Board and sold or otherwise disposed of as the  
President of the Board may direct, and, if it is sold, the sale proceeds may be credited to  the cantonment 
fund.  
(3) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to  two thousand five hundred rupees.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to cured or preserved  meat or to animal s driven 
or meat carried through a cantonment for consumption outside thereof, or to meat  brought into a 
cantonment by any person for his  immediate domestic consumption:  
Provided that the Board  may, by public notice, direct that the provisions of this sect ion shall apply to 
cured or preserved meat of any  specified description or brought from any specified place. 
CHAPTER XII  
SPIRITUOUS  LIQUORS AND  INTOXICATING  DRUGS  
285. Unauthorised sale of spirituous liquor or intoxicating drug .—If within a cantonment, or 
within such limit  sad joining a cantonment as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, define, any  person not subject to Army, Navy or Air Force law, or any person subject to Army, 
Navy or Air Force law,  otherwise than as a mili tary officer or a soldier knowingly barters, sells or  
91 
 supplies, or offers or attempts to  barter, sell or supply, any spirituous liquor or intoxicating drug to or for 
the use of any soldier or soldier's wife  or minor child without the written permission of the Officer 
Commanding the station, or of some person  authorised by the Officer Commanding  the station, to grant 
such permission, he shall be punishable with fine  which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to  six months,  or with both.  
286. Unauthorised possession of  spirituous liquor. —If within a cantonment, or within any limits 
defined under section 285 — 
(a) any person  subject to, Army, Navy or Air Force law, otherwise than as a military officer or a 
soldier;  or  
(b) the wife or  servant of a ny such person or of a soldier,  
has in his or her possession, except on behalf of the Central  Government or for the private use of a 
military officer, more than one quart of any spirituous liquor, other than  fermented malt-liquor, without 
the written permission of the Officer Commanding the station or of some  person authorised by the Officer 
Commanding the station, to grant such permission, he or she shall be  punishable, in the case of a first 
offence, with fine which m ay extend to two thousand five hundred rupees, and,  in the case of a 
subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which  may extend to three months, or  with fine which 
may extend to five thousand rupees.  
287. Arrest of persons and seizure and  confisca tion of things for offences against t he two last 
foregoing sections. —(1) Any police officer or excise  officer may, without an order from a Judicial 
Magistrate, and without a warrant, arrest any person whom he  finds committing an offence under                
section 285 or section 286, and may seize and detain any spirituous liquor  or intoxicating drug in respect 
of which such an offence has been committed and any vessels or coverings in  which the liquor or drug is 
contained.  
(2) Where a person accused of an  offence under section 285 has been  previously convicted of an 
offence under that section, an officer in charge of a police station may, with the  written permission of a 
Judicial Magistrate, seize and detain any spirituous liquor or intoxicating drug within  the cantonment or 
within  any limits defined under that section which, at the time of the alleged, commission of  the 
subsequent offence, belonged to, or was in t he possession of, such person.  
(3) The court convicting a  person of an offence under sect ion 285 or section 286 may order the 
confiscation of the whole or any part of  anything seized under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2). 
(4) Subject to the provisions of Chapter XXXIV of  the C ode of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)  
anything, seized unde r sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) and not  confiscated under sub -section ( 3) shall 
be restored to the person from whom it was taken.  
288. Saving of articles sold or supplied for medicinal  purposes. —The foregoing provisions of this 
Chapter shall not apply to the sale or supply of any article in good  faith for medicinal purposes by a 
medical practitioner, chemist or druggist authorised in this behalf by a  general or special order of the 
Officer Commanding the station.  
CHAPTER XIII  
PUBLIC  SAFETY AND  SUPPRESSION OF NUISANCES  
General Nuisances  
289. P enalty for causing nuisances .—(1) Whoever — 
(a) in any street or other public pl ace within a cantonment, — 
(i) is drunk and disorderly or drunk and incapable of taking care of himself; or  
(ii) uses any threatening,  abusive or insulting words, or behaves in a threatening or insulting 
manner with intent to provoke a breach of  the peace, or whereby a breach of the peace is likely to 
be occasioned; or  
(iii) eases himself, or wil fully or  indecently exposes h is person; or   
92 
 (iv) loiters, or b egs importunately, for alms; or  
(v) exposes or exhibits, with  the object of exciting charity, any deformity or disease or any 
offensive sore or wound; or  
(vi) carries meat  exposed to public view; or  
(vii) is found gaming; or 
(viii) pickets an imals, or collects vehicles; or  
(ix) being  engaged in the removal of night -soil or other offensive matter or rubbish, willfully 
or negligently permits any  portion thereof to spill or fall, or neglects to sweep away or otherwise 
effectually to remove any portion thereof  which may spill or fall in such street or place; or  
(x) without proper authority affixes upon any building,  monument, post, wall, fence, tree or 
other thing, any bil l, notice or other document; or  
(xi) without prop er authority defaces or writes upon or otherwise marks any building, 
monument, post, wall, fence, tree or other  thing; or  
(xii) without proper authority removes, destroys, defaces or otherwise obliterates any notice 
or other  document put up or exhibited un der this Act; or  
(xiii) without proper authority displaces, damages, or makes  any alteration in, or otherwise 
interferes with the  pavement, gutter, storm water -drain, flags or other materials  of any such street, 
or any lamp, bracket, direction -post, hydra nt or water -pipe maintained by the Board in any  such 
street or public place, or extinguishes a public light; or  
(xiv) carries any corpse not decently covered or  without taking due precautions to prevent risk 
of infection or injury to the public health or a nnoyance to  passers -by or to persons dwelling in the 
neighbourhood; or  
(xv) carries night -soil or other offensive matter or  rubbish at any hour prohibited by the Chief 
Executive Officer by public notice, or in any pattern of vehicle or  receptacle which has  not been 
approved for the purpose by the Chief Executive Officer, or fails to close such  vehicle or 
receptacle when in use; or  
(b) carries night -soil or other offensive matter or rubbish along any route  in contravention of any 
prohibition made in this beh alf by the Chief Executi ve Officer by public notice; or  
(c) deposits, or causes or permits to be deposited, earth or materials of any description, or any 
offensive matter or  rubbish, in any place not intended for the purpose in any street or other public 
place or waste or unoccupied  land under the management of the Board; or  
(d) having charge of a corpse fails to bury, burn or otherwise  lawfully dispose of the same within 
twenty-four hours after death; or  
(e) makes any grave or buries or burns  any corpse i n any place not  set apart for such purpose; or  
(f) keeps or uses, or knowingly permits to be kept or  used, any place as a common gaming house, 
or assists in conducting th e business of any common gaming house; or  
(g) at any time or place at which the same h as been prohibited by the Chief Executive Officer 
public or special notice, beats a drum or tom -tom, or blows a horn or trumpet, or beats any utensil, or 
sounds  any brass or other ins trument, or plays any music; or  
(h) disturbs the public peace or order by  singing,  screaming or shouting or by using megaphone 
or loud -speaker; or  
(i) lets loose any animal so as to cause, or  negligently allows any animal to cause, injury, danger, 
alarm  or annoyance to any person; or  
   
93 
 (j) being the  occupier of any building or  land in or upon which an animal dies, neglects within 
three hours of the death of  the animal, or, if the death occurs at night, within three hours after sunrise, 
either — 
(i) to report the occurrence  to the Chief Executive Officer or to an officer, if any,  appointed 
by him in this behalf with a view to securing  the removal and disposal of the carcass by the public 
conservancy establishment; or  
(ii) to remove and dispose  of the carcass in accordance with any general directions given by 
the Board by public n otice or any special  direction given by the Chief Executive Officer on 
receipt of such report as aforesaid; or  
(k) save with the  written permission of the Chief Executive Officer and in such manner as he may 
authorise, stores or uses  night -soil, manure, ru bbish or any other substance emitting an offensive 
smell; or  
(l) uses or permits to be used  as a latrine any place not intended for the purpose ; or  
(m) uses or permits to be used without previous  permission of the Chief Executive Officer any 
premises for  any trade invo lving offensive smell or smoke,  
shall  be punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand five hundred rupees.  
(2) Whoever does not take  reasonable means to prevent any child under the age of twelve years being 
in his charge from easing  himself in  any street or other public place within the cantonment shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to two  hundred -fifty rupees.  
(3) The owner  or keeper of any animal found picketed or staying without a keeper in a  street or other 
public place in a cantonment shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand  rupees.  
(4) Any animal found picketed or straying as aforesaid may be removed by any officer or employee 
of the Board to a pound.  
(5) Whoever in a c antonment manufactures, supplies, carries or uses for packaging or  any other 
purposes material of non -biodegradable nature including polythene bags shall be punished with fine  
which may extend to five thousand rupees or imprisonment which may extend to six  months.  
Dogs  
290. Registration and control of dogs .—(1) A Board may make bye -laws to  provide for the 
registration of all dogs kept within the cantonment.  
(2) Such bye -laws shall — 
(a) require the  registration, by any officer authorised in this behalf of all dogs kept in the 
cantonment;  
(b) require that every  registered dog shall wear a collar to which shall be attached a metal token to 
be issued by the registration  authority, and fix the fee payab le for the issue thereof;  
(c) require that any dog which has not been registered or  which is not wearing such token shall, if 
found in any public place, be detained at a place set apart for the  purpose; and  
(d) fix the fee which shall be charged for such  detention and provide that any such dog shall be  
liable to be destroyed or otherwise disposed of unless it is claimed and the fee in respect thereof is 
paid within  one week; and may provide for such other m atters as the Board thinks fit.  
(3) The Chief Exe cutive Officer may — 
(a) cause to be destroyed, or to be confined for such period as he may direct, any dog or other 
animal which  is, or is reasonably suspected to be, suffering from rabies, or which has been bitten by 
any dog or other animal  suffering or s uspected to be suffering from rabies;  
(b) by public notice direct that, after such date as may be  specified in the notice, dogs which are 
without collars or without marks distinguishing them as private property  and are found straying on the  
94 
 streets or beyond the enclosures of the houses of their owners, if any, may be  destroyed, and cause 
them to be destroyed accordingly.  
(4) No damages shall be payable in respect of any dog  or other animal destroyed or otherwise 
disposed of under this section.  
(5) Whoe ver, being the owner or person  in charge of any dog, neglects to restrain it so that it shall not 
be at large in any street without being muzzled  and without being secured by a chain lead in a ny case in 
which — 
(a) he knows that the dog is likely to annoy o r intimidate any person; or  
(b) the Board has, by public notice during the prevalence of rabies, directed that dogs  shall not be 
at large without muzzles and chain leads,  
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one  thousand rupees.  
(6) Whoever in a cantonment — 
(a) allows any ferocious dog which belongs to him or is in his  charge to be at large without being 
muzzled; or  
(b) sets on or urges any dog or other animal to attack, worry or  intimidate any person;  or  
(c) knowing or having reason to believe that any dog or animal belonging to him or  in his charge 
has been bitten by an animal suffering or reasonably suspected to be suffering from rabies,  neglects to 
give immediate information of the fact to the Chief Executive Officer or gives informat ion which is  
false,  
 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees.  
Traffic  
291. Traffic rule of the road. —Whoever in driving, leading or propelling a vehicle along a street 
fails,  except in a case of actual necessity, — 
(a) to keep to the left when passing a vehicle coming from the opposite  direction; or  
(b) to keep to the right when passing a vehicle going in the same direction as himself, shall be  
punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
Prevention o f fire, etc.  
292. Use of inflammable materials for building purpose s.—(1) The Chief Executive  Officer may, 
by public notice, direct that within such limits in the cantonment as may be specified in the  notice, the 
roofs and external walls of huts or other buildings shall not, without the permission in writing of the  Chief 
Executive Officer be made or renewed of grass, mats, leaves or other inflammable materials, and may,  by 
notice in writing, require any person who has disobeyed any such direction as afores aid to remove or alter  
the roofs or walls s o made or renewed.  
(2) The Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the  owner of any building in the 
cantonment which has an external roof or wall made of any such material as  aforesaid to remove  such 
roof or wall within such time as may be specified in the notice, notwithstanding that a  public notice under 
sub-section ( 1) has not been issued or that such roof or wall was made with the consent of  the Chief 
Executive Officer or before t he issue of such public notice:  
Provided that, in the case of any such  roof or wall in existence before the issue of such a public notice 
or made with the consent of the Chief  Executive Officer, it shall make compensation, not exceeding the 
original cost of constructi ng the roof or wall,  for any damage caused by the removal.  
293. Stacking or collecting  inflammable materials. —A Board may, by a public notice, prohibit in 
any case where  such prohibition appears to it to be necessary for the prevention of danger to life o r 
property, the stacking or  collecting of wood, dry grass, straw or other inflammable materials, or the 
placing of mats or thatched huts or  the lighting of fires in any place in the cantonment, or within any 
limits therein, which may be specified in the  notice:   
95 
 Provided that Chief Executive Officer may, in case of imminent danger to public life or property,  
enforce such prohibition in consultation with the President or the Vice -President in the absence of the  
President.  
294. Care of naked lights. —No perso n shall set a naked light on or  near any building in any street or 
other public place in a cantonment in such manner as to cause danger of fire:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the use of lights for purpose of 
illumination  on the occasion of a festival or public or private entertainment.  
295. Regulation of cinematogr aphic and dramatic performances. —(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law relating to sanctioning of cinematograph films for  exhibition, no exhibition of 
pictures or other optical effects by means o f a cinematograph or other like apparatus for the purpose of 
which inflammable films are used, and no public dramatic performance,  pantomime, circus, carnival, 
exhibi tion, dance or ot her similar show for public recreation or amusement, shall be given in any 
cantonment  elsewhere than in premises for which a licence has been granted by the Chief Executive 
Officer under this  section.  
(2) If the owner of a cinematograph or other apparatus uses the apparatus or allows it to be used, or if  
any person takes any part in any public dramatic performance, pantomime, circus, carnival, exhibition, 
dance  or other similar show for public recreation or amusement, in contravention of the provisions of t his 
section, or  if the occupier of any premises allows them to be used in contravention of the provisions of 
this section or of  any condition of any licence granted under this section, he shall be punishable with fine 
which may extend to  five thousand rupe es, and, in the case of continuing offence, with an additional fine 
which may extend to two  thousand rupees for each day after the first duri ng which the offence continues.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall  be deemed to prohibit the giving of any exhibitio n or any dramatic 
performance, pantomime, circus, carnival,  exhibition, dance or other similar show for public recreation or 
amusement, in any theatre or institute which is  the property of Government where the exhibition, 
performance, pantomime, circus, ca rnival, exhibition, dance  or other similar show for public recreation or 
amusement, is held with the permission and under the control of  the military authorities.  
296. Discharging fire -works, fire -arms,  etc.—Whoever in a cantonment discharges any fire -arm or 
lets off fire -works or fire -balloons, or  detonates or engages in any game or carries on works such as 
quarries, blasts, timber cutting or building  operation in such manner as to cause or to be likely to  cause 
danger to persons passing by or dwelling or  working in the neighbourhood or risk of injury to property 
shall be liable to fine which may extend to two  thousand five hundred rupees.  
297. Power to require buildings, we lls, etc., to be rendered safe. —Where in a cantonment any 
building, or wall, or  anything affixed thereto, or any well, tank, reservoir, pool, depression, or excavation, 
or any bank or tree, is in  the opinion of the Chief Executive Officer, in a ruinous state or, for want of 
sufficient repairs, protection or  enclosure, a nuisance or dange rous to persons passing by or dwelling or 
working in the neighbourhood, the  Chief Executive Officer, by notice in writing may, require the owner, 
or part -owner or person claiming to be the o wner or part -owner thereof, or, failing any of them, the 
occupier,  thereof, to remove the same or may  require him to repair, or to protect or to enclose, the same in 
such manner as the thinks necessary; and, if the danger is, in the opinion of the Chief Executive Officer, 
imminent, he shall forthwith take such steps as h e thinks necessary to avert the same.  
298. Enclosure of wasteland used for improper purposes. —The Chief Executive Officer may, by 
notice in writing,  require the owner or part -owner, or person claiming to be the owner or part -owner, of 
any building or land  in the cantonment, or the lessee or the person claiming to be the lessee of any such 
land, which, by reason of  disuse or disputed ownership or other cause, has remained unoccupied and has 
become the resort of idle and  disorderly persons or of persons who have no ostensible means of 
subsistence or cannot give a satisfactory  account of themselves, or is used for gaming or immoral 
purposes, or otherwise occasions or is likely to  occasion a nuisance, to secure and enclose the same within 
such time as may be specified in the notice.  
   
96 
 CHAPTER XIV  
REMOVAL  AND EXCLUSION  FROM  CANTONMENTS  AND  SUPPRESSION OF  SEXUAL IMMORALITY  
299. Power to remove brothels and prostitutes —The Officer Commanding the Station or the Board 
may, on  receiving information that any building  in the cantonment is used as a brothel or for purposes of 
prostitution,  by order in writing setting forth the substance of information received, summon the owner, 
lessee, tenant or  occupier of the building to appear before him or the Board as the case may  be either in 
person or by an  authorised agent, and, if the Officer Commanding the Station or the Board, is then 
satisfied as to the truth of   the information, may, by order in writing, direct the owner, lessee, tenant or 
occupier, as the case may be, to  discontinue such use of the building within such period as may be 
specified in the order.  
300. Penalty for loitering and importuning for  purposes of prostitution .—(1) Whoever in a 
cantonment loiters for the purpose of prostitution or importunes  any person to the commission of sexual 
immorality, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend  to three months, or with fine which 
may extend to five thousand rupees and in case of subsequent offence shall  be punishable with 
imprisonment which m ay extend t o one year.  
(2) No prosecution for an offence under this  section shall be instituted except on the complaint of the 
person importuned, or of a military officer in whose  presence the offence was committed, or of a member 
of the Military, Naval or Air Force Police, being  employed in the cantonment and authorised in this 
behalf by the Officer Commanding the Station, in whose  presence the offence was committed, or of a 
police officer not below the rank of Assistant Sub -Inspector, who  is deployed in the cantonme nt and 
authorised in this behalf by the Officer Commanding the Station with the  concurrence of District 
Magistrate.  
301. Removal of persons from cantonment .—If the Officer Commanding the Station or the Board 
is, after such  inquiry as he or it thinks necessary, satisfied that any person residing in or frequenting the 
cantonment is a  prostitute or has been convicted of an offence, under section 300, or of the abetment of 
such an offence he or,  as the case may be, the Board may cause to be served on such  person an order in 
writing requiring such person  to remove from the cantonment within such time as may be specified in the 
order, and prohibiting such person  from re -entering it without the permission in writing of the Officer 
Commanding the Station or th e Board.  
302. Removal and exclusion from  cantonment of disorderly persons .—(1) A Judicial Magistrate 
of the First Class, having jurisdiction in a  cantonment, on receiving information that any person residing 
in or frequenting the cantonment — 
(a) is a  disorderly person who has been convicted more than once of gaming or who keeps or 
frequents, a common  gaming house, a disorderly drinking shop or a disorderly house of any other 
description; or  
(b) has been  convicted more than once either within the canto nment or elsewhere, of an offence 
punishable under Chapter  XVII of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) ; or  
(c) has been ordered under Chapter VIII of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2  of 1974) 
either within the cantonment or elsewhere to execute a bon d for his good behaviour,  
may record in  writing the substance of the information received, and may issue a summon to such person 
requiring him to  appear and show cause why he should not be required to remove from the cantonment 
and be prohibited from  re-entering it.  
(2) Every summons issued under sub -section ( 1) shall be accompanied by a copy of the record  
aforesaid and the copy shall be served along with the summons on the person against whom the summon 
is issued. 
(3) The Magistrate shall, when the pe rson so summoned appears before him, proceed to inquire into 
the truth of the information received and take such further evidence as he thinks fit, and if upon such 
inquiry it  appears to him that such person is a person of any kind described in sub -section  (1) and that it is 
necessary for  the maintenance of good order in the cantonment that such person is required to be removed 
therefrom and be  prohibited from re -entering the cantonment, the Magistrate shall inform the matter to the  
97 
 Officer Commanding  the S tation and, the Officer Commanding the Station shall cause to be served on 
such person an order in  writing requiring him to remove from the cantonment within such time as may be 
specified in the order and  prohibiting him from re -entering it without the per mission in writing of the 
Officer Commanding the Station.  
303. Removal and exclusion from  cantonment of seditious persons .—(1) If any person in a 
cantonment causes or attempts to cause or does any act  which he knows is likely to cause disloyalty; 
disaffection or breach of discipline amongst any portion of the  forces or is a person who, the Officer 
Commanding the Station has reason to believe, is likely to do any such  act, the Officer Commanding the 
Station may make an order in writing setting forth  the reasons for making of  the same and requiring such 
person to remove from the cantonment within such time as may be specified in the  order and prohibiting 
him from re -entering it without the permission in writing of the Officer Commanding the  Station:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section against any person unless he has had a  
reasonable opportunity of being informed of the grounds on which it is proposed to make the order and of  
showing cause why the order should not be made.  
(2) Eve ry order made under sub -section (1) shall be sent to  the Superintendent of Police of the 
District, who shall c ause a copy thereof to be served  on the person  concerned.  
(3) Upon the making of any order under sub -section ( 1), the Officer Commanding the Stat ion shall  
forthwith send a copy of the s ame to the Central Government.  
(4) The Central Government may of its own  motion and shall on application made to it in this behalf 
within one month of the date of the order by the  person against whom the order has be en made, call upon 
the District Magistrate to make after such inquiry as  the Central Government may prescribe a report 
regarding the justice of the order and the necessity therefor:  
Provided that at every such inquiry the person against whom the order has been made shall be given 
an opportunity of being heard in his own defence.  
 (5) The Central Government may, at any time after the receipt  of the copy of an order sent under              
sub-section ( 3) or where a report has been called for under sub-section ( 4), on receipt of that report, if it is 
of opinion that the order should be varied or rescinded, make such orders  thereon as it thinks fit.  
(6) Any person who has been excluded from a cantonment by an order made under this  section may, 
at any time after the expiry of one month from the date thereof, apply to the General Officer  
Commanding -in-Chief, the Command for the rescission of the same and, on such application being made, 
the said Officer may, after making such inquiry, if any, as he think s necessary, either reject the 
application or  rescind the order.  
304. Penalty .—Whoever — 
(a) fails to comply with an order issued under  this Chapter within the period specified therein or 
whilst an order prohibiting him from re -entering a  cantonment withou t permission is in force,                   
re-enters the cantonment without such permission; or  
(b) knowing  that any person has, under this Chapter been required to remove from the 
cantonment and has not obtained the  requisite permission to re -enter it, harbours or conceals such 
person in the cantonment,  
shall be punishable  with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and in case of continuing offence 
with an additional fine  which may extend to five hundred rupe es for every day after the first during which 
he has persisted in the  offence.  
 
CHAPTER XV  
POWERS, PROCEDURES, PENALTIES AND APPEALS  
Entry and inspection  
305. Powers of entry .—It shall be lawful for the President or the Vice -President of a Board, or the 
Chief  Executive Officer, or the Health Officer or any person specially authorised by the Chief Executive  
98 
 Officer, or  the Health Officer or for any other person authorised by general or special order of a Board in 
this behalf, to  enter into or upon any buil ding or land with or without assistants or workmen in order to 
make any inquiry,  inspection, measurement, valuation or survey, or to execute any work, which is 
authorised by or under this Act  or which it is necessary to make or execute for any of the purpo ses or in 
pursuance of any of the provisions of  this Act or of any rule, by e-law or order made thereunder:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed  to confer upon any person any power such as is 
referred to in section 274 or section 283 or to authorise the  conferment upon any person of any such 
power.  
306. Power of inspection by member of a Board .—A Board may by special order authorise or order 
any member to  inspect any work or institution constructed or maintained, in whole or part, at the exp ense 
of the Board, and  any register, book accounts or other documents belonging to, or in the possession of, 
the Board.  
307. Power of inspection, etc. —(1) A Board or the Chief Executive Officer may, by general or 
special order,  authorise any person — 
(a) to inspect any drain, privy, latrine, urinal, cesspool, pipe, sewer or channel in or on  any 
building or land in the cantonment, and, in his discretion, to cause, the ground to be opened for the 
purpose  of preventing or removing any nuisance arising from the drain, privy, latrine, urinal, 
cesspool, pipe, sewer or  channel, as the case may be;  
(b) to examine works under construction in the cantonment, to take levels or to  remove, test, 
examine, replace or read any meter.  
(2) If, on such inspection, the opening of the ground is found  to be necessary for the prevention or 
removal of a nuisance, the expenses thereby incurred shall be paid by the  owner or occupier of the land or 
building, but if it is found that no nuisance exists or but for such opening  would have arisen, the ground 
or portion of any building, drain or other work  opened, injured or removed for  the purpose of such 
inspection shall be filled in, reinstated, or made good, as the case may be by the Board or  the Chief 
Executive Officer.  
308. Power to ent er land, adjoining land where work is in progress. —(1) The Chief Executive 
Officer of a  cantonment may, with or without assistants or workmen, enter on any land within fifty yards 
of any work  authorised by or under this Act for the purpose of depositing th ereon any soil, gravel, stone 
or other materials,  or of obtaining access to such work, or for any other purpose connected with the 
carrying on of the same.  
(2) The Chief Executive Officer shall, before entering on any land under sub -section ( 1), give the 
occupier, or, if  there is no occupier, the owner not less than three day's previous notice in writing of his 
intention to make such  entry, and shall state the purpose thereof, and shall, if so required by the occupier 
or owner, fence off so much  of the lan d as may be required for such purpose.  
 (3) The Chief Executive Officer shall, in exercising any power  conferred by this section, do as little 
damage as may be, and compensation shall be payable by the Board to the  owner or occupier of such 
land, or to both, for any such damage whether permanent or temporary.  
309. Breaking into premises .—It shall be lawful for any person, authorised by or  under this Act to 
make any entry into any place, to open or cause to be opened  any door, gate or other barrier — 
(a) if he considers the opening thereof necessary for the purpose of such entry; and  
(b) if the owner or occupier  is absent, or being present refuses to open such door, gate or barrier.  
310. Ent ry to be made in the day ti me.—Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no entry  
authorised by or under this Act shall be made except between the hours of sunrise and sunset.  
311. Owner's con sent ordinarily to be obtained. —Save as otherwise  expressly provided in this Act, 
no building or land shall be entered without the consent of the occupier, or if  there is no occupier of the 
owner thereof, and no such entry shall be made without giving the said occupier or  owner, as the case 
may be, not less than four hours, written noti ce of the intention to make such entry:   
99 
 Provided that no such notice shall be necessary if the place to be inspected is a factory or workshop or 
trade  premises or a place used for carrying on any trade, calling or occupation specified in section 277 or 
a stable for  horses or a shed for cattle or a latrine, privy or urinal or a work under construction, or for the 
purpose of  ascertaining whether any animal intended for human food is slaughtered in that place in 
contravention of this  Act or any bye -law made thereunder.  
312. Regard  to be had to social and religious usages .—When any place used as a human dwelling 
is entered under this Act,  due regard shall be paid to the social and religious customs and usages of the 
occupants of the place entered,  and no apart ment in the actual occupancy of a female shall be entered or 
broken open until she has been  informed that she is at liberty to withdraw and every reasonable facility 
has been afforded to her for  withdrawing.  
313. Penalty for obstruction .—Whoever obstructs  or molests  any person acting on behalf of the 
Board, who is not a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the  Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860)  
or any person with whom the Board has lawfully contracted, in the execution of his duty or  of anything 
which he is empowered or required to do by virtue or in consequence of any of the provisions of  this Act 
or any rule, bye -law or order made thereunder, or in fulfilment of his contract, as the case may be,  shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees . 
Powers and duties of p olice officers  
314. Arrest without warrant .—Any member of the police force employed in a cantonment may, 
without a  warrant, arrest any person committing in his view a breach of any of the provisions of this Act 
which are  specified in Schedule IV:  
Provided that — 
(a) in the case of a breach of any such provisions as is specified in Part  B of Schedule IV, no 
person shall be so arrested who consents to give his name and address, unless there is  reasonable 
ground for  doubting the accuracy of the name or address so given, the burden of proof of which  shall 
lie on the arresting officer, and no person so arrested shall be detained after his name and address 
have  been ascertained; and  
(b) no person shall be so arrested f or an offence under section 300 except — 
 (i) at the  request of the person importuned, or of a military officer in whose presenc e the 
offence was committed; or  
(ii) by or at the request of a member of the Military, Naval or Air Force Police, who is 
employed  in the  cantonment and authorised in this behalf by the Officer Commanding the 
Station, and in whose presence the  offence was committed or by or at the request of any police 
officer not below the rank of assistant sub -inspector  who is deployed in the canto nment and 
authorised in this behalf by the Officer Commanding the  station.  
315. Duties of police officers .—It shall be the duty of all police  officers to give immediate 
information to the Board of the commission of, or attempt to commit any offence  against the provisions 
of this Act or of any rule or bye -law made thereunder, and to assist all cantonment  officers and employees 
in the exe rcise of their lawful authority.  
Notices  
316. Notices to fix reasonable time .—Where any notice, order or requisition  made under this Act or 
any other  rule or bye -law made thereunder requires anything to be done for the doing of which no time is 
fixed in this  Act or in the rule or bye -law, the notice, order or requisition shall specify a reasonable time 
for doing the sam e. 
317. Authentication and validity of notices  issued by Board .—(1) Every notice, order or 
requisition issued by a Board under this Act or any rule or bye  law made thereunder shall be signed — 
(a) either by the President of the Board or by the Chief Executive  Officer; or   
100 
 (b) by the members of any committee especially authorised by the Board in this behalf.  
(2) Whenever under this Act or any rule or bye -law made thereunder the doing of, or the omission to 
do, anything  or the validity of anything depends upon the approval, sanction, consent, concurrence, 
declaration, opinion or  satisfaction of the Board, a written document signed by any officer or member 
specified in sub -section ( 1) purporting to convey or set -forth such approval, sanction, consent , 
concurrence, declaration, opinion or  satisfaction shall be sufficient evidence thereof.  
(3) Every license, written permission, notice, bill summons or  other document which is required by 
this Act or any rule or bye -law made thereunder to bear the signat ure of  the President, Vice -President or 
the Chief Executive Officer, or of any such member of any committee as has  been specially authorised by 
the Board in this behalf shall be deemed to be properly signed if it bears facsimile  of the signature of any 
such officer or member, as the case may be, stamped thereon.  
318. Service of notice, etc. —(1) Every notice, order or requisition issued under this Act or any  rule 
or bye -law made thereunder shall, save as otherwise expressely pr ovided, be served or presented — 
(a) by giving or tendering the notice, order or requisition, or sending it by post, to the person for 
whom it is intended;  or 
(b) if such person cannot be found, by affixing the notice order or requisition on some 
conspicuous part of  his last known place  of abode or business, if within the cantonment, or by giving 
or tendering the notice, order  or requisition to some adult member or servant or his family, or by 
causing it to be affixed on some  conspicuous part of the buildings or land, if any, to which it  relates.  
(2) When any such notice, order or  requisition is required or permitted to be served upon an owner, 
lessee or occupier of any building or land, it  shall not be necessary to name the owner, lessee or occupier 
therein, and the service thereof shal l, save as  otherwise expressl y provided, be effected either — 
(a) by giving or tendering the notice, order or requisition, or  sending it by post, to the owner, 
lessee or occupier, or, if there are more owners, lessees, or occupiers than one  to any one of th em; or  
(b) if no such owner, lessee or occupier can be found, by giving or tendering the notice,  order or 
requisition to the authorised agent, if any, of any such owner, lessee or occupier, or to an adult  
member or servant of the family of any such owner, lessee, occupier, or by causing it to be affixed on 
some  conspicuous part of the building or land to which it relates.  
(3) When the person on whom a notice, order or  requisition is to be served is a minor, service upon 
his guardian or upon an adult member  or servant of his  family shall be deemed to be service upon the 
minor.  
319. Method of  giving notice .—Every notice which, by or under this Act, is to be given or served as 
a public notice or as a  notice which is not required to be given to any individual therein specified shall, 
save as otherwise expressly  provided, be deemed to have been sufficiently given or served if a copy 
thereof is affixed in such conspicuous  part of the office of the Board or in such other public place during 
such period, or is publ ished in such local  newspaper or in such other manner, as the Board may direct.  
320. Powers of Board in case of non -compliance with notice, etc .—In the event of  non-compliance 
with the terms of any notice, order or requisition issued to any person under this Act or any  rule or                
bye-law made thereunder, requiring such person to execute any work or to do any act, it shall be lawful  
for the Board, or the civil area committee or the Chief Executive Officer at whose instance the notice, 
order or  requisition has been issued whether or not the person in default is liable to punishment for such 
default or has  been prosecuted or sentenced to any punishment therefor, after giving notice in writing to 
such person, to take  such action or such steps as ma y be necessary for the completion of the act or work 
required to be done or  executed by him, and all the expenses incurred on such account shall be 
recoverable by the Chief Executive  Officer on demand, and if not paid within ten days after such demand, 
shall be recoverable in the same manner  as moneys recoverable by the Board under section 324:  
Provided that where the action or step relates to the  demolition of any erection or re -erection under 
section 248 or the removal of any projection or encroachment  under section 252, the Board or the civil 
area co mmittee or the Chief Executive O fficer may request any police  officer to render such assistance as   
101 
 considered necessary for the lawful exercise of any power in this regard and  it shall be the duty of such 
police officer to render forthwith such assistance on such requisition.  
321. Occupier not to obstruct owner when  complying with notice. —If the owner of any property 
in respect of which a notice as is referred to in section  320 has been given is prevented by the occupier 
from complying with such notice, the Board or civil area  committee or the Chief Executive Officer at 
whose instance such notice has been given, may, by order, require  the said occupier to permit the owner 
within eight days from the date of service of such notice to take all such  actions as may be necessary to 
comply with the said notice and such owner shall, for the period during which  he is prevented as 
aforesaid, be exempt from any fine or penalty to which he might otherwise have become  liable by reason 
of non -compliance with such notice.  
Recovery of Money  
322. Liability of occupier to pay in default of owner .—(1) If any such notice as is referred to in 
section  320 has been given to any person in respect of property of which he is the owner , and he fails to 
comply with  the notice so given, the Board or the civil area committee or the Chief Executive Officer at 
whose instance  such notice has been issued may require any occupier of such property or  of any part 
thereof to pay to it or him  inste ad of to the owner any rent payable by him in respect of such property, as 
it falls due, up to the amount  recoverable from the owner under section 320:  
Provided that if the occupier, on application made to him by the  Board or the civil area committee or 
the Chief Executive Officer at whose instance such notice has been issued,  refuses to truly disclose the 
amount of his rent or the name or address of the person to whom it is payable, the  Chief Executive Officer 
may recover from the occupier the whole amoun t recoverable under section 320 in the  same manner as 
money i s recoverable by the Board under  section 324.  
 (2) Any amount recovered from an  occupier inst ead of from an owner under sub -section ( 1) shall, in 
the absence of any contract between the  owner and  the occupier to the contrary, be deemed to have been 
paid to the owner.  
323. Relief to Agents and Trustees. —(1) Where any person, by r eason of his receiving the rent  of  
immovable property as an agent or trustee, or of his being as an agent or trustee the  person who would  
receive the rent if the property were let to a tenant, would under this Act be bound to discharge any 
obligation  imposed on the owner of the property for the discharge of which money is required, he shall 
not be bound to  discharge the obl igation unless he has or but for his own improper act or default might 
have had funds in his  hands belonging to the owner sufficient for the purpose.  
(2) The burden of proving any fact entitling an agent  or trustee to relief under sub -section ( 1) shall li e 
upon him.  
(3) Where any agent or trustee has claimed and  established his right to relief under this section, the 
Board may, by notice in writing, require him to apply to the  discharge of such obligation as aforesaid the 
first monies which may come to his  hands on behalf, or for the  use, of the owner and on failure to comply 
with the notice, he shall be deemed to be personally liable to  discharge the obligation.  
324. Method of recovery. —(1) Notwithstanding  anything elsewhere contained in this Act arrears o f 
any tax, and any other money recoverable, including rent  on land and buildings due or damages and fine 
due under leases or licences executed by or in favour of a Board  or the Defence Estates Officer under this 
Act or the rules made thereunder may be reco vered together with the  cost of recovery either by suit or on 
application to a Judicial Magistrate having jurisdiction in the cantonment  or in any place where the person 
from whom such tax, rent or money is recoverable may for the time being be  residing, either by the 
distress and sale of movable property of such person, or by the attachment and sale of  immovable 
property of that person, which is within the limits of the jurisdiction of such Judicial Magistrate, or  by 
both these methods, and shall, if paya ble by the owner of any property as such, be a charge on the 
property  until paid :  
Provided that the tools of artisans, growing crops up  to the value of five thousand rupees and  
implements and cattle used for the purposes of agriculture shall be exempt fr om such distress or sale.   
102 
 (2) An  application to a Judicial Magistrate under sub -section ( 1) shall be in writing and shall be 
signed by the  President or Vice -President of the Board or by the Chief Executive Officer or the Defence 
Estates Officer or  the Off icer Commanding the Station or any other officer authorised by any of these 
officers, but shall not  require to be personally presented.  
(3) Upon receiving the application, the Judicial Magistrate referred to in  sub-section ( 1) may take 
action for the reco very of the amount of tax, rent or money from the person specified  in the application as 
if such amount were a fine recoverable under a sentence passed by him and the provisions  of               
section s 421 and 422 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , shall, so far as may be, apply 
to the recovery  of such amount:  
Provided that the recovery of no such amount shall be made by the arrest or detention in  prison of the 
said person.  
Committees of Arbitration  
325. Application for a  Committee of Arbitration. —In the event of any disagreement as to the 
liability of a Board to pay any  compensation under this Act, or as to the amount of any compensation so 
payable, the person claiming such  compensation may apply to the Board shall for the reference of  the 
matter to a Committee of Arbitration, and  the Board shall forthwith proceed to convene a Committee of 
Arbitration to determine the matter in dispute.  
326. Procedure for convening Committee of  Arbitration. —When a Committee of Arbitration is to 
be conve ned, the Board shall cause a public notice to be  published stating the matter to be determined, 
and shall forthwith send copies of the order to the District  Magistrate, and to the other party concerned, 
and shall, as soon as may be, nominate such members o f the Committee as it is entitled to nominate under 
section 327, and by notice in writing call upon the other persons  who are entitled to nominate a member 
or members of the Committee to nominate such member or members in  accordance with provisions of 
that section.  
327. Constitution of the Committee of Arbitration. —(1) Every Committee of Arbitration shall 
consist of five  members, namely: — 
(a) a Chairman who shall be a person not in the service of the Government or the Board,  and who 
shall be nominated by t he Officer Commanding the Station;  
(b) two persons nominated by the Board;  
(c) two persons nominated  by the other party concerned.  
(2) If the Board or the other party concerned or the  Officer Commanding the Station fails within 
seven days of the date of issue of the notice referred to in section  326 to make any nomination which it or 
he is entitled to make or if any member who has been so nominated  neglects or refuses to act and the 
Board or other person by whom such member was nominated fails to  nominate  another member in his 
place within seven days from the date on which it or he may be called upon to  do so by the District 
Magistrate, the District Magistrate shall forthwith appoint a member or members, as the  case may be, to 
fill the vacancy or vacancies .  
328. No person to be nominated who has direct interest or  whose services  are not immediately 
available. —(1) No person who has a direct interest in the matter under  reference, or whose services are 
not immediately available for the purposes of the Commit tee shall be  nominated a member of the 
Committee of Arbitration.  
(2) If, in the opinion of the District Magistrate any  person who has been nominated has a direct 
interest in the matter under reference or is otherwise disqualified  for nomination or if the services of any 
such person are not immediately available as aforesaid and if the Board  or the other person by whom any 
such person was nominated fails to nominate another member within seven  days from the date on which it 
or he may be called upon to do so  by the District Magistrate, such failure shall  be deemed to constitute a 
failure to make a nomination within the meaning of section 327.   
103 
 329. Meetings and powers of Committee of Arbitration. —(1) When a Committee of Arbitration 
has been duly  constituted, the Board shall, by notice in writing inform each of the members of the fact, 
and the Committee  shall meet as soon as may be thereafter.  
(2) The Chairman of the Committee shall fix the time and place of the  meetings and shall have power 
to adjourn any meet ing from time to time as may be necessary.  
(3) The  Committee shall receive and record evidence, and shall have power to administer oaths to 
witnesses, and on  requisition in writing signed by the Chairman of the Committee, the District Magistrate 
shall issu e the  necessary processes for the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents 
required by the  Committee and may, enforce the said processes as if they were processes for attendance or 
production before  himself.  
330. Decisions of Committee of A rbitration. —(1) The decisions of every Committee of Arbitration 
shall be in accordance with the majority of votes taken at a  meeting at which the Chairman and at least 
three of the other members are present.  
(2) If there is not a majority  of votes in favou r of any proposed decision, the opinion of the Chairman 
shall prevail.  
(3) The decision of a  Committee of Arbitration shall be final and shall not be questioned in any court.  
Prosecutions  
331. Prosecutions. —Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no court shall proceed to the 
trial of any  offence made punishable by or under this Act, other than an offence specified in Schedule IV, 
except on the  complaint of or upon information received from the Board concerned or a person authorised 
by the Boa rd by a  general or special order in this behalf.  
332. Composition of offence .—(1)The Chief Executive Officer or any person authorised by him, by 
general or special order in this behalf, may,   before or after the institution of the proceedings, compound 
an offence, made punishable by or under this  Act other tha n an offence under Chapter XIV:  
Provided that no offence shall be compoundable which is  committed by failure to comply with a 
notice, order or requisition issued by or on behalf of the Chief  Executive  Officer, unless and until the 
same has been complied with in so far as compliance is possible.  
(2)Where an offence has been compounded, the offender, if in custody, shall be discharged and no 
further  proceedings shall be taken against him in respect of t he offence so compounded.  
General Penalty Provisions  
333. General penalty. —Whoever, in any case in which a penalty is not expressly provided by this 
Act, fails to  comply with any notice, order or requisition issued under any provision thereof, or otherwise 
contravenes any  of the provisions of this Act, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five 
thousand rupees, and, in  the case of a continuing failure or contravention, with an additional fine which 
may extend to five hundred  rupees for everyday after the first during which he has persisted in the failure 
or contravention.  
334. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been  committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge  of, and was  
responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing containe d in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he  proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent  the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything c ontained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence  under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the  consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, se cretary or  other  
104 
 officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of  
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of  this section, — 
(a) “compa ny” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of              
individuals;  and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
335. Cancellation or suspension of licences, etc. —Where any person to whom a licence or  written 
permission has been granted under this Act or any agent or servant of such person commits a breach of  
any of the conditions thereof, or of any bye -law made under this Act for the purpose of regulating the 
manner  or circumstances in, or t he conditions subject to, which anything permitted by such licence or 
written  permission is to be or may be done, or where the Board or the civil area committee, as the case 
may be, is  satisfied that such licence or written permission has been secured by t he holder through 
misrepresentation or  fraud, the Board or the civil area committee, as the case may  be, may, without 
prejudice to any other penalty  which may have been incurred under this Act, by order in writing, cancel 
the licence or written permission  or suspend it for such period as it thinks fit:  
Provided that no such order shall be made unless an opportunity has  been given to the holder of the 
licence or written permission to show cause why it should not be made.  
336. Recovery of amount  payable in respect of damage to cantonment property .—Where any 
person has incurred a penalty by reason of  having caused any damage to the property of a Board, he shall 
be liable to make good such damage, and the  amount payable in respect of the damage shall, in case of 
dispute, be determined by the Judicial Magistrate by  whom the person incurring such penalty is 
convicted, and, on non -payment of such amount on demand, the  same shall be recovered either by the 
distress and sale of the movable property of such person, o r by the  attachment and sale of the immovable 
property of that person, or by both these methods and the Judicial  Magistrate shall recover the amount in 
accordance with the provisions of sections 421 and 422 of the Code of  Criminal Procedure,                  
1973  (2 of 1974 ) as if it were a fine recoverable under a sentence passed by him.  
Limitation  
337. Limitation for prosecution. —No court shall try any person for an offence made  punishable by 
or under this Act, after the expiry of six months from the date of the commission of the offence,  unless 
complaint in respect of the offence has been made to a Judicial Magistrate within the six months  
aforesaid.  
Suits  
338. Prot ection of action of Board, etc. —No suit or  prosecution shall be entertained in any cou rt 
against a Board or against the Chief Executive Officer, the Officer  Commanding a station, Defence 
Estates Officer, Principal Director, General Officer Commanding in Chief, the  Command, Director 
General Defence Estates, or against any member of a Board, or against any officer or  employee of a 
Board, for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done, under this Act or any  rule or               
bye-law made thereunder.  
339. Notice to be given of suits. —(1) No suit shall be instituted against any Board or against any 
member of a Board, or against any officer or  employee of a Board, in respect of any act done, or 
purporting to have been done, in pursuance of this Act or of  any rule or bye -law made thereunder, until 
the expiration of two months after notice in writing has been left at  the office of the Board, and, in the 
case of such member, officer or employee, unless notice in writing has also  been delivered to him or left 
at his office or place of abode, and unless such notice states explicitl y the cause of  action, the nature of 
the relief sought, the amount of compensation claimed, and the name and place of abode  of the intending 
plaintiff, and unless the plaint contains a statement that such notice has been so delivered or  left.   
105 
 (2) If the B oard or member, officer or employee has, before the suit is instituted, tendered sufficient  
amounts to the plaintiff, the plaintiff shall not recover any sum in excess of the amount so tendered, and 
shall  also pay all costs incurred by the defendant after such tender.  
(3) No suit, such as is described in sub -section ( 1), shall, unless it is an action for the recovery of 
immovable property or for a declaration of title thereto, be  instituted after the expiry of six months from 
the date on which the cause of  action arises.  
(4) Nothing in sub -section  (1) shall be deemed to apply to a suit in which the only relief claimed is an 
injunction of which the  object would be defeated by the giving of the notice or the postponement of the 
institution of the suit or  proceeding.  
Appeals and Revision  
340. Appeals from executive orders. —(1) Any person  aggrieved by any order described in the third 
column of Schedule V may appeal to the appellate authority  specified in that behalf in the fourth column 
of the said Schedule.  
(2) The Central Government may, for the  purposes of expeditious disposal of the pending appeals, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, amend  Schedule V so as to designate additional appellate authority in 
the fourth column of the said Schedule.  
 (3) No  such appeal shall be admitted if it is made after the expiry of the period specified in that 
behalf in the fifth  column of the said Schedule.  
 (4) The period specified as aforesaid shall be computed in accordance with the  provisions of the 
Limitation Act, 1963  (36 of 1963) , with respect to the computation of periods of limitation thereunder.  
341. Petition of Appeal. —(1) Every appeal under section 340 shall be made by  petition in writing 
accompanied by a copy of the order appealed against.  
(2) Any such peti tion may be  presented to the authority which made the order against which the 
appeal is made, and that authority shall be  bound to forward it to the appellate authority, and may attach 
thereto any report which it may desire to make  by way of explanation.  
342. Suspension of Action Pending  Appeal .—On the admission of an appeal from an order, other 
than an order contained in a notice issued under  section 144, section 183, section 238, section 273 or 
section 302, where the appellate authority so directs, all  proceedings to enforce the order and all 
prosecutions for any contravention thereof shall be held in abeyance  pending the decision of the appeal, 
and, if the order is set aside on appeal, disobedience thereto shall not be  deemed to be an offence.  
343. Revision .—(1) Where an appeal from an order made by the  Board has been disposed of by the 
District Magistrate, either party to the proceedings may, within thirty days  from the date thereof, apply 
through the General Officer Commanding -in-Chief, the Command  to the Central  Government, or to such 
authority as the Central Government may appoint in this behalf, for revision of the  decision.  
(2) The provisions of this Chapter with respect to appeals shall apply, as far as may be, to the  
applications for revision  made under this section.  
(3) The appellate authority shall make endeavours to dispose  of the appeal made under section 340 of 
this Act within a period of ninety days.  
344. Finality of the Appellate Orders. —Save as otherwise provided in section 343, every  order of 
appellate authority shall be final.  
345. Right of appellant to  be heard. —No appeal shall be decided under this Chapter unless the 
appellant has been heard, or has had a  reasonable opportunity of being heard in person or through a legal 
practition er. 
   
106 
 CHAPTER XVI  
RULES AND BYE -LAWS  
346. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, after previous  publication, make 
rules to carry out the purposes and objects of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without  prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following  matters, namely :— 
(a) the manner in which, and the authority to which, application for permission to occupy and 
belonging to the Government in a cantonment is to be made;  
(b) the auth ority by which such permission  may be granted and the conditions to be annexed to 
the grant of any such permission;  
(c) the allotment to a  Board of a share of the rents and profits accruing from property entrusted to 
its management under the  provisions of  section 63;  
(d) the appointment, promotion, transfer, tenure of office, salaries and allowances,  provident 
funds, pensions, gratuities, leave of absence, discipline and other condition of service of employees  of 
Boards;  
(e) the circumstances in which security shall be demanded from employees of Boards and the  
amount and nature of such security;  
(f) the keeping of accounts by Boards and the manner in which such  accounts shall be audited and 
published;  
(g) the definition of the persons by whom, and the manner in which,  money may be paid out of a 
cantonment fund or cantonment development fund;  
(h) the preparation of  estimates of income and expenditure by Boards and the definition of the 
persons by whom, and the conditions  subject to which, such estimates  may be sanctioned;  
(i) the regulation of the procedure of Committees of  Arbitration;  
(j) the prescribing of registers, statements and forms to be used and maintained by any authority  
for the purposes of this Act;  
(k) the grant of leave to the members o f the Board;  
(l) the form of notices,  required to be sent under this Act and t he manner of their service; and  
(m) any other matter which is required  to be, or may be prescribed.  
347. Supplemental  provisions respecting rules .—(1) A rule under section 346 may be made either 
generally for all cantonments or  for the whole or any part of any one or more cantonments.  
 (2) The power to make rules under clause ( c) of sub-section ( 2) of section 346 shall include power to 
give retrospective effect from a date not e arlier than the  date of commencement of the Cantonments Act, 
2006, to the rules or any of them but no retrospective effect  shall be given to any rule so as to 
prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such rule may be  applicable :  
Provided t hat where any rule has to be given retrospective operation, the reasons therefor and the  
effect of giving such retrospective operation shall be published along with the draft of the rules when such  
draft is published for eliciting public opinion under sub -section ( 1) of section 346.  
(3) All rules made under  this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette and in such other manner, 
if any, as the Central Government  may direct and, on such publication, shall have effect as if enacted in 
this Act.  
 (4) Every rule made by the  Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of  Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in  two or more s uccessive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or  the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in  
107 
 making any modification in the rule or both Houses  agree that the rule should not be made, the rule sh all 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of  no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice  to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
348. Power to  make by e-laws. —Subject to the provisions of this Act and of the rules made 
thereunder, a Board may, in  addition to any bye -laws which it is empowered to make by any other 
provision of this Act, make bye -laws to  provide for all or any of the following matt ers in t he cantonment, 
namely : — 
(1) the registration of births, deaths  and marriages, and the taking of a census;  
(2) the enforcement of compulsory vaccination and inoculation and  levy of fees where such 
vaccination or inoculation is carried out at the houses of  residents;  
(3) the regulation of  the collection and recovery of taxes, tolls and fees under this Act and the 
refund of taxes;  
(4) the regulation of  any description of traffic in the streets and the enforcement of measures for 
the reduction of noise caused  thereby or the prohibition of any description of such traffic;  
(5) the manner in which vehicles standing, driven,  led or propelled in the streets between sunset 
and sunrise shall be lighted;  
(6) the seizure and confiscation of  ownerless animals str aying within the limits of the 
cantonments and regulation and control of cattle pounds;  
(7) the prevention and extinction of fire;  
(8) the construction of scaffolding for building operations to secure the  safety of the general 
public and of persons worki ng thereon;  
(9) the regulation in any manner not specifically  provided for in this Act of the construction, 
alteration, maintenance, preservation, cleaning and repairs of  drains, ventilation -shafts, pipes,                      
water -closets, privies, latr ines, urinals, cesspools and other drainage works;  
(10) the regulation or prohibition of the discharge into, or deposit in, drains of sewage, polluted 
water and  other offensive or obstructive matter;  
(11) the regulation or prohibition of the stabling or herding of animals, or  of any class of animals, 
so as to prevent danger to public health;  
(12) the proper disposal of corpses, the  regulation and management of burial and burning places 
and other places for the disposal of corpses, and the  fees chargeable  for the use of such places where 
the same are provided or maintained by Government or at the  expense of the cantonment fund;  
(13) the permission, regulation or prohibition of the use or occupation of any  street or place by 
itinerant vendors or by any per son for the sale of articles or the exercise of any calling or the  setting 
up of any booth or stall, and the fees chargeable for such use or occupation;  
(14) the regulation and  control of encamping grounds, sarais, hotels, dak -bangalows, lodging -
houses, boarding -houses, buildings let intenements, residential clubs, restaurants, eating -houses, 
cafes, refreshment -rooms, guest houses, holiday  resorts, cinemas and places of public recreation, 
entertainment or resort;  
(15) the regulation of the ventilation,  lighting, cleansing, drainage and water -supply of the 
buildings used for the manufacture or sale of aerated or  other potable waters and of butter, milk, 
sweetmeats and other articles of food or drink for human  consumption;  
(16) the matters regarding which conditions may be imposed by licences granted under                        
section  295 or section 277;  
(17) the control and supervision of places where dangerous or offensive trades are carried  on so 
as to secure cleanliness therein or to minimise any inj urious, offensive or dangerous effects arising or  
likely to arise there  from;   
108 
 (18) the regulation of the erection of any enclosure, fence, tent, awning or other  temporary 
structure of whatsoever material or nature on any land situated within the cantonmen t and the fees  
chargeable in respect thereof;  
(19) the laying out of streets, and the regulation and prohibition of the erection of  buildings 
without adequate provision being made for the laying out and location of streets;  
(20) the form of and  the partic ulars which shall be contained in a development scheme or an 
improvement scheme and the manner  in which such scheme shall be framed or altered and levy of 
development charges;  
(21) the regulation of the  use of public parks and gardens and other public pla ces, and the 
protection of avenues, trees, grass and other  appurtenances of streets and other public places;  
(22) the regulation of the grazing of animals and the fees  chargeable in respect thereof;  
(23) the fixing and regulation of the use of public bath ing and washing places;  
(24) the regulation of the posting of bills and advertisment, and of the position, size, shape or 
style or name  boards,  sign-boards and sign -posts;  
(25) the fixation of a method for the sale of articles whether by measure,  weight, piece or any 
other method;  
(26) the rendering necessary of lice nces within the cantonment for — 
(a) persons working as job porters for the conveyance of goods;  
(b) animals or vehicles let out on hire or used for  hawking articles;  
(c) the proprieto rs or drivers of vehicles, boats or other conveyances, or of animals kept or  
plying for hire or used for hawking articles;  
(d) persons impelling or carrying such vehicles or other  conveyances; or  
(e) persons practising as nurses, midwives or dais;  
(27) the prescribing of the fee payable for  any licence required under clause ( 26), and of the 
conditions subject to which such licences may be granted,  revised, suspended or withdrawn;  
(28) the regulation of the charges to be made for the services of such job  porters and of the hire of 
such animals, vehicles or other conveyances, and for the remuneration of persons  impelling or 
carrying such vehicles or conveyances as are referred to in clause ( 26);  
(29) the prescribing of fee  payable for any licence except as  otherwise specifically provided in the 
Act, sanction or for any written  permission granted by the Chief Executive Officer;  
(30) the regulation or prohibition, for purposes of  sanitation or the prevention of disease or the 
promotion of public safety or convenience, of any act which  occasions or is likely to occasion a 
nuisance, and for the regulation or prohibition of which no provision is  made elsewhere by or under 
this Act;  
(31) the circumstances and the manner in which owners of buildings or  land in the cantonment, 
who are temporarily absent from, or are not resident in, the cantonment, may be  required to appoint as 
their agents, for all or any of the purposes of this Act of any rule or bye -law made  thereunder, persons 
residing within or near the cant onment;  
(32) the prevention of the spread of infectious or  contagious diseases within the cantonment;  
(33) the segregation in, or the removal and exclusion from, the  cantonment, or the destruction, of 
animals suffering from or reasonably suspected to be s uffering from any  infectious or contagious 
disease;  
(34) the supervision, regulation, conservation and protection from injury,  contamination or 
trespass of sources and means of public water -supply and of appliances for the distribution of  water 
whether wi thin or without the limits of the cantonment;   
109 
 (35) the manner in which connections with  water -works may be constructed or maintained, and 
the agency which shall or may be employed for such  construction and maintenance;  
(36) the regulation of all matters a nd things relating to the supply and use of  water including the 
collection and recovery of charges there  for and the prevention of evasion of the same;  
(37) the maintenance of schools, and the furtherance of education generally;  
(38) the regulation or prohibition of the  cutting or destruction of trees or shrubs, or of the making 
of excavations, or of the removal of soil or quarrying,  where such regulation or prohibition appears to 
the Board to be not prejudicial to the maintenance of ecological  balance and to be necessary for the 
maintenance of a water -supply, the preservation of the soil, the prevention  of landscape or of the 
formation of ravines or torrents, or the protection of land against erosion, or against the  deposit 
thereon of sand, gravel or st ones;  
(39) the rendering necessary of licences for the use of premises  within the cantonment as stables, 
kennels, sites or cow  houses or as accommodation for sheep, goats or fowls;  
(40) the control of the use in the cantonment of mechanical whistles, siren s or trumpets;  
(41) the regulation of  supply of copies of official document and prescribing the fee payable in 
respect t hereof;  
(42) the regulation of  permission for granting licence for use of loud -speakers and prescribing the 
fee payable in respect there of; 
(43) the conservation and maintenance of ancient and historical monuments, archaeological sites 
and remains or  place of public importance in the cantonment; and  
(44) generally for the regulation of the administration of the  cantonment under this Act.  
349. Penalty for breach of bye -laws .—(1) Any bye -law made by a Board under this Act may 
provide that a  contravent ion thereof shall be punishable — 
(a) with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees; or  
(b) with fine which may extend to five thousand  rupees and, in the case of a continuing 
contravention, with an additional fine which may extend to five hundred  rupees for every day during 
which such contravention continues after conviction for the first such  contravention; or  
(c) with fine which may ext end to one hundred fifty rupees for every day during which the  
contravention continues after the receipt of a notice from the Board or Chief Executive Officer by the 
person  contravening the bye -law requiring such person to discontinue such contravention.  
(2) Any such bye -law may  also provide that a person contravening the same shall be required to 
remedy, so far as lies in his power, the  damage or mischief, if any, caused by such contravention.  
350. Supplemental provisions regarding bye -laws and regulations .—(1) Any power to  make              
bye-laws conferred by this Act is conferred subject to the conditions of bye -laws being made after  
previous publication and of their not taking effect until they have been approved and confirmed by the 
Central  Governmen t and published in the Official Gazette.  
(2) The Central Government in confirming a bye -law may  make any change therein which appears to 
it to be necessary.  
 (3) The Central Government may, after previous  publication of its intention, cancel any bye -law 
which it has  confirmed, and thereupon the bye -law shall cease  to have effect.  
 (4) Every bye -law and Regulation made under this Act and every order made under sub -section  (3) 
shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament  while it is in session, for 
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions 
and if,  before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both  Houses agree in making any modification in the bye -law and Regulation, or order or both 
Houses agree that the  bye-law and Regulation, or order should not be made, the bye -law and Regulation, 
or order shall thereafter  have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,  
110 
 however, that any such  modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that  bye-law and Regulation or order.  
351. Rules and bye -laws to be available for inspec tion and purchase. —(1) A copy of all rules and 
bye-laws made under this Act shall be kept at the office of the Board and shall, during office hours, be 
open free of  charge to inspection by any inhabitant of the cantonment.  
 (2) Copies of all such rules and  bye-laws shall be  kept at the office of the Board and shall be sold to 
the public at cost price singly, or in collection at the option  of the purchaser.  
CHAPTER XVII  
SUPPLEMENTAL  PROVISIONS  
352. Extension of certain provisions of the Act and rules to place beyond cantonments .—The 
Central  Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, and subject to any conditions as to 
compensation or  otherwise which thinks fit to impose, extend to any area beyond a cantonment and in the 
vicinity thereof, wit h or without restriction or modification, any of the provisions of Chapters VIII to XV 
or of any rule or bye -law made under this Act for the cantonment which relates to the subject -matter of 
any of those Chapters, and every  enactment, rule or bye -law so ex tended shall thereupon apply to that 
area as if the area were included in the  cantonment.  
353. Power to delegate functions to the  President, etc. —(1) The Board may, by a resolution passed 
in this behalf, delegate to the President, Vice -President, Chief Ex ecutive Officer or Health Officer, subject 
to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in  the resolution, all or any of its functions under clause ( b) 
of sub -section ( 5) of section 290, section 168, section170, section 175, section 167, section 263 and  
section 264.  
(2) The civil a rea committee may, by passing a  similar resolution, delegate subject to such conditions, 
if any, as may be specified in such resolution, all or any  of its functions to the Vice -President, Chief 
Executive Officer or Health Officer.  
354. Registration .—(1) Paragraphs 2 and 3 of section 54, and section 59, 107 and 123 of the Transfer 
of Property  Act, 1882  (4 of 1882) , with respect to the transfer of prop erty by registered instrument, shall, 
on and from the  commencement of this A ct, extend to every cantonment.  
(2) The Registrar or Sub -Registrar of the district or  sub-district formed for the purpose s of the 
Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908)  in which any c antonment is situated, shall,  when any document 
relating to immovable property within the cantonment is registered, send information of  the registration 
forthwith to the Chief Executive Officer and the Defence Estates Officer and such other  authority as th e 
Central Government may prescribe in this behalf.  
355. Validity of notices and other documents .—No notice, order, requisition, licence, permission  in 
writing or other such document issued under this Act shall be invalid merely by reason of any defect of  
form.  
356. Admissibility of document or entry as  evidence. —A copy of any receipt, application, plan, 
notice, order or other document or of any entry in a  register, in the possession of a Board shall, if duly 
certified by the legal keeper thereof or  other person authorised by the Chief Executive Officer in this 
behalf, be admissible in evidence of the  existence of the document or entry, and shall be admitted as 
evidence of the matters and transactions there  in recorded in every case where, and to the same e xtent to 
which, the original documents or entry would, if  produced, have been a dmissible to prove such matters . 
357. Evidence by off icer or employee of the Board. —No officer or employee of a Board shall, in 
any legal proceeding to which the Board is not pa rty, be required to produce any register or document the 
contents  of which can be proved under section 356 by a certified copy, or to appear as a witness to prove 
any matter or  transaction recorded therein save by order of the court made for special cause.   
358. Application of Act 4 of 1899 .—For the purposes of the Government Buildings Act, 1899,  
cantonments and Boards shall be deemed to be municipalities and municipal authorities respectively and 
the references to the State Government in section 4 of that Act shall be construed as references to the 
Central  Government.   
111 
 359. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty  arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the  Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be  necessary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of  two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act . 
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be  laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament.  
360. Repeals and savings .—(1) The Cantonment s Act, 1924 (2 of 1924) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal  of the Cant onments Act, 1924 (2 of 1924) — 
(a) any appointment, notification, order, scheme, rule, form, notice or bye -law made or issued, 
and any licence or permission granted under the Act shall, in so far as it is not in  consistent  with the 
provisions of this Act continue in force and be deemed to have been made, issued or granted, under  
the provisions of this Act, unless and until it is superseded by any appointment, notification, order, 
scheme,  rule, form, notice or bye -law made or issued or any licence or permis sion gra nted under the 
said provisions;  
(b) all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and 
things engaged to be  done by, with or for the Board shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered 
into or engaged t o be done by,  with or for the Bo ard constituted under this Act;  
(c) all budget estimates, assessments, valuations,  measurements or divisions made by the Board 
shall in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of  this Act, continue in force a nd be 
deemed to have been made under the provisions of this Act unless and until  they are superseded by 
any budget estimate, assessment, valuation, measurement or division made by the  Board constit uted 
under the said provisions;  
(d) all properties, movable  and immovable and all interests of  whatsoever nature and kind therein, 
vested in the Board shall with all rights of whatsoever description, use,  enjoyed or possessed by the 
said Board vest in the Bo ard constituted under this Act;  
(e) all rates, taxes, fee s, rents and other sums of money due to the Board shall be deemed to be 
due to the Board constituted under this  Act; 
(f) all rates, taxes, fees, rents, fares and other charges shall, until and unless they are varied by the 
Board  constituted under this Act,  continue to be levied at the same rate at which they were being 
levied by the Board  immediately befor e the commencement of this Act;  
(g) all suits, prosecutions and other legal proceedings  instituted or which might have been 
instituted by or against the B oard may be continued or instituted by or  against the Board constituted 
under this Act.  
   
112 
 SCHEDULE I  
(See section 100)  
NOTICE  OF DEMAND  
To 
 
residing at  
 
Taking notice that the Board demands from.................................... the sum of .................... due from 
...................................on account of......................................(here describe the property, occupation , 
circumstance or thing in respect of which the sum is payable) leviable under ....................... .................. for 
the period of ........................................................ Commencing on the ............ ............................... day of 
...............................20............, and ending on the .........................day of ........................20......................, 
and that if, within thirty days from the service of this notice, the said sum is not paid to the Boar d 
at.................................. or sufficient cause for non -payment is not shown to the satisfa ction of the Chief  
Execut ive Officer, warrant of distress /attachment* will be issued for the recovery of the same with costs.  
 
Dated  this.......................................day of ......................20.........................  
 
(Signed)  
 
 
 
Chief Executive Officer,  
Cantonment.  
 
[*Strike out whichever is not applicable.]  
 
 
   
113 
 SCHEDULE II.  
(See section 101)  
FORM  OF WARRANT  
(Here insert the name of the officer  charged  with the execution of warrant)  
Whereas A.B. of ................... has not paid, and  has not shown  satisfactory cause for the non -payment 
of, the sum of ................... due on account of... .............. *............... for the period 
of............................commencing on the day of......... ...........20.............. and ending  with the 
.......................... day of................20........ which sum is leviable under.......................  
And whereas thirty  days have elapsed since the service on him of notice of demand for the same.  
This is to command you to  [distraint/ attach# ] subject to the provisions of the Cantonments Act , 2006, 
the [movable/immovable# ] property of the said A.B. to the amount of the said sum of Rs. ..................; and 
forthwith to certify to me,  together with this warrant, all particulars of the property [s eized/attached # ] by 
you thereunder.  
Dated  this .......................day of ...........................20.......................  
                   
                                        (Signed)  
 
 
                                                            Chief Executive Officer,  
Cantonment.  
 
*Here describe the liability.  
# Strike out whichever is not applicable.    
114 
 SCH EDULE III  
(See section 103)  
FORM  OF INVENTORY  OF PROPERTY  DISTRAINED AND  NOTICE  OF SALE 
To,  
residing  at ..........................................................................  
Take notice that I have this day seized the property specified  in the inventory annexed hereto, for the 
value of.................due for the liability* men tioned in the margin for  the period commencing 
with......................day of ..................20................ and ending with  the ............................day 
of....................20................, together with Rs............. due for service  of notice of  demand, and that, unless 
within seven days from the date of the service of this notice you pay to the Board the  said amount, 
together with the costs of recovery, the said property will be sold by public auction.  
Dated  this ............................................day of ..................................20.............. . 
(Signature of officer executing the  warrant .)  
 
INVENTORY  
(Here state particulars of property seized).  
 
*Here describe the liability.    
115 
 SCHEDULE IV  
(See section 314)  
CASES  IN WHICH POLICE  MAY ARREST  WITHOUT  WARRANT  
PART A  
Section  Subject  
174 Making or selling of food, etc., or washing of clothes, by infected person.  
289(1) (a)(i)  Drunkenness, etc.  
PART B  
183(1)  Remaining in, or re -entering, cantonment after notice of expulsion for failure to 
attend hospital or dispensary.  
259 Destroying, etc., name of street or number affixed to building.  
282 Feeding animal on faith, etc.  
289(1)(a)(ii)  Using threatening or abusive words, etc.  
289(1)(a)(iii)  Indecent  exposure of person, etc.  
289(1)(a)(iv)  Begging.  
289(1)(a)(v)  Exposing deformity, etc.  
289(1)(a)(vii)  Gaming.  
289(1)(a)(xii)  Destroying notice, etc.  
289(1)(a)(xiii)  Displaces, damages, alters, pavements, gutter, storm water drain.  
289(1)(f)  Keeping common gaming -house, etc.  
289(1)(g)  Beating drum, etc.  
289(1)(h)  Singing, etc., so as to disturb public peace or order.  
290(6)  Setting loose, or setting on, ferocious dog.  
296 Discharging fire -arms, etc., so as to cause danger.  
300 Loitering or importuning for sexual immorality.  
304(a)  Remaining in, or returning to, a cantonment after notice of expulsion.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
116 
 SCHEDULE V  
APPEALS  FROM EXECUTIVE ORDERS  
(See section 340)  
 
Sl. No.  Section  Executive Order  Appellate Authority  Time allowed for appeal  
1 2 3 4 5 
1. 2 (zc)  Declaring  'inhabitant'  District Magistrate  Fifteen days . 
2. 137 Notice to fill up well, tank , 
etc., or to drain off or 
remove water.  Principal Director  Thirty days from service of 
notice.  
3. 138 Notice requiring the owner 
to provide latrine, urinal, 
cesspool dust -bin or other 
receptacle.  Board  Fifteen days from service of 
notice.  
4. 139 Notice  requiring  provision of 
sanitary  facilities in market, 
school, theatre or  other place  
of public resort.  Board  Fifteen days from service of 
notice.  
5. 142 Notice for removal of 
congested building . General  Officer   
Commanding -in-Chief,  
the Command  Thirty days from service of  
notice.  
6. 144 Notice requiring a  building 
to be repaired or altered so 
as to remove sanitary 
defects . Principal  Director  Thirty days from service of 
notice . 
7. 147 Notice prohibiting owner or 
occupier to use a building or 
part of a building for human 
habitation.  Principal Director  Twenty -one from days service 
of notice.  
8. 183 Order directing a person to 
remove from the 
Cantonment and prohibiting 
him from  
re-entering it without 
permission.  General Officer 
Commanding -in-Chief, 
the Command  Thirty days from service of 
notice.  
9. 190 Notice requiring 
maintenance  
or closing of private source  
of public drinking water 
supply . Board  Fifteen days from service  of  
notice.  
10. 192 Notice requiring the  owner, 
lessee or occupier of a 
building or land to obtain 
water from  a source of 
public water supply . Board  Fifteen days from service of 
notice . 
   
117 
 1 2 3 4 5 
11. 195 Notice for cutting off the 
connection  between any 
source of public water 
supply and any building or 
land to which water is 
supplied.  Board  Fifteen days from service of 
notice.  
12. 238  (a) Refusal to sanction 
the erection or                 
re-erection of a  
building in a civil area.  
 Principal Director  Thirty days from  service of 
communication .  
  (b) Refusal to sanction 
the erection  or                  
re-erection of a 
building in a 
Cantonm ent (Other 
than a civil area) . General Officer 
Commanding -in-Chief , 
the Command  Thirty days from service of 
communication.  
13. 239 Order of stoppage of 
building or works in certain 
cases.  Board  Thirty days from service of 
communication.  
14. 248  (a) Notice to stop erection or 
re-erection of, or to alter or 
demolish, a building in a 
civil area.  Principal Director  Thirty days from service of 
communication.  
  (b) Notice to stop erection or 
re-erection of, or to alter or 
demolish, a building in a 
Cantonment (Other than a 
civil area  General Officer 
Commanding -in Chief, 
the Command  Thirty days from service of 
communication . 
15. 252 Notice  requiring the owner 
or the occupier to  alter or 
remove any projection or 
encroachment.  Board  Thirty days from service of 
notice.  
16. 253 Notice to pull down or 
otherwise deal with a 
building  newly erected or re -
built without permissio n 
over a sewer, drain, culvert,  
water course  or   water - pipe. Board  Thirty days from service of 
notice.  
   
118 
 1 2 3 4 5 
17. 273 Notice prohibiting or 
restricting the use of a 
slaughter -house.  Board  Twenty -one days from service 
of notice . 
18. 297 Notice to remove , repair, 
protect, or enclose a  
building, wall or anything 
affixed thereto, or well, tank, 
reservoir, pool, depression or 
excavation.  Board  Thirty days from service  of 
notice . 
19. 302 Notice directing disorderly 
person to remove  from 
cantonment and 
prohibiting him from re -
entering  it without 
permission . District Magistrate  Thirty days from service of 
notice.  
 
--------------------------The Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005--------------------------
1 
 THE COMMISSIONS FOR PROTECTION OF CHILD RIGHTS ACT, 2005  
_________________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
THE NATIONAL  COMMISSIONFOR  PROTECTONOF  CHILD  RIGHTS  
 
3. Constitution of National  Commission  for Protection of Child Rights.  
4. Appointment of Chairperson and Members.  
5. Term of office and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members.  
6. Salary and allowances of Chairperson and Members.  
7. Removal from office.  
8. Vacation of office by Chairperson or Member.  
9. Vacancies, etc., not to  invalidate proceedings of Commission.  
10. Procedure for transaction of business.  
11. Member -Secretary, officers and other employees of Commission.  
12. Salaries and allowances to be paid out of grants.  
 
CHAPTER II I 
FUNCTIONSAND POWERS OF THE  COMMISSION  
 
13. Function s of Commission.  
14. Powers relating to inquiries.  
15. Steps after inquiry.  
16. Annual and special reports of Commission.  
 
CHAPTE R IV 
STATE  COMMISSION FOR PROTECTION  OF CHILD RIGHTS  
 
17. Constitution of State Commission for Protection  of Child Rights.  
18. Appointment of Chairperson and other Members.  
19. Term of office and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members.  
20. Salary and allowances and Chairperson and Members.  
21. Secretary, officers and other employees of the State Commission.  
22. Salaries and allowances to be paid out of grants.  
  2 
 SECTIONS  
 
23. Annual and special reports of State Commission.  
24. Application of  certain provisions relating to National Commission for Protection of Child 
Rights to State  Commission s. 
CHAPTER V  
CHILDRENS’S  COURTS  
25. Children’s Courts.  
26. Special Public Prosecutor.  
CHAPTER VI  
FINANCE , ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
27. Grants by Central Government.  
28. Grants by State Government s. 
29. Accounts and audit of Commission.  
30. Accounts and audit of State Commission.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
31. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
32. Chairpers on, Members and other officers to be public servant.  
33. Directions by Central Government.  
34. Returns or information.  
35. Power of Central Government  to make rules.  
36. Power of State Government to make rules.  
37. Power to remove difficulties.  
 
 
  3 
 THE COMMISSIONS FOR PROTECTION OF CHILDRIGHTS ACT, 2005  
ACT NO. 4 OF 2006  
[20th January , 2006.]  
An Act to provide for the constitution of a National Commission and State Commissions for  
Protection of Child Rights and Children's Courts for providing speedy trial of offences  
against children or of violation of child rights and for matters connected therewith or  
incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  India participated in the United Nations (UN) General Assembly Summit in1990, 
which adopted a Declaration on Survival, Protection and Development of Children;  
AND WHEREAS India has also acceded to the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC)  on the 
11th December, 1992;  
AND WHEREAS CRC is an interna tional treaty that makes it incumbent upon the signatory  States 
to take all necessary steps to protect children's rights enumerated in the Convention;  
AND WHEREA S in order to ensure protection of rights of children one of the recent  initiatives that 
the Government have taken for Children is the adoption of National Charter  for Children, 2003;  
AND WHEREAS  the UN General Assembly Special Session on Children held in  May, 2002 adopted 
an Outcome Document titled “A World Fit for Children ” containing the  goals,  objectives, strategies 
and activities to be undertaken by the member countries for the  current decade;  
AND WHEREAS  it is expedient to enact a law relating to children to give effect to the  policies 
adopted by the Government in this regard, standards presc ribed in the CRC, and all  other relevant 
international instruments;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -sixth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short  title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the  Commissions for 
Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by  notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Chairperson ” means the Chairperson of the Commission or of the State  Commission, as 
the case may be;  
(b) “child rights ” includes the children's rights adopted in the United Nations  convention on 
the Rights of the Child on the 20th November, 1989 and ratified by the  Government of India on 
the 11th December, 1992;  
(c) “Commission ” means the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights  constituted 
under section 3;  
(d) “Member ” means a Member of the Commission or of the State Commission, as the  case 
may be, and includes the Chairperson;  
                                                           
1. 5th February, 2007, vide notification N o. S.O. 229(E) , dated 15th February, 2007, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec.  3(ii). 4 
 (e) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “State Commission ” means a State Commission for Protection of Child Rights  constituted 
under section 17.  
CHAPTER II  
THE NATIONAL  COMMISSIONFOR  PROTECTIONOF  CHILD  RIGHTS  
3. Constitution of National Commission  for Protection of Child Rights. —(1) The  Central 
Government shall, by notification, constitute a body to be known as the National  Commission for 
Protection of Child Rights to exercise the powers conferred on, and to  perform the functions assigned 
to it, under this Act.  
(2) The Commission shall consist of  the following Members, namely:— 
(a) a Chairperson who is a person of eminence and has done outstanding work  for promoting 
the welfare of children; and  
(b) six Members, out of which at least two shall be women, from the following  fields, to be 
appointed by  the Central Government from amongst persons of  eminence, ability, integrit y, 
standing and experience in, — 
(i) education;  
(ii) child health, care, welfare or child development;  
(iii) juvenile justice or care of neglected or marginalized children or  children with 
disabilities;  
(iv) elimination of child labour or children in distress;  
(v) child psychology or sociology; and  
(vi) laws relating to children.  
(3) The office of the Commission shall be at Delhi.  
4. Appoint ment of Chairperson and Members. —The Central Government shall, by  
notification, appoint the Chairperson and other Members:  
Provided that the Chairperson shall be appointed on the recommendation of a three  member 
Selection Committee constituted by the Central Government under the Chairmanship  of the 1[Minister 
in-charge of the Ministry or the Department of W omen and Child Development].  
5. Term of office and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members .—(1) The  
Chairperson and every Member shall hold office as such for a term of three years from the  date on 
which he assumes office:  
Provided that no Chairperson or a Member shall hold the office for more than two  terms:  
Provided further that no Chairperson or any other Member shall hold office as such  after he has 
attained— 
(a) in the case of t he Chairperson, the age of sixty -five years; and  
(b) in the case of a Member, the age of sixty years.  
                                                           
1. Subs.  by Act 4 of 2007, s.2.,  for “Minister in -charge of the Ministry of Human Resource Development”                          
(w.e.f. 29 -12-2006).  5 
 (2) The Chairperson or a Member may, by writing under his hand addressed to the  Central 
Government, resign his office at any time.  
6. Salary and allowances of Chairperson and Members .—The salary and allowances  payable 
to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and Members, shall  be such as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government:  
Provided that neither the salary and allow ances nor the other terms and conditions of  service of 
the Chairperson or a Member, as the case may be, shall be varied to his  disadvantage after his 
appointment.  
7. Removal from office .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the  Chairperson may  
be removed from his office by an order of the Central Government on the  ground of proved 
misbehaviour or incapacity.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government  may by order 
remove from office the Chairperson or any o ther Member, if the Chairperson  or, as the c ase may be, 
such other Member, — 
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside the  duties of his office; 
or 
(c) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting; or  
(d) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or  
(e) has so abused his office as to render his continuance in office detrimental  to the public 
interest; or  
(f) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which  in the  opinion of the 
Central Government involves moral turpitude; or  
(g) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Commission, absent from  three 
consecutive meetings of the Commission.  
(3) No person shall be removed under this section until that person has been given an  opportunity 
of being heard in the matter.  
8. Vacation of office by Chairperson or Members .—(1) If the Chairperson or, as the  case may 
be, a Member, — 
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 7; or  
(b) tenders his resignation under sub -section ( 2) of section 5,  
his seat shall thereupon become vacant.  
(2) If a casual vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairperson or a Member, whether  by reason of 
his death, resignation or otherwise, such vacancy shall b e filled within a period  of ninety days by 
making afresh appointment in accordance with the provisions of section 4and the person so appointed 
shall hold office for the remainder of the term of office for which  the Chairperson, or a Member, as 
the case may  be, in whose place he is so appointed would  have held that office.  
9. Vacancies, etc., not to inval idate proceedings of Commission. —No act or  proceeding of the 
Commission shall  be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Commission; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as the Chairperson or a  Member; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission not affecting the merits of  the case.  6 
 10. Procedure for transaction of business .—(1) The Commission shall meet regularly  at its 
office at such time as the Chairperson thinks fit, but three months shall not intervene  between its last 
and the next meeting.  
(2) All decisions at a meeting shall be taken by majority:  
Provided that in the case  of equality of votes, the Chairperson, or in his absence the person  
presiding, shall have and exercise a second or casting vote.  
(3) If for any reason, the Chairperson, is unable to attend the meeting of the  Commission, any 
Member chosen by the Members present from amongst themselves at the  meeting, shall preside.  
(4) The Commission shall observe such rules of procedure in the transaction of its  business at a 
meeting, including the quorum at such meeting, as may be prescribed by the  Central Government.  
(5) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated by the Member -Secretary 
or any other officer of the Commission duly authorised by Member -Secretary in  this behalf.  
11. Member -Secretary, officers and other employees of Commission .—(1) The Central 
Government shall, by notification, appoint an officer not below the rank of the Joint  Secretary or the 
Additional Secretary to the Government of India as a Member -Secretary of  the Commission and shall 
make available to the Commission such other  officers and  employees as may be necessary for the 
efficient performance of its functions.  
(2) The Member -Secretary shall be responsible for the proper administration of the  affairs of the 
Commission and its day -to-day management and shall exercise and di scharge  such other powers and 
perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the Central  Government.  
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of  service of the 
Member -Secretary, other officers and employees, appointed  for the purpose of  the Commission shall 
be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
12. Salaries and allowances to be paid out of grants .—The salaries and allowances  payable to 
the Chairperson and Members and the administrative expenses, inclu ding salaries,  allowances and 
pensions payable to the Member -Secretary, other officers and employees  referred to in section 11, 
shall be paid out of the grants referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 27.  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONSAND POWERS OF THE  COMMISSION  
13. Functions of Commission .—(1) The Commission shall perform all or any of the  following 
functions, namely: — 
(a) examine and review the safeguards provided by or under any law for the time  being in 
force for the protection of child rights and recommend measures for their  effective 
implementation;  
(b) present to the Central Government, annually and at such other intervals, as the  
Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards;  
(c) inquire into violation of child rights and recommend  initiation of proceedings in  such 
cases;  
(d) examine all factors that inhibit the enjoyment of rights of children affected by  terrorism, 
communal violence, riots, natural disaster, domestic violence, HIV/AIDS,  trafficking, 
maltreatment, torture and exploi tation, pornography and prostitution and  recommend appropriate 
remedial measures;  
(e) look into the matters relating to children in need of special care and protection  including 
children in distress, marginalized and disadvantaged children, children in  conflict with law, 7 
 juveniles, children without family and children of prisoners and  recommend appropriate remedial 
measures;  
(f) study treaties and other international instruments and undertake periodical review  of 
existing policies, programmes and other acti vities on child rights and make  recommendations for 
their effective implementation in the best interest of children;  
(g) undertake and promote research in the field of child rights;  
(h) spread child rights literacy among various sections of the society and  promote  awareness 
of the safeguards available for protection of these rights through  publications, the media, seminars 
and other available means;  
(i) inspect or cause to be inspected any juvenile custodial home, or any other place of  
residence or institut ion meant for children, under the control of the Central  Government or any 
State Government or any other authority, including any institution  run by a social organisation; 
where children are detained or lodged for the purpose of  treatment, reformation or p rotection and 
take up with these authorities for remedial  action, if found necessary;  
(j) inquire into complaints and take suo motu  notice of matters relating to, — 
(i) deprivation and violation of child rights;  
(ii) non -implementation of laws providing for  protection and development of  children;  
(iii) non -compliance of policy decisions, guidelines or instructions aimed at  mitigating 
hardships to and ensuring welfare of the children and to provide  relief to such children,  
or take up the issues arising out o f such matters with  appropriate authorities; and  
(k) such other functions as it may consider necessary for the promotion of child rights  and any 
other matter incidental to the above functions.  
(2) The Commission shall not inquire into any matter which is p ending before a State  
Commission or any other Commission duly constituted under any law for the time being in  force.  
14. Powers relating to inquiries .—(1) The Commission shall, while inquiring into any  matter 
referred to in clause ( j) of sub -section ( 1) of section 13 have all the powers of a civil  court trying a suit 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) and, in particular, in  respect of  the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) discovery and production of any document;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office; and  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents.  
(2) The Commission shall have the power to forward any case to a Magistrate having  jurisdiction 
to try the same and the Magistrate to whom any such case is forwarded shall  proceed to hear the 
complaint against the accused as if the case has been forwarded to him  under section 346 of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
15. Steps after inquiry. —The Commission may take any of the following steps upon  the 
completion of an inquir y held under this Act, namely :— 
(i) where the inquiry discloses, the Commission of violation of child rights of a  serious nature 
or contravention of provisions of any law for the time being in force, it  may recommend to the 
concerned Government or authority the initiation of  proceedings for prosecution or such other 
action as the Commission may deem fit  against the concerned person or persons;  8 
 (ii) approach the Supreme Court or the High Court concerned for such directions,  orders or 
writs as that Court may deem necessary;  
(iii) recommend to the concerned Government or author ity for the grant of such  interim relief 
to the victim or the members of his family as the Commission may  consider necessary.  
16. Annual and  special reports of Commission. —(1) The Commission shall submit  an annual 
report to the Central Government and to the State Government concerned and may  at any time submit 
special reports on any matter which, in its opinion, is of such urgency or  importance that it should not 
be deferred till submission of the annual report.  
(2) The Central Government and the State Go vernment concerned, as the case maybe, shall cause 
the annual and special reports of the Commission to be laid before each House  of Parliament or the 
State Legislature respectively, as the case may be, along with a  memorandum of action taken or 
proposed to  be taken on the recommendations of the  Commission and the reasons for non -acceptance 
of the recommendations, if any, within a  period of one year from the date of receipt of such report.  
(3) The annual report shall be prepared in such form, manner and cont ain such details  as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government.  
CHAPTER IV  
STATE  COMMISSION FOR  PROTECTIONOF  CHILD  RIGHTS  
17. Constitution of State Commission for Protection of Child Rights .—(1) A State  
Government may constitute a body to be known as the ..........(name of the State) Commission  for 
Protection of Child Rights to exercise the powers conferred upon, and to perform the  functions 
assigned to, a State Commission under this Chapter.  
(2) The State Commission shall consist of the following Members,  namely:— 
(a) a Chairperson who is a person of eminence and has done outstanding work  for promoting 
the welfare of children; and  
(b) six Members, out of which at least two shall be women, from the  following fields, to be 
appointed by the State Government from amongst  persons of eminence, ability, integri ty, standing 
and experience in, — 
(i) education;  
(ii) child health, care, welfare or child development;  
(iii) juvenile justice or care of neglected or marginalized children or  children with 
disabilities;  
(iv) elimination of child labour or children in distress;  
(v) child psychology or sociology; and  
(vi) laws relating to children.  
(3) The headquarter of the State Commission shall be at such place as the State  Government may, 
by notification, specify.  
18. Appointment of Chairperson and other Members .—The State Government shall,  by 
notification, appoint the Chairperson and other Members:  
Provided that the Chairperson shall be appointed on the recommendation of a three  Member 
Selection Committee constituted b y the State Government under the Chairmanship  of the Minister           
in-charge of the Department dealing with children.  
  9 
 19. Term of office and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members .—(1)The 
Chairperson and every Member shall hold office as such for a term of three years from  the date on 
which he assumes office:  
Provided that no Chairperson or a Member shall hold the office for more than two  terms:  
Provided further that no Chairperson or any other Member shall hold office as such  after he has  
attained— 
(a) in the case of Chairperson, the age of sixty -five years; and  
(b) in the case of a Member, the age of sixty years.  
(2) The Chairperson or a Member may, by writing under his hand addressed to the  State 
Government, resign his office at any time.  
20. Salary and allowances of Chairperson and Members .—The salaries and  allowances 
payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and  Members shall be such 
as may be prescribed by the State Government:  
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of  service of 
the Chairperson or a Member, as the case may be, shall be varied to his  disadvantage after his 
appointment.  
21. Secretary, officers and other employees of the State Commission .—(1) The State 
Government shall, by notification, appoint an officer not below the rank of the  Secretary to the State 
Government as the Secretary of the State Commission and shall make  available to the State 
Commission such other officers and employees as may b e necessary for  the efficient performance of 
its functions.  
(2) The Secretary shall be responsible for the proper administration of the affairs of  the State 
Commission and its day -to-day management and shall exercise and discharge such  other powers and 
perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of  service of the 
Secretary, other officers and employees, appointed for the purpose of the State  Commission shall be 
such as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
22. Salaries and allowances to be paid out of grants .—The salaries and allowances  payable to 
the Chairperson and Members and the administrative expenses, including salaries,  allowances and 
pension s payable to the Secretary, other officers and employees referred to in  section 21, shall be paid 
out of the grants referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 28.  
23. Annual and special reports of State Commission .—(1) The State Commission  shall submit 
an annual report to the State Government and may at any time submit special  reports on any matter 
which, in its opinion, is of such urgency or importance that it should  not be deferred till submission of 
the annual report.  
(2) The State Government shall cause all the reports referred to in sub -section ( 1) to be laid before 
each House of State Legislature, where it consists of two Houses, or where  such Legislature consists 
of one House, before that House along with a memorandum  explaining the action taken or proposed to 
be taken on the recommendations relating to the  State and the reasons for the non -acceptance, if any, 
of any of such recommendations.  
(3) The annual report shall be prepared in such form, manner and contain such details  as may be 
prescribed by the State Government.  
  10 
 24. Application of certain provisions relating to National Commission for  Protection of 
Child Rights to State Commissions .—The provisions of sections 7, 8, 9, 10,sub -section ( 1) of 
section 13 and sections 14 and 15 shall apply to a State Commission and  shall have effect, subject to 
the following modifications, namely: — 
(a) references to “Commission ” shall be construed as references to “State  Commission ”; 
(b) references to “Central Government ” shall be construed as references to “State  
Government ”; and  
(c) references to “Member -Secretary ” shall be construed as references to “Secretary ”. 
CHAPTER V  
CHILDREN’S COURTS  
25. Children's Courts .—For the purpose of providing speedy trial of offences against  children or 
of violation of child rights, the State Government may, with the concurrence of  the Chief Justice of 
the High Court, by notification, specify at least a court in the State or  specify, for each district, a Court 
of Session to be a Children's Court to try the said offences:  
Provi ded that nothing in this section shall apply if — 
(a) a Court of Session is already specified as a special court; or  
(b) a special court is already constituted,  for such offences under any other law for the time 
being in force.  
26. Special Public Prosecutor .—For every Children's Court, the State Government  shall, by 
notification, specify a Public Prosecutor or appoint an advocate who has been in  practice as an 
advocate for not less than seven years, as a Special Public Prosecutor for the  purpose of conductin g 
cases in that Court.  
CHAPTER VI  
FINANCE , ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
27. Grants by Central Government .—(1) The Central Government shall, after due  
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Commission by way of  grants such 
sums of money as  the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the  purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Commission may spend such sums of money as it thinks fit for performing  the functions 
under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the  grants referred to in 
sub-section ( 1). 
28. Grants by State Governments .—(1) The State Government shall, after due  appropriation 
made by Legislature by law in this behalf, pay to the State Commission by way  of grants such sums of 
money as the State G overnment may think fit for being utilised for  the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The State Commission may spend such sums of money as it thinks fit for  performing the 
functions under Chapter III of this Act, and such sums shall be treated as  expenditure payabl e out of 
the grants referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
29. Accounts and audit of Commission .—(1) The Commission shall maintain proper  accounts 
and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form  as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and  Auditor -General of 
India.  
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General at 
such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in  connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and  Auditor -General.  11 
 (3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General and any person appointed by him in  connection with the 
audit of the accounts of the Commission under this Act shall,  have the  same rights and privileges and 
the authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller  and Auditor -General generally has in 
connection with the audit of Government accounts and,  in particular, shall have the right to demand 
the production of books, accounts, connected  vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect 
any of the offices of the  Commission.  
(4) The accounts of the Commission as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General or any 
other person appointed by him in this b ehalf, together with the audit report  thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government by the Commission and the  Central Government shall cause the 
audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is  received, before each House of Parliamen t. 
30. Accounts and audit of State Commission .—(1) The State Commission shall  maintain proper 
accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of  accounts in such form as may 
be prescribed by the State Government in consultation with the  Comptroller and  Auditor -General of 
India.  
(2) The accounts of the State Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and                       
Auditor -General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in  
connection with s uch audit shall be payable by the State Commission to the Comptroller and                   
Auditor -General.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General and any person appointed by him in  connection with the 
audit of the accounts of the State Commission under t his Act shall, have  the same rights and 
privileges and the authority in connection with such audit as the  Comptroller and Auditor -General 
generally has in connection with the audit of Government  accounts and, in particular, shall have the 
right to demand the production of books, accounts,  connected vouchers and other documents and 
papers and to inspect any of the offices of the  State Commission.  
(4) The accounts of the State Commission as certified by the Comptroller and  Auditor -General or 
any other person  appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit  report thereon shall be 
forwarded annually to the State Government by the State Commission  and the State Government shall 
cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is  received, b efore the State Legislature.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANE OUS 
31. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal  proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government, the State Government, the Commission,  the State 
Commission, or any  Member thereof or any person acting under the direction either  of the Central 
Government, State Government, Commission or the State Commission, in  respect of anything which 
is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this  Act or of any ru les made there  under 
or in respect of the publication by or under the authority  of the Central Government, State 
Government, Commission, or the State Commission of any  report or paper.  
32. Chairperson, Members  and other officers to be public servant .—Every  Member  of the 
Commission, State Commission and every officer appointed in the Commission or the  State 
Commission to exercise functions under this Act shall be deemed to be a public servant  within the 
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1 860).  
33. Directions by Central Government .—(1) In the discharge of its functions under  this Act, the 
Commission shall be guided by such directions on questions of policy relating to  national purposes, as 
may be given to it by the Central Government.  
(2) If any dispute arises between the Central Government and the Commission as to  whether a 
question is or is not a question of policy relating to national purposes, the decision  of the Central 
Government thereon shall be final.  12 
 34. Returns or information .—The Commission shall furnish to the Central  Government such 
returns or other information with respect to its activities as the Central  Government may, from time to 
time, require.  
35. Power to Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government  may, by 
notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such  rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) terms and conditions of ser vice of the Chairperson and Members of the  Commission and 
their salaries and allowances under section 6;  
(b) the procedure to be followed by the Commission in the transaction of its  business at a 
meeting under sub -section ( 4) of section 10;  
(c) the powers and duties which may be exercised and performed by the  Member - Secretary 
of the Commission under sub -section ( 2) of section 11;  
(d) the salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of  officers and other 
employees of the Commission under sub-section ( 3) of section 11; and  
(e) form of the statement of accounts and other records to be prepared by the  Commission 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 29.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,  before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which  may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the  expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive ses sions afore  said, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule  should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of  no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any  
such modification or annulment shall be  with out prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
36. Power of State Government to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by  
notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such  rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members of the  State Commission  
and their salaries and allowances under section 20;  
(b) the procedure to be followed by the State Commission in the transaction of  its business at 
a meeting under sub -section ( 4) of section 10 read with section24;  
(c) the powers and duties which may be ex ercised and performed by the  Secretary of the State 
Commission under sub -section ( 2) of section 21;  
(d) the salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of  officers and other 
employees of the State Commission under sub -section ( 3) of section 21; and  
(e) form of the statement of accounts and other records to be prepared by the  State 
Commission under sub -section ( 1) of section 30.  
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon  as may be 
after it is mad e, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two  Houses, or where 
such State Legislature consists of one House, before that House.  
  13 
 37. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the  provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official  Gazette, make such 
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may  appear to be necessary for 
removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of the period  of two years 
from the d ate of commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is  made, before 
each House of Parliament.  
 
--------------------------The Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act, 2006--------------------------
1 
 THE DELHI LAWS (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) ACT, 2006  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and duration . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Enforcement to be kept in abeyance . 
4. The provisions of this Act not to apply in certain cases . 
5. Power of Central Government to give directions . 
 
  2 
 THE DELHI LAWS (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) ACT, 2006  
ACT No. 22 OF 2006  
[19th May , 2006.]  
An Act to make special provisions for the areas of Delhi for a period  of one year and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental  thereto.  
WHEREAS  phenomenal increase in the population owing to migration has  put tremendous pressure on 
land and infrastructure in Delhi resulting  in developments which are not in consonance with the Master 
Plan of  Delhi 2001 and the building bye -laws;  
AND WHEREAS  keeping in view the perspective for the year 2021 and  emerging new dimensions in 
urban development, the Central Government  has proposed extensive modifications in the Master Plan of 
Delhi, which  have been published and suggestions and objections  have been received  in respect thereof 
from the public, and the finalisation of the Master  Plan 2021 is likely to take some more time;  
AND WHEREAS  the Central Government has constituted a Committee of  Experts to look into the 
various aspects of unauthorise d construction  and misuse of premises and suggest a comprehensive 
strategy to deal  with them;  
AND WHEREAS  a revised policy for relocation and rehabilitation of slum dwellers  in Delhi is also 
under consideration of the Central  Government;  
AND WHEREAS  a strategy is proposed to be prepared by the local  authorities in Delhi in accordance 
with the National Policy for Urban  Street Vendors;  
AND WHEREAS  action for violation of the provisions of the Master Plan,2001 and building bye -laws, 
before a final view is taken in the matter  by the Government, is causing avoidable hardship and 
irreparable loss  to a large number of people;  
AND WHEREAS  some time is required for making orderly arrangements in  terms of the proposed 
Master Plan 2021;  
AND WHEREAS  it is expedie nt to have a law to provide temporary relief  to the people of Delhi against 
such action for a period of one year  within which various policy issues referred to above are expected to 
be finalised;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -seventh Year of the Republic  of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and duration .—(1) This Act may be called the  Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) 
Act, 2006.  
(2) It extends to Delhi.  
(3) It shall cease to have effect on the expiry of one year from the  date of its commencement, except 
as respects things done or omitted to  be done before such cesser, and upon such cesser section 6 of the  
General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) , shall apply as if this Act had then b een repealed by a Central 
Act. 
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise  requires,— 
(a) “building bye -laws” means bye -laws made under section 481 of the  Delhi Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1957  (66 of 1957) or the bye -laws made under  section 188, sub -section ( 3) of 
section 189 and sub -section ( 1) of section 190 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 (Punjab Act 3 of 
1911) , as in force in New Delhi  or the regulations made under sub -section ( 1) of section 57 of the  
Delhi Development Act, 1957  (61 of 1957) , relating to buildings;  
(b) “Delhi” means the entire area of the National Capital Territory of  Delhi except the Delhi 
Cantonment as defined in clause ( 11) of section  2 of the Delhi  Municipal Corporation Act, 1957          
(66 of 1957) ; 3 
 (c) “encroachment” means unauthorised occupation of Government land or  public land by way of 
putting temporary, semi -permanent or permanent structure  for residential use or commercial use or 
any other use;  
(d) “local authority” means the Delhi Municipal Corporation established  under the Delhi 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 (66 of 1957) , or the New Delhi  Municipal Council established 
under the New Delhi Municipal Council  Act, 1994 (44 of 1994) or the Delhi Development Authority 
established under the  Delhi  Development Act, 1957 (61 of 1957) , legally entitled to exercise control 
in respect of the areas under their respective jurisdiction;  
(e) “Master Plan” means the Master Plan for Delhi 2001 notified under  the Delhi Development 
Act, 1957;  
(f) “notification”  means a notification published in the Official  Gazette;  
(g) “punitive action” means action taken by a local authority under the  relevant law against 
unauthorised development and shall include demolition , sealing of premises and displacement of 
persons or their business  establishment from their existing location, whether in  pursuance of Court 
orders or otherwise;  
(h) “relevant law” means in case of — 
(i) the Delhi Development Authority, the Delhi Development Act, 1957  (61 of 1957) ; 
(ii) the  Municipal Corporation of Delhi, the Delhi Municipal  Corporation Act, 1957               
(66 of 1957) ; and  
(iii) the New Delhi Municipal Council, the New Delhi Municipal Council  Act, 1994                
(44 of 1994) ; 
(i) “unauthorised development” means use of land or use of building or  construction of building 
carried out in contravention of the sanctioned  plans or without obtaining the sanction of plans, or in 
contravention  of the land use as permitted under the Master Plan or Zonal Plan or  layout plan, as the 
case may be, and includes encroachment.  
(2) The words and expressions used but not defined herein shall have  the meanings respectively 
assigned to them in the Delhi Development  Act, 1957 (61 of 1957) , the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 
1957  (66 of 1957) and the New Delhi  Municipal Council Act, 1994 (44 of 1994) . 
3. Enfor cement to be kept in abeyance .—(1) Notwithstanding anything  contained in any relevant 
law or any rules, regulations or bye -laws made thereunder, the Central Government shall within a period 
of one  year of the coming into effect of this Act, take all possible measures  to finalise norms, policy 
guidelines and feasible strategies to deal  with the problem of unauthorised development with regard to the 
under -mentioned  categories, n amely:— 
(a) mixed land use not conforming to the Master Plan;  
(b) construction beyond sanctioned plans; and  
(c) encroachment by slum and Jhuggi -Jhompri  dwellers and hawkers and  street vendors,  
so that the development of Delhi takes place in a sustainable and  planned manner.  
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1) and  notwithstanding any judgment, decree 
or order of any court, status quo  as on the 1st day of January, 2006 shall b e maintained in respect of  the 
categories of unauthorised development mentioned in sub -section  (1). 
(3) All notices issued by any local authority for initiating action against  the categories of unauthorised 
development referred to in sub -section( 1), shall be deemed to have been suspended and no punitive action  
shall be taken during the said period of one year.  
(4) Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this Act, the  Central Government may, at any 
time before the expiry of one year,  withdraw the exemption by notification in the Official Gazette in  
respect of one or more of the categories of unauthorised development mentioned  in sub -section ( 2) or  
sub-section ( 3), as the case may be.  4 
 4. The provisions of this Act n ot to apply in certa in cases .—During  the period of operation of this 
Act, no relief shall be available under  the provisions of section 3 in respect of the following categories of  
unauthorised development, namely: — 
(a) any construction unauthori sed started or continued on or after  the 1st day of January, 2006;  
(b) commencement of any commercial activity in residential areas in  violation of the provisions 
of the Master Plan of Delhi 2001 on or  after the 1st day of January, 2006;  
(c) encroachment on p ublic land except in those cases which are covered  under clause ( c) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 3;  
(d) removal of slums and Jhuggi -Jhompri  dwellers and hawkers and street  vendors, in accordance 
with the relevant policies approved by the  Central Government for clearance of land required for 
specific public  projects.  
5. Power of Central Government to give directions .—The Central  Government may, from time to 
time, issue such directions to the local  authorities as it may deem fit, for giving effect t o the provisions of  
this Act and it shall be the duty of the local authorities, to comply  with such directions.  
________  
--------------------------The Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006--------------------------
1 
 THE FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS ACT, 2006  
–––––  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
–––––  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union.  
3. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
FOOD SAFETY  AND STANDARDS  AUTHORITY OF  INDIA  
4. Establishment of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India.  
5. Composition of Food Authority and qualifications for appointment of its Chairperson and other 
Members.  
6. Selection Committee for selection of Chairperson and Members of Food Aut hority.  
7. Term of office, salary, allowances and other conditions of service of Chairperson and Members of 
Food Authority.  
8. Removal of Chairperson and Members of Food Authority.  
9. Officers and other employees of Food Authority.  
10. Functions of the Chief Executive Officer.  
11. Central Advisory Committee.  
12. Functions of Central Advisory Committee.  
13. Scientific Panels.  
14. Scientific Committee.  
15. Procedure for Scientific Committee and Scientific Panel.  
16. Duties and functions of Food Authority.  
17. Proceedings of Food Authority.  
 
CHAPTER III 
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF  FOOD SAFETY  
18. General principles to be followed in administration of Act.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
GENERAL P ROVISIONS AS TO ARTICLES OF FOOD  
19. Use of food additive or processing aid.  
20. Contaminants, naturally occurring toxic substances, heavy metals , etc.  
21. Pesticides, veterinary drugs residues, antibiotic residues and microbiological counts.  
22. Genetically modified foods, organic foods, functional foods, proprietary foods, etc.  
23. Packaging and labelling of foods.  
24. Restrictions of advertisement and prohibition as to unfair trade practices.  
 
  2 
 CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO IMPORT  
SECTIONS 
25. All imports of articles of food to be subject to this Act.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
SPECIAL RESPONSIBILITIES AS TO  FOOD SAFETY  
26. Responsibilities of the food business operator.  
27. Liability of the manufacturers, packers, wholesalers, distributors and sellers.  
28. Food recall procedures.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
ENFORCEMENT OF THE  ACT 
29. Authorities responsible for enforcement of Act.  
30. Commissioner of Food Safety of the State.  
31. Licensing and registration  of food business.  
32. Improvement notices.  
33. Prohibition orders.  
34. Emergency prohibition notices and orders.  
35. Notification of food poisoning.  
36. Designated Officer.  
37. Food Safety Officer.  
38. Powers of Food Safety Officer.  
39. Liability of Food Safety Officer in certain cases.  
40. Purchaser may have food analysed.  
41. Power of search, seizure, investigation, prosecution and procedure thereof.  
42. Procedure for launching prosecution.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
ANALYSIS OF FOOD  
43. Recognition and accreditation of laboratories, research institutions and refe rral food laboratory.  
44. Recognition of organisation or agency for food safety audit.  
45. Food Analysts.  
46. Functions of Food Analyst.  
47. Sampling and analysis.  
 
CHAPTER IX  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
48. General provisions relating to offences.  
49. General provisions relating to penalty.  
50. Penalty for selling food not of the nature or substance or quality demanded.  
51. Penalty for sub -standard food.  
52. Penalty for misbranded  food.  
53. Penalty for misleading advertisement.  
54. Penalty for food containing extraneous matter.  
55. Penalty for failure to co mply with the directions of Food Safety Officer.  
56. Penalty for unhygienic or unsanitary processing or manufacturing of food.  3 
 SECTIONS 
57. Penalty for possessing adulterant.  
58. Penalty for contraventions for which no specific penalty is provided.  
59. Punishment for unsafe food.  
60. Punishment for interfering with seized items.  
61. Punishment for false information.  
62. Punishment for obstructing or impersonating a Food Safety Officer.  
63. Punishment for carrying out a business without licence.  
64. Punishment for subsequent offences.  
65. Comp ensation in case  of injury or death of consumer.  
66. Offences by companies.  
67. Penalty for contravention of provisions of this Act in case of import of articles of food to be in 
addition to penalties provided under any other Act.  
 
CHAPTER X  
ADJUDICATION AND  FOOD SAFETY  APPELLATE  TRIBUNAL  
68. Adjudication.  
69. Power to compound offences.  
70. Establishment of Food Safety Appellate Tribunal.  
71. Procedure and powers of the Tribunal.  
72. Civil court not to have jurisdiction.  
73. Power of court to try cases summarily.  
74. Special courts and Publ ic Prosecutor.  
75. Power to transfer cases to regular courts.  
76. Appeal.  
77. Time limit for prosecutions.  
78. Power of court to implead manufacturer, etc.  
79. Magistrate’s power to impose enhanced punishment.  
80. Defences which may or may not be allowed in prosecution under this  Act. 
 
CHAPTER XI  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND REPORTS  
81. Budget of Food Authority.  
82. Finances of the Food Authority.  
83. Accounts and audit of Food Authority.  
84. Annual report of Food Authority.  
 
CHAPTER XII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
85. Power of Central Government to issue directions to Food Authority and obtain reports and 
returns.  
86. Power of Central Government to give directions to State Governments.  
87. Members, officers of Food Authority and Commissioner of Food Safety to be public servants.  
88. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
89. Overriding effect of this Act over all other food related laws.  
90. Transfer of existing employees of Central Government Agencies governing various foods related 
Acts or Orders to Food Authority.  
91. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
92. Power of Food Authority to make regulations.  
93. Laying of rules and regulations before Parliament.  
94. Power of State Government to make rules.  4 
 SECTIONS 
95. Reward by State Government.  
96. Recovery of penalty.  
97. Repeal and savings.  
98. Transitory provisions for food standards.  
99. Milk and Milk  Products Order, 1992 shall be deemed to be regulations made under this Act.  
100. Amendments to the Infant Milk Substitutes, Fee ding Bottles and Infant Foods ( Regulation of 
Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 1992.  
101. Power to remove difficulties.  
 THE FIRST  SCHEDULE.  
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE.   5 
 THE FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS ACT, 2006  
ACT NO. 34 OF 2006  
[23rd August , 2006 .] 
An Act to consolidate the laws relating to food and to establish the Food Safety and Standards 
Authority of India for laying down science based standards for articles of food and to 
regulate their manufacture, storage, distribution, sale and import, to ensure availability of 
safe and wholesome food for human consumption and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: – 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. –(1) This Act may be called the Food Safety and 
Standards Act, 2006.  
(2) It extends to the whole of Indi a. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and 
any reference in any such provision to the commence ment of this Act shall be construed as a reference to 
the coming into force of that provision.  
2. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union. –It is hereby declared that it is expedient 
in the public interest that the Union should take under its control the food industry.  
3. Definitions. –(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, – 
(a) ―adulterant‖ means any material which is or could be employed for making the food unsafe 
or sub -standard or mis -branded or containing extraneous matter;  
(b) ―advertisement‖ means any audio or visual publicity, representation or pronouncement made 
by means of any light, sound, smoke, gas, print, electronic media, internet or website and includes 
through any notice, circular, label, wrapper, invoice or other documents;  
(c) ―Chairperson‖ means the Chairperson of the Food Authority;  
(d) ―claim‖ means any representation which states, suggests, or implies that a food has particular 
qualities relating to its origin, nutritional properties, nature, processi ng, composition or otherwise;  
(e) ―Commissioner of Food Safety‖ means the Commissioner of Food Safety appointed under 
section 30;  
(f) ―consumer‖ means persons and families purchasing and receiving food in order to meet their 
personal needs;  
(g) ―contaminan t‖ means any substance, whether or not added to food, but which is present in 
such food as a result of the production (including operations carried out in crop husbandry, animal 
husbandry or veterinary medicine), manufacture, processing, preparation, treat ment, packing, 
packaging, transport or holding of such food or as a result of environmental contamination and does 
not include insect fragments, rodent hairs and other extraneous matter;  
                     
1. 28th May, 2008 (ss. 3 and 30), vide notification No. S.O. 1246(E), dated 28th May, 2008, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
28th August, 2008 (s. 90), vide notification No. S.O. 2127(E), dated 28th August, 2008, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
18th November, 2008 (ss. 16, 17, 18, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85 , 86, 92 and 93), vide notification No. S.O. 2678(E), dated 18th 
November , 2008, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
9th M arch, 2009 (ss. 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15), vide notification No. S.O. 650(E), dated 9th March, 2009 , see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
 6 
 (h) ―Designated Officer‖ means the officer appointed under section 36 ; 
(i) ―extraneous matter‖ means any matter contained in an article of food which may be carried 
from the raw materials, packaging materials or process systems used for its manufacture or which is 
added to it, but such matter does not render such article of  food unsafe;  
(j) ―Food‖ means any substance, whether processed, partially processed or unprocessed, which is 
intended for human consumption and includes primary food to the extent defined in clause ( zk), 
genetically modified or engineered food or food con taining such ingredients, infant food, packaged 
drinking water, alcoholic drink, chewing gum, and any substance, including water used into the food 
during its manufacture, preparation or treatment but does not include any animal feed, live animals 
unless t hey are prepared or processed for placing on the market for human consumption, plants, prior 
to harvesting, drugs and medicinal products, cosmetics, narcotic or psychotropic substances:  
Provided that the Central Government may declare, by notification in t he Official Gazette, any 
other article as food for the purposes of this Act having regards to its use, nature, substance or 
quality;  
(k) ―food additive‖ means any substance not normally consumed as a food by itself or used as a 
typical ingredient of the fo od, whether or not it has nutritive value, the intentional addition of which 
to food for a technological (including organoleptic) purpose in the manufacture, processing, 
preparation, treatment, packing, packaging, transport or holding of such food results,  or may be 
reasonably expected to result (directly or indirectly), in it or its by -products becoming a component 
of or otherwise affecting the characteristics of such food but does not include ―contaminants‖ or 
substances added to food for maintaining or i mproving nutritional qualities;  
 (l) ―Food Analyst‖ means an analyst appointed under section  45; 
(m) ―Food Authority‖ means the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India established under 
section 4;  
(n) ―food business‖ means any undertaking, whether for  profit or not and whether public or 
private, carrying out any of the activities related to any stage of manufacture, processing, packaging, 
storage, transportation, distribution of food, import and includes food services, catering services, sale 
of food o r food ingredients;  
(o) ―food business operator‖ in relation to food business means a person by whom the business is 
carried on or owned and is responsible for ensuring the compliance of this Act, rules and regulations 
made thereunder;  
(p) ―food laboratory ‖ means any food laboratory or institute established by the Central or a State 
Government or any other agency and accredited by National Accreditation Board for Testing and 
Calibration Laboratories or an equivalent accreditation agency and recognised by th e Food Authority 
under section 43;  
(q) ―food safety‖ means assurance that food is acceptable for human consumption according to 
its intended use;  
(r) ―food safety audit‖ means a systematic and functionally independent examination of food 
safety measures ad opted by manufacturing units to determine whether such measures and related 
results meet with objectives of food safety and the claims made in that behalf;  
(s) ―Food Safety Management System‖ means the adoption Good Manufacturing Practices, Good 
Hygienic Practices, Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point and such other practices as may be 
specified by regulation, for the food business;  
(t) ―Food Safety Officer‖ means an officer appointed under section 37;  
(u) ―hazard‖ means a biological, chemical or phy sical agent in, or condition of, food with the 
potential to cause an adverse health effect;  
(v) ―import‖ means bringing into India any article of food by land, sea or air;  
(w) ―improvement notice‖ means a notice issued under section 32 of this Act;  7 
 (x) ―infant food‖ and ―infant milk substitute‖ shall have the meanings assigned to them in clauses 
(f) and ( g) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Infant Milk Substitutes, Feeding Bottles and Infant 
Foods (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) Act , 1992 (41 of 1992), respectively;  
(y) ―ingredient‖ means any substance, including a food additive used in the manufacture or 
preparation of food and present in the final product, possibly in a modified form;  
(z) ―label‖ means any tag, brand, mark, pictori al or other descriptive matter, written, printed, 
stencilled, marked, embossed, graphic, perforated, stamped or impressed on or attached to container, 
cover, lid or crown of any food package and includes a product insert;  
(za) ―licence‖ means a licence  granted under section 31;  
(zb) ―local area‖ means any area, whether urban or rural, notified by the Commissioner of Food 
Safety, to be a local area for the purposes of this Act;  
(zc) ―manufacture‖ means a process or adoption or any treatment for conversio n of ingredients 
into an article of food, which includes any sub -process, incidental or ancillary to the manufacture of 
an article of food;  
(zd) ―manufacturer‖ means a person engaged in the business of manufacturing any article of food 
for sale and include s any person who obtains such article from another person and packs and labels it 
for sale or only labels it for such purposes;  
1[(ze) ―Member‖ includes a part -time Member and the Cha irperson of the Food Authority; ] 
(zf) ―misbranded food‖ means an article of food – 
(A) if it is purported, or is represented to be, or is being – 
(i) offered or promoted for sale with false, misleading or deceptive claims either;  
(a) upon the label of the package, or  
(b) through advertisement, or  
(ii) sold by a name which belongs  to another article of food; or  
(iii) offered or promoted for sale under the name of a fictitious individual or company as 
the manufacturer or producer of the article as borne on the package or containing the article 
or the label on such package; or  
(B) if the article is sold in packages which have been sealed or prepared by or at the instance 
of the manufacturer or producer bearing his name and address but – 
(i) the article is an imitation of, or is a substitute for, or resembles in a manner likely to 
decei ve, another article of food under the name of which it is sold, and is not plainly and 
conspicuously labelled so as to indicate its true character; or  
(ii) the package containing the article or the label on the package bears any statement, 
design or device  regarding the ingredients or the substances contained therein, which is false 
or misleading in any material particular, or if the package is otherwise deceptive with respect 
to its contents; or  
(iii) the article is offered for sale as the product of any p lace or country which is false; or  
(C) if the article contained in the package – 
(i) contains any artificial flavouring, colouring or chemical preservative and the package 
is without a declaratory label stating that fact or is not labelled in accordance wit h the 
requirements of this Act or regulations made thereunder or is in contravention thereof; or  
(ii) is offered for sale for special dietary uses, unless its label bears such information as 
may be specified by regulation, concerning its vitamins, minerals  or other dietary properties 
in order sufficiently to inform its purchaser as to its value for such use; or  
                     
 1. Subs.by Act 13 of 2008, s. 2, for cl. (ze) (w.e.f. 7 -2-2008).  8 
 (iii) is not conspicuously or correctly stated on the outside thereof within the limits of 
variability laid down under this Act.  
(zg) ―notification‖  means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(zh) ―package‖ means a pre -packed box, bottle, casket, tin, barrel, case, pouch, receptacle, sack, 
bag, wrapper or such other things in which an article of food is packed;  
(zi) ―premises‖ include any  shop, stall, hotel, restaurant, airline services and food canteens, place 
or vehicle or vessel where any article of food is sold or manufactured or stored for sale;  
(zj) ―prescribed‖ means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be under this Act;  
(zk) ―primary food‖ means an article of food, being a produce of agriculture or horticulture or 
animal husbandry and dairying or aquaculture in its natural form, resulting from the growing, raising, 
cultivation,  picking, harvesting, collection or catching in the hands of a person other than a farmer or 
fisherman;  
(zl) ―prohibition order‖ means an order issued under section 33 of this Act;  
(zm) ―risk‖, in relation to any article of food, means the probability of a n adverse effect on the 
health of consumers of such food and the severity of that effect, consequential to a food hazard;  
(zn) ―risk analysis‖, in relation to any article of food, means a process consisting of three 
components, i.e. risk assessment, risk m anagement and risk communication;  
(zo) ―risk assessment‖ means a scientifically based process consisting of the following steps:  
(i) hazard identification, ( ii) hazard characterisation; ( iii) exposure assessment, and ( iv) risk 
haracterisation;  
(zp) ―risk communication‖ means the interactive exchange of information and opinions 
throughout the risk analysis process concerning risks, risk -related factors and risk perceptions, 
among risk assessors, risk managers, consumers, industry, the academic community and  other 
interested parties, including the explanation of risk assessment findings and the basis of risk 
management decisions;  
(zq) ―risk management‖ means the process, distinct from risk assessment, of evaluating policy 
alternatives, in consultation with al l interested parties considering risk assessment and other factors 
relevant for the protection of health of consumers and for the promotion of fair trade practices, and, if 
needed, selecting appropriate prevention and control options;  
(zr) ―sale‖ with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means the sale of any article 
of food, whether for cash or on credit or by way of exchange and whether by wholesale or retail, for 
human consumption or use, or for analysis, and includes an agreement for sale , an offer for sale, the 
exposing for sale or having in possession for sale of any such article, and includes also an attempt to 
sell any such article;  
(zs) ―sample‖ means a sample of any article of food taken under the provisions of this Act or any 
rules and regulations made thereunder;  
(zt) ―specified by regulations‖ means specified by regulations made by the Food Authority;  
(zu) ―standard‖, in relation to any article of food, means the standards notified by the Food 
Authority;  
(zv) ―State Government‖ in relation to a Union territory means the Administrator of that Union 
territory appointed by the President under article 239 of the Constitution;  
(zw) ―substance‖ includes any natural or artificial substance or other matter, whether it is in a 
solid state or  in liquid form or in the form of gas or vapour;  
(zx) ―sub-standard‖ an article of food shall be deemed to be sub -standard if it does not meet the 
specified standards but not so as to render the article of food unsafe;  
(zy) ―Tribunal‖ means the Food Safety  Appellate Tribunal established under section 70;  9 
 (zz) ―unsafe food‖ means an article of food whose nature, substance or quality is so affected as to 
render it injurious to health: — 
(i) by the article itself, or its package thereof, which is composed, whet her wholly or in 
part, of poisonous or deleterious substance s; or 
(ii) by the article consisting, wholly or in part, of any filthy, putrid, rotten, decomposed 
or diseased animal substance or vegetable substance; or  
(iii) by virtue of its unhygienic processing or the presence in that article of any harmful 
substance; or  
(iv) by the substitution of any inferior or cheaper substance whether wholly or in part; or  
(v) by addition of a substance directly or as an ingredient which is not permitted; or  
(vi) by the abstraction, wholly or in part, of any of its constituents; or  
(vii) by the article being so coloured, flavoured or coated, powdered or polished, as to 
damage or conceal the article or to make it appear better or of greater value than it really is; 
or 
(viii) by the presence of any colouring matter or preservatives other than that specified in 
respect thereof; or  
(ix) by the article having been infected or infested with worms, weevils, or insects; or  
(x) by virtue of its being prepared, packed or kept  under insanitary conditions; or  
(xi) by virtue of its being mis -branded or sub -standard or food containing extraneous 
matter; or  
(xii) by virtue of containing pesticides and other contaminants in excess of quantities 
specified by regulations.  
(2) Any refe rence in this Act to a law which is not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall, 
in relation to that State, be construed as a reference to the corresponding Law, if any, in force in that 
State.  
CHAPTER II  
FOOD SAFETY  AND STANDARDS  AUTHORITY OF  INDIA  
4. Establishment of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India. –(1) The Central Government 
shall, by notification, establish a body to be known as the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform t he functions assigned to, it under this Act.  
(2) The Food Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession 
and a  common  seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, 
and to contr act and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.  
(3) The head office of the Food Authority shall be at Delhi.  
(4) The Food Authority may establish  its offices at any other place in India.   
5. Composition of Food Authority and qualifications for appointment  of its Chairperson and 
other Members. –(1) The Food Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and the following twenty -two 
members out of which one -third shall be women, namely: – 
(a) seven Members, not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India, to be 
appointed by the Central Government, to respectively represent the Ministries or Departments of the 
Central Government dealing with – 
(i) Agriculture,  
(ii) Commerce,  
(iii) Consumer Affairs,  
(iv) Food Processing,  10 
 (v) Health,  
(vi) Legislative Affairs,  
(vii) Small Scale Industries,  
(viii) who shall be Members ex officio ; 
(b) two representatives from food industry of which one shall be from small scale industries;  
(c) two representatives from consumer organisations;  
(d) three eminent food technologists or scientists;  
(e) five members to be appointed by rotation every three years, one each in seriatim from the 
Zones as specified in the First Schedule to represent the States and the Union territories;  
(f) two persons to represent farmers’ org anisations;  
(g) one person to represent retailers’ organisations.  
(2) The Chairperson and other Members of the Food Authority shall be appointed in such a manner 
so as to secure the highest standards of competence, broad range of relevant expertise, and sh all 
represent, the broadest possible geographic distribution within the country.  
(3) The Chairperson shall be appointed by the Central Government from amongst the persons of 
eminence in the field of food science or from amongst the persons from the adminis tration who have 
been associated with the subject and is either holding or has held the position of not below the rank of 
Secretary to the Government of India.  
1[(4) The Chairperson and the Members including part -time Members other than the ex officio  
embers of the Food  Authority may be appointed by the Central Government on the recommendations of 
the Selection Committee.  
(5) The Chairperson of the Food Authority shall not hold any other office .] 
6. Selection Committee for selection of Chairperson and Members of Food Authority. –(1) The 
Central Government shall, for the purpose of selection of the Chairperson and the Members other than ex 
officio  Members of the Food Authority, constitute a Selection Committee consisting of – 
(a) Cabinet Secretary –Chairperson,  
(b) Secretary -in-charge of the Ministry or the Department responsible for administration of this 
Act as the convener –Member,  
(c) Secretary -in-charge of the Ministries or the Departments of the Central Government dealing 
with Health, Legislative and Personnel –Members,  
(d) Chairman of the Public Enterprises Selection Board –Member,  
(e) An eminent food technologist to be nominated by the Central Government –Member.  
Explanation –For the purposes of clause ( e), the Central Government shall no minate a person 
from amongst persons holding the post of Director or the Head, by whatever name called, of any 
national research or technical institution.  
(2) The Central Government shall, within two months from the date of occurrence of any vacancy by 
reason of death,  resignation, or removal of the Chairperson or a Member of the Food Authority and three 
months before the superannuation or completion of the term of office of the Chairperson or any Member 
of that Authority, make a reference to the Selection Committee for filling up of the vacancy.  
(3) The Selection Committee shall finalise the selection of the Chairperson and Members of the Food 
Authority within two months from the date on which the reference is made to it.  
(4) The Selection Committee shall r ecommend a panel of two names for every vacancy referred to it.  
                     
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2008, s. 3, for sub -sections ( 4) and ( 5) (w.e.f. 7 -2-2008).  
 11 
 (5) Before recommending any person for appointment as a Chairperson or other Member of the Food 
Authority, the Selection Committee shall satisfy itself that such person does not have any finan cial or 
other interest, which is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as a Member.  
(6) No appointment of the Chairperson or other Member of the Food Authority shall be invalid 
merely by reason of any vacancy in the Selection Committee.  
7. Term of office, salary, allowances and other conditions of service of Chairperson and 
Members of Food Authority. –(1) The Chairperson and the members other than ex officio  Members 
shall hold office for a term of three years from the date on which they enter upon the ir offices, and shall 
be eligible for re -appointment for a further period of three years:  
1[Provided that the Chairperson shall not hold office as such after he has attained the age of sixty -five  
years.]   
 (2) The salary and allowances payable to, and the  other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson and Members other than ex officio  Members shall be such as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government.  
(3) The Chairperson and every Member shall, before entering upon his office, make and subscribe to 
an oath of office and of secrecy in such form and in such manner and before such authority as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section the Chairperson or any Member may – 
(a) relinquish his office by giving in writing to the Central Government a notice of not less than 
three months; or  
(b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of section 8.  
(5) The Chairperson or any Member ceasing to hold office as such shall not represent any person 
before the Food Authority or any State Authority in any manner.  
8. Removal of Chairperson and Members of Food Authority. –(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in sub -section ( 1) of section 7, the Central Government may, by order, remo ve from office the 
Chairperson or any other Member, if the Chairperson or as the case may be, such other Member, — 
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves 
moral tu rpitude; or  
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interests as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions 
as a Member; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his cont inuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest.  
(2) No Member shall be removed under clauses ( d) and ( e) of sub -section ( 1) unless he has been 
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
9. Officers and other employees of Food Author ity.–(1) There shall be a Chief Executive Officer 
of the Food Authority, not below the rank of Additional Secretary to the Government of India, who shall 
be the Member -Secretary of the Authority, to be appointed by the Central Government.  
(2) The Food Auth ority may, with the approval of the Central Government, determine the number, 
nature and categories of other officers and employees required to the Food Authority in the discharge of 
its functions.  
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to and other condi tions of service of, the Chief Executive 
Officer, officers, and other employees shall be such as may be specified by regulations by the Food 
Authority with the approval of the Central Government.  
                     
1. Subs.by Act 13 of 2008, s. 4, for the proviso ( w.e.f. 7 -2-2008).  12 
 10. Functions of the Chief Executive Officer. –(1) The Chief Executive Officer shall be the legal 
representative of the Food Authority and shall be responsible for – 
(a) the day -to-day administration of the Food Authority;  
(b) drawing up of proposal for the Food Authority’s work programmes in consultation with the 
Central Advisory Committee;  
(c) implementing the work programmes and the decisions adopted by the Food Authority;  
(d) ensuring the provision of appropriate scientific, technical and administrative support for the 
Scientific Committee and the Scientific Panel ; 
(e) ensuring that the Food Authority carries out its tasks in accordance with the requirements of 
its users, in particular with regard to the adequacy of the services provided and the time taken;  
(f) the preparation of the statement of revenue and expenditure and the execution of the budget of 
the Food Authority; and  
(g) developing and maintaining contact with the Central Government, and for ensuring a regular 
dialogue with its relevant committees.  
(2) Every year, the Chief Executive Officer shall s ubmit to the Food Authority for approval – 
(a) a general report covering all the activities of the Food Authority in the previous year;  
(b) programmes of work;  
(c) the annual accounts for the previous year; and  
(d) the budget for the coming year.  
(3) The Ch ief Executive Officer shall, following adoption by the Food Authority, forward, the 
general report and the programmes to the Central Government and the State Governments and shall have 
them published.  
(4) The Chief Executive Officer shall approve all finan cial expenditure of the Food Authority and 
report on the Authority’s activities to the Central Government.  
(5) The Chief Executive Officer shall exercise the powers of the Commissioner of Food Safety while 
dealing with matters relating to food safety of such articles.  
(6) The Chief Executive Officer shall have administrative control over the officers and other 
employees of the Food Authority.  
11. Central Advisory Committee. –(1) The Food Authority shall, by notification, establish a 
Committee to be known a s the Central Advisory Committee.  
(2) The Central Advisory Committee shall consist of two members each to represent the interests of 
food industry, agriculture, consumers, relevant research bodies and food laboratories and all 
Commissioners of Food Safety,  and the Chairperson of the Scientific Committee shall be ex officio  
member.  
(3) The representatives of the concerned Ministries or Departments of the Central Government in 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Bio -technology, Commerce and Industry, Consumer 
Affairs, Environment and Forests, Food Processing Industries, Health, Panchayati Raj, Small Scale 
Industries and Food and Public Distribution or government institutes or organisations and government 
recognised farmers’ shall be invitees to the del iberations of the Central Advisory Committee.  
(4) The Chief Executive Officer shall be ex officio  Chairperson of the Central Advisory Committee.  
(5) The Central Advisory Committee shall follow such rules of procedure including its transaction of 
business a s may be specified by regulations.  13 
 12. Functions of Central Advisory Committee. –(1) The Central Advisory Committee shall ensure 
close cooperation between the Food Authority and the enforcement agencies and organisations operating 
in the field of food.  
(2) The Central Advisory Committee shall advise the Food Authority on – 
(a) the performance of its duties under this section and in particular in drawing up of a proposal 
for the Food Authority’s work programme,  
(b) on the prioritisation of work,  
(c) identifying potential risks,  
(d) pooling of knowledge, and  
(e) such other functions as may be specified by regulations.  
(3) The Central Advisory Committee shall meet regularly at the invitation of the Chairperson of 
Central Advisory Committee or at the request of at least one -third of its members, and not less than three 
times a year.  
13. Scientific Panels. –(1) The Food Authority shall establish scientific panels, which shall consist of 
independent scientific experts.  
(2) The Scientific Panel shall invit e the relevant industry and consumer representatives in its 
deliberations.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Food Authority may establish as many 
Scientific Panels as it considers necessary in addition to the Panels on:  
(a) food additives, flavourings, processing aids and materials in contact with food;  
(b) pesticides and antibiotics residues;  
(c) genetically modified organisms and foods;  
(d) functional foods, nutraceuticals, dietetic products and other similar products;  
(e) biological hazards;  
(f) contaminants in the food chain;  
(g) labelling; and  
(h) method of sampling and analysis.  
(4) The Food Authority may from time to time re -constitute the Scientific Panels by adding new 
members or by omitting the existing members or by c hanging the name of the panel as the case may be.  
14. Scientific Committee. –(1) The Food Authority shall constitute Scientific Committee which shall 
consist of the Chairpersons of the Scientific Panels and six independent scientific experts not belonging o r 
affiliated to any of the Scientific Panels.  
(2) The Scientific Committee shall be responsible for providing the scientific opinions to the Food 
Authority, and shall have the powers, where necessary, of organising public hearings.  
(3) The Scientific Commi ttee shall be responsible for the general co -ordination necessary to ensure 
consistency of the scientific opinion procedure and in particular with regard to the adoption of working 
procedures and harmonisation of working methods of the Scientific Panels.  
(4) The Scientific Committee shall provide opinions on multi -sectoral issues falling within the 
competence of more than one Scientific Panel, and on issues which do not fall within the competence of 
any of the Scientific Panels.  
(5) Wherever necessary, and particularly, in the case of subjects which do not fall within the 
competence of any of the Scientific Panel, the Scientific Committee shall set up working groups and in 
such cases, it shall draw on the expertise of those working groups when establishing s cientific opinions.  14 
 15. Procedure for Scientific Committee and Scientific Panel. –(1) The members of the Scientific 
Committee, who are not members of the  Scientific Panel and the members of the Scientific Panel shall be 
appointed by the Food Authority, for a period of three years, which shall be renewable for such period, 
and the vacancy notice shall be published in the relevant leading scientific publications and on the  Food 
Authority’s website for a call for expressions of interest.  
(2) The Scientific Committee and the Scientific Panel shall each choose a Chairperson from amongst 
their members.  
(3) The Scientific Committee and the Scientific Panel shall act by a majority of their members and the 
views of the members shall be recorded.  
(4) The procedure for the operation and co -operation of the Scientific Committee and the Scientific 
Panel shall be specified by regulations.  
(5) These procedures shall relate in particular to – 
(a) The number of times that a member can serve consecutively on a Scientific Com mittee or 
Scientific Panel;  
(b) the number of members in each Scientific Panel;  
(c) the procedure for re -imbursing the expenses of members of the Scientific Committee and the 
Scientific Panel;  
(d) the manner in which tasks and requests for scientific opini ons are assigned to the Scientific 
Committee and the Scientific Panel;  
(e) The creation and organisation of the working groups of the Scientific Committee and the 
Scientific Panel, and the possibility of external experts being included in those working gro ups; 
(f) The possibility of observers being invited to meetings of the Scientific Committee and the 
Scientific Panel;  
(g) The possibility of organising public hearings; and  
(h) Quorum of the meeting, meeting notice, agenda of the meeting and such other mat ters. 
16. Duties and functions of Food Authority. –(1) It shall be the duty of the Food Authority to 
regulate and monitor the manufacture, processing, distribution, sale and import of food so as to ensure 
safe and wholesome food.  
(2) Without prejudice to th e provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Food Authority may by regulations 
specify – 
(a) the standards and guidelines in relation to articles of food and specifying an appropriate 
system for enforcing various standards notified under this Act;  
(b) the limits fo r use of food additives, crop contaminants, pesticide residues, residues of 
veterinary drugs, heavy metals, processing aids, myco -toxins, antibiotics and pharmacological active 
substances and irradiation of food;  
(c) the mechanisms and guidelines for accre ditation of certification bodies engaged in 
certification of food safety management systems for food businesses;  
(d) the procedure and the enforcement of quality control in relation to any article of food 
imported into India;  
(e) the procedure and guidelin es for accreditation of laboratories and notification of the accredited 
laboratories;  
(f) the method of sampling, analysis and exchange of information among enforcement authorities;  
(g) conduct survey of enforcement and administration of this Act in the co untry;  
(h) food labelling standards including claims on health, nutrition, special dietary uses and food 
category systems for foods; and  15 
 (i) the manner in which and the procedure subject to which risk analysis, risk assessment, risk 
communication and risk management shall be undertaken.  
(3) The Food Authority shall also – 
(a) provide scientific advice and technical support to the Central Government and the State 
Governments in matters of framing the policy and rules in areas which have a direct or indirect 
bearing on food safety and nutrition;  
(b) search, collect, collate, analyse and summarise relevant scientific and technical data 
particularly relating to – 
(i) food consumption and the exposure of individuals to risks related to the consumption of 
food;  
(ii) incidence and prevalence of biological risk;  
(iii) contaminants in food;  
(iv) residues of various contaminants;  
(v) identification of emerging risks; and  
(vi) introduction of rapid alert system;  
(c) promote, co -ordinate and issue guidelines for the develo pment of risk assessment 
methodologies and monitor and conduct and forward messages on the health and nutritional risks of 
food to the Central Government, State Governments and Commissioners of Food Safety;  
(d) provide scientific and technical advice and a ssistance to the Central Government and the State 
Governments in implementation of crisis management procedures with regard to food safety and to 
draw up a general plan for crisis management and work in close co -operation with the crisis unit set 
up by the  Central Government in this regard;  
(e) establish a system of network of organisations with the aim to facilitate a scientific co -
operation framework by the co -ordination of activities, the exchange of information, the development 
and implementation of joi nt projects, the exchange of expertise and best practices in the fields within 
the Food Authority’s responsibility;  
(f) provide scientific and technical assistance to the Central Government and the State 
Governments for improving co -operation with internat ional organisations;  
(g) take all such steps to ensure that the public, consumers, interested parties and all levels of 
panchayats receive rapid, reliable, objective and comprehensive information through appropriate 
methods and means;  
(h) provide, whether within or outside their area, training programmes in food safety and 
standards for persons who are or intend to become involved in food businesses, whether as food 
business operators or employees or otherwise;  
(i) undertake any other task assigned to it by  the Central Government to carry out the objects of 
this Act;  
(j) contribute to the development of international technical standards for food, sanitary and phyto -
sanitary standards;  
(k) contribute, where relevant and appropriate to the development of agree ment on recognition of 
the equivalence of specific food related measures;  
(l) promote co -ordination of work on food standards undertaken by international governmental 
and non -governmental organisations;  
(m) promote consistency between international technic al standards and domestic food standards 
while ensuring that the level of protection adopted in the country is not reduced; and  
(n) promote general awareness as to food safety and food standards.  
  16 
 (4) The Food Authority shall make it public without undue delay – 
(a) the opinions of the Scientific Committee and the Scientific Panel immediately after adoption;  
(b) the annual declarations of interest made by members of the Food Authority, the Chief 
Executive Officer, members of the Advisory Committee and membe rs of the Scientific Committee 
and Scientific Panel, as well as the declarations of interest if any, made in relation to items on the 
agendas of meetings;  
(c) the results of its scientific studies; and  
(d) the annual report of its activities.  
(5) The Food Authority may, from time to time give such directions, on matters relating to food safety 
and standards, to the Commissioner of Food Safety, who shall be bound by such directions while 
exerc ising his powers under this Act.  
(6) The Food Authority shall not disclose or cause to be disclosed to third parties confidential 
information that it receives for which confidential treatment has been requested and has been acceded, 
except for information which must be made public if circumstances so require, in order to  protect public 
health.  
17. Proceedings of Food Authority. –(1) The Food Authority shall meet at the head office or any of 
its offices at such time as the Chairperson may direct, and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard 
to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at its meetings)  as may be specified by 
regulations.  
(2) If the Chairperson is unable to attend a meeting of the Food Authority, any other Member 
nominated by the Chairperson in this behalf and, in the absence  of such nomination or where there is no 
Chairperson, any Member chosen by the Members present from amongst themselves, shall preside at the 
meeting.  
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Food Authority shall be decided by a 
majority of  votes of the Members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the 
Chairperson or the person presiding over the meeting shall have the right to exercise a second or casting 
vote.  
(4) All orders and decisions of the Food Authority shall  be authenticated by the Chief Executive 
Officer.  
(5) The Chief Executive Officer shall take part in the meetings of the Food Authority but without a 
right to vote.  
(6) The Food Authority may invite the Chairperson of the Scientific Committee to attend its  meetings 
but without a right to vote.  
(7) No act or proceedings of the Food Authority shall be questioned or invalidated merely on the 
ground of existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of Food Authority.  
CHAPTER III  
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF  FOOD SAFETY  
18. General principles to be followed in administration of Act. –The Central Government, the State 
Governments, the Food Authority and other agencies, as the case may be, while implementing the 
provisions of this Act shall be guided by the followi ng principles namely: – 
(1) (a) endeavour  to achieve an appropriate level of protection of human life and health and the 
protection of consumer’s interests, including fair practices in all kinds of food trade with reference to 
food safety standards and practices;  
(b) carry out risk management whi ch shall include taking into account the results of risk 
assessment and other factors which in the opinion of the Food Authority are relevant to the matter 
under consideration and where the conditions are relevant, in order to achieve the general objective s 
of regulations;  17 
 (c) where in any specific circumstances, on the basis of assessment of available information, the 
possibility of harmful effects on health is identified but scientific uncertainty persists, provisional risk 
management measures necessary t o ensure appropriate level of health protection may be adopted, 
pending further scientific information for a more comprehensive risk assessment;  
(d) the measures adopted on the basis of clause ( c) shall be proportionate and no more restrictive 
of trade tha n is required to achieve appropriate level of health protection, regard being had to 
technical and economic feasibility and other factors regarded as reasonable and proper in the matter 
under consideration;  
(e) the measures adopted shall be reviewed within  a reasonable period of time, depending on the 
nature of the risk to life or health being identified and the type of scientific information needed to 
clarify the scientific uncertainty and to conduct a more comprehensive risk assessment;  
(f) in cases where  there are reasonable grounds to suspect that a food may present a risk for 
human health, then, depending on the nature, seriousness and extent of that risk, the Food Authority 
and the Commissioner of Food Safety shall take appropriate steps to inform the general public of the 
nature of the risk to health, identifying to the fullest extent possible the food or type of food, the risk 
that it may present, and the measures which are taken or about to be taken to prevent, reduce or 
eliminate that risk; and  
(g) where any food which fails to comply with food safety requirements is part of a batch, lot or 
consignment of food of the same class or description, it shall be presumed until the contrary is 
proved, that all of the food in that batch, lot or consignment f ails to comply with those requirements.  
(2) The Food Authority shall, while framing regulations or specifying standards under this Act – 
(a) take into account – 
(i) prevalent practices and conditions in the country including agricultural practices and 
handling, storage and transport conditions; and  
(ii) international standards and practices, where international standards or practices exist 
or are in the process of being formulated,  
unless it is of opinion that taking into account of such prevalent pract ices and conditions or 
international standards or practices or any particular part thereof would not be an effective or 
appropriate means for securing the objectives of such regulations or where there is a scientific 
justification or where they would resul t in a different level of protection from the one determined as 
appropriate in the country;  
(b) determine food standards on the basis of risk analysis except where it is of opinion that 
such analysis is not appropriate to the circumstances or the nature of  the case;  
(c) undertake risk assessment based on the available scientific evidence and in an 
independent, objective and transparent manner;  
(d) ensure that there is open and transparent public consultation, directly or through 
representative bodies includ ing all levels of panchayats, during the preparation, evaluation and 
revision of regulations, except where it is of opinion that there is an urgency concerning food 
safety or public health to make or amend the regulations in which case such consultation ma y be 
dispensed with:  
Provided that such regulations shall be in force for not more than six months;  
(e) ensure protection of the interests of consumers and shall provide a basis for consumers to 
make informed choices in relation to the foods they consume;  
(f) ensure prevention of – 
(i) fraudulent, deceptive or unfair trade practices which may mislead or harm the 
consumer; and  
(ii) unsafe or contaminated or sub -standard food.  18 
 (3) The provisions of this Act shall not apply to any farmer or fisherman or farming  operations or 
crops or livestock or aquaculture, and supplies used or produced in farming or products of crops 
produced by a farmer at farm level or a fisherman in his operations.  
CHAPTER IV  
GENERAL POVISIONS AS TO ARTICLES OF FOOD  
19. Use of food additive or processing aid. –No article of food shall contain any food additive or 
processing aid unless it is in accordance with the provisions of this Act and regulations made thereunder.  
Explanation .–For the purposes of this section, ―processing aid‖ mea ns any substance or material, not 
including apparatus or utensils, and not consumed as a food ingredient by itself, used in the processing of 
raw materials, foods or its ingredients to fulfil a certain technological purpose during treatment or 
processing a nd which may result in the non -intentional but unavoidable presence of residues or 
derivatives in the final product.  
20. Contaminants, naturally occurring toxic substances, heavy metals, etc. –No article of food 
shall contain any contaminant, naturally occu rring toxic substances or toxins or hormone or heavy metals 
in excess of such quantities as may be specified by regulations.  
21. Pesticides, veterinary drugs residues, antibiotic residues and microbiological counts. –(1) No 
article of food shall contain ins ecticides or pesticides residues, veterinary drugs residues, antibiotic 
residues, solvent residues, pharmacological active substances and micro -biological counts in excess of 
such tolerance limit as may be specified by regulations.  
(2) No insecticide shall  be used directly on article of food except fumigants registered and approved 
under the Insecticides Act, 1968 (46 of 1968).  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this section, – 
(1) ―pesticide residue‖ means any specified substance in food resulting from the us e of a pesticide 
and includes any derivatives of a pesticide, such as conversion products, metabolites, reaction 
products and impurities considered to be of toxicological significance and also includes such residues 
coming into food from environment;  
(2) ―residues of veterinary drugs‖ include the parent compounds or their metabolites or both in 
any edible portion of any animal product and include residues of associated impurities of the 
veterinary drugs concerned.  
22. Genetically modified foods, organic foods, functional foods, proprietary foods, etc. –Save as 
otherwise provided under this Act and regulations made thereunder, no person shall manufacture, 
distribute, sell or import any novel food, genetically modified articles of food, irradiated food, orga nic 
foods, foods for special dietary uses, functional foods, neutraceuticals, health supplements, proprietary 
foods and such other articles of food which the Central Government may notify in this behalf.  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this section, – 
(1) ―foods for special dietary uses or functional foods or nutraceuticals or health supplements‖ means:  
(a) foods which are specially processed or formulated to satisfy particular dietary requirements 
which exist because of a particular physical or physiologic al condition or specific diseases and 
disorders and which are presented as such, wherein the composition of these foodstuffs must differ 
significantly from the composition of ordinary foods of comparable nature, if such ordinary foods 
exist, and may contai n one or more of the following ingredients, namely: – 
(i) plants or botanicals or their parts in the form of powder, concentrate or extract in water, 
ethyl alcohol or hydro alcoholic extract, single or in combination;  
(ii) minerals or vitamins or proteins o r metals or their compounds or amino acids (in amounts 
not exceeding the Recommended Daily Allowance for Indians) or enzymes (within permissible 
limits);  
(iii) substances from animal origin;  19 
 (iv) a dietary substance for use by human beings to supplement th e diet by increasing the total 
dietary intake;  
(b) (i) a product that is labelled as a ―Food for special dietary uses or functional foods or 
nutraceuticals  or health supplements or similar such foods‖ which is not represented for use as a 
conventional food and whereby such products may be formulated in the form of powders, granules, 
tablets, capsules, liquids, jelly and other dosage forms but not parenterals , and are meant for oral 
administration;  
(ii) such product does not include a drug as defined in clause ( b) and ayurvedic, sidha and unani 
drugs as defined in clauses ( a) and ( h) of section 3 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 
1940) and rules made  thereunder;  
(iii) does not claim to cure or mitigate any specific disease, disorder or condition (except for 
certain health benefit or such promotion claims) as may be permitted by the regulations made under 
this Act;  
(iv) does not include a narcotic drug  or a psychotropic substance as defined in the Schedule of the 
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985) and rules made thereunder and 
substances listed in Schedules E and EI of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945;  
(2)  ―genetically  engineered or modified food‖ means food and food ingredients composed of or 
containing genetically modified or engineered organisms obtained through modern biotechnology, or food 
and food ingredients produced from but not containing genetically modified o r engineered organisms 
obtained through modern biotechnology;  
(3) ―organic food‖ means food products that have been produced in accordance with specified organic 
production standards;  
(4) ―proprietary and novel food‖ means an article of food for which stan dards have not been specified 
but is not unsafe:  
Provided that such food does not contain any of the foods and ingredients prohibited under this Act 
and the regulations made thereunder.  
23. Packaging and labelling of foods. –(1) No person shall manufacture, distribute, sell or expose for 
sale or despatch or deliver to any agent or broker for the purpose of sale, any packaged food products 
which are not marked and labelled in the manner as may be specified by regulations:  
Provide d that the labels shall not contain any statement, claim, design or device which is false or 
misleading in any particular concerning the food products contained in the package or concerning the 
quantity or the nutritive value implying medicinal or therapeu tic claims or in relation to the place of 
origin of the said food products.  
(2) Every food business operator shall ensure that the labelling and presentation of food, including 
their shape, appearance or packaging, the packaging materials used, the manner in which they are 
arranged and the setting in which they are displayed, and the information which is made available about 
them through whatever medium, does not mislead consumers.  
24. Restrictions of advertisement and prohibition as to unfair trade practic es.–No advertisement 
shall be made of any food which is misleading or deceiving or contravenes the provisions of this Act, the 
rules and regulations made thereunder.  
(2) No person shall engage himself in any unfair trade practice for purpose of promoting t he sale, 
supply, use and consumption of articles of food or adopt any unfair or deceptive practice including the 
practice of making any statement, whether orally or in writing or by visible representation which – 
(a) falsely represents that the foods are of  a particular standard, quality, quantity or grade -
composition;  
(b) makes a false or misleading representation concerning the need for, or the usefulness;  
(c) gives to the public any guarantee of the efficacy that is not based on an adequate or scientific 
justification thereof:  20 
 Provided that where a defence is raised to the effect that such guarantee is based on adequate or 
scientific justification, the burden of proof of such defence shall lie on the person raising such 
defence.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATI NG TO IMPORT  
25. All imports of articles of food to be subject to this Act. –No person shall import into India – 
(i) any unsafe or misbranded or sub -standard food or food containing extraneous matter;  
(ii) any article of food for the import of which a licence is required under any Act or rules or 
regulations, except in accordance with the conditions of the licence; and  
(iii) any article of food in contravention of any other provision of this Act or of any rule or 
regulation made thereunder or any other Act. 
(2) The Central Government shall, while prohibiting, restricting or otherwise regulating import of 
article of food under the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 (22 of 1992), follow the 
standards laid down by the Food Authority under the provisions of this Act and the Rules and regulations 
made thereunder.  
CHAPTER VI  
SPECIAL RESPONSIBILITIES AS TO  FOOD SAFETY 
26. Responsibilities of the Food business operator. –(1) Every food business operator shall ensure 
that the articles of food satisfy the requirements of this Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder 
at all stages of production, processing, import, distribution and sale within the businesses under his 
control.  
(2) No food business operator shall himself or by any person on his behalf manufacture, store, sell or 
distribute any article of food – 
(i) which is unsafe; or  
(ii) which is misbranded or sub -standard or contains extraneous matter; or  
(iii) for which a licence is required, except in accordance with the conditions of the licence; or  
(iv) which is for the time being prohibited by the Food Authority or the Central Government or 
the State Government in the interest of public health; or  
(v) in contravention of any other provision of this Act or of any rule or regulation ma de 
thereunder.  
(3) No food business operator shall employ any person who is suffering from infectious, contagious 
or loathsome disease.  
(4) No food business operator shall sell or offer for sale any article of food to any vendor unless he 
also gives a guar antee in writing in the form specified by regulations about the nature and quality of such 
article to the vendor:  
Provided that a bill, cash memo, or invoice in respect of the sale of any article of food given by a food 
business operator to the vendor shal l be deemed to be a guarantee under this section, even if a guarantee 
in the specified form is not included in the bill, cash memo or invoice.  
(5) Where any food which is unsafe is part of a batch, lot or consignment of food of the same class or 
descriptio n, it shall be presumed that all the food in that batch, lot or consignment is also unsafe, unless 
following a detailed assessment within a specified time, it is found that there is no evidence that the rest 
of the batch, lot or consignment is unsafe:  
Prov ided that any conformity of a food with specific provisions applicable to that food shall be 
without prejudice to the competent authorities taking appropriate measures to impose restrictions on that 
food being placed on the market or to require its withdra wal from the market for the reasons to be 
recorded in writing where such authorities suspect that, despite the conformity, the food is unsafe.  21 
 27. Liability of manufacturers, packers, wholesalers, distributors and sellers. –(1) The 
manufacturer or packer of  an article of food shall be liable for such article of food if it does not meet the 
requirements of this Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder.  
(2) The wholesaler or distributor shall be liable under this Act for any article of food which is – 
(a) supplied after the date of its expiry; or  
(b) stored or supplied in violation of the safety instructions of the manufacturer; or  
(c) unsafe or misbranded; or  
(d) unidentifiable of manufacturer from whom the article of food have been received; or  
(e) stored or handled or kept in violation of the provisions of this Act, the rules and regulations 
made thereunder; or  
(f) received by him with knowledge of being unsafe.  
(3) The seller shall be liable under this Act for any article of food which is – 
(a) sold after the date of its expiry; or  
(b) handled or kept in unhygienic conditions; or  
(c) misbranded; or  
(d) unidentifiable of the manufacturer or the distributors from whom such articles of food were 
received; or  
(e) received by him with knowledge of being un safe. 
28. Food recall procedures. –(1) If a food business operator considers or has reasons to believe that a 
food which he has processed, manufactured or distributed is not in compliance with this Act, or the rules 
or regulations, made thereunder, he shall  immediately initiate procedures to withdraw the food in question 
from the market and consumers indicating reasons for its withdrawal and inform the competent authorities 
thereof.  
(2) A food business operator shall immediately inform the competent authorit ies and co -operate with 
them, if he considers or has reasons to believe that a food which he has placed on the market may be 
unsafe for the consumers.  
(3) The food business operator shall inform the competent authorities of the action taken to prevent 
risks to the consumer and shall not prevent or discourage any person from co -operating, in accordance 
with this Act, with the competent authorities, where this may prevent, reduce or eliminate a risk arising 
from a food.  
(4) Every food business operator shall follow such conditions and guidelines relating to food recall 
procedures as the Food Authority may specify by regulations.  
CHAPTER VII  
ENFORCEMENT OF THE  ACT 
29. Authorities responsible for enforcement of Act. –(1) The Food Authority and the State Food 
Safety Authorities shall be responsible for the enforcement of this Act.  
(2) The Food Authority and the State Food Safety Authorities shall monitor and verify that the 
relevant requirements of law are fulfilled by food business operators at all stages of f ood business.  
(3) The authorities shall maintain a system of control and other activities as appropriate to the 
circumstances, including public communication on food safety and risk, food safety surveillance and 
other monitoring activities covering all sta ges of food business.  
(4) The Food Safety Officers shall enforce and execute within their area the provisions of this Act 
with respect to which the duty is not imposed expressly or by necessary implication on some other 
authority.  22 
 (5) The regulations under  this Act shall specify which of the Food Safety Officers are to enforce and 
execute them, either generally or in relation to cases of a particular description or a particular area, and 
any such regulations or orders may provide for the giving of assistanc e and information by any authority 
concerned in 11the administration of the regulations or orders, or of any provisions of this Act, to any 
other authority so concerned, for the purposes of their respective duties under them.  
(6) The Commissioner of Food Safety and Designated Officer shall exercise the same powers as are 
conferred on the Food Safety Officer and follow the same procedure specified in this Act.  
30. Commissioner of Food Safety of the State. –(1) The State Government shall appoint the 
Commissio ner of Food Safety for the State for efficient implementation of food safety and standards and 
other requirements laid down under this Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder.  
(2) The Commissioner of Food Safety shall perform all or any of the fo llowing functions, namely: – 
(a) prohibit in the interest of public health, the manufacture, storage, distribution or sale of any 
article of food, either in the whole of the State or any area or part thereof for such period, not 
exceeding one year, as may b e specified in the order notified in this behalf in the Official Gazette;  
(b) carry out survey of the industrial units engaged in the manufacture or processing of food in 
the State to find out compliance by such units of the standards notified by the Food Authority for 
various articles of food;  
(c) conduct or organise training programmes for the personnel of the office of the Commissioner 
of Food Safety and, on a wider scale, for different segments of food chain for generating awareness 
on food safety;  
(d) ensure an efficient and uniform implementation of the standards and other requirements as 
specified and also ensure a high standard of objectivity, accountability, practicability, transparency 
and credibility;  
(e) sanction prosecution for offences punishab le with imprisonment under this Act;  
(f) such other functions as the State Government may, in consultation with the Food Authority, 
prescribe.  
(3) The Commissioner of Food Safety may, by Order, delegate, subject to such conditions and 
restrictions as may b e specified in the Order, such of his powers and functions under this Act  (except the 
power to appoint Designated Officer, Food Safety Officer and Food Analyst) as he may deem necessary 
or expedient to any officer subordinate to him.  
31. Licensing and regi stration of food business. –(1) No person shall commence or carry on any 
food business except under a licence.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to a petty manufacturer who himself 
manufactures or sells any article of food or a petty reta iler, hawker, itinerant vendor or a temporary stall 
holder or small scale or cottage or such other industries relating to food business or tiny food business 
operator; but they shall register themselves with such authority and in such manner as may be spec ified 
by regulations, without prejudice to the availability of safe and wholesome food for human consumption 
or affecting the interests of the consumers.  
(3) Any person desirous to commence or carry on any food business shall make an application for 
grant of a licence to the Designated Officer in such manner containing such particulars and fees as may be 
specified by regulations.  
(4) The Designated Officer on receipt of an application under sub -section ( 3), may either grant the 
licence or after giving the a pplicant an opportunity of being heard and for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, refuse to grant a licence to any applicant, if he is satisfied that it is necessary so to do in the 
interest of public health and shall make available to the applicant a copy  of the order:  
Provided that if a licence is not issued within two months from the date of making the application or 
his application is not rejected, the applicant may start his food business after expiry of the said period and 
in such a case, the Designat ed Officer shall not refuse to issue a licence but may, if he considers 
necessary, issue an improvement notice, under section 32 and follow procedures in that regard.  23 
 (5) Every licence shall be in such form and subject to such conditions as may be specifie d by 
regulations.  
(6) A single licence may be issued by the Designated Officer for one or more articles of food and also 
for different establishments or premises in the same area.  
(7) If the articles of food are manufactured, stored, sold or exhibited for sale at different premises 
situated in more than one area, separate applications shall be made and separate licence shall be issued in 
respect of such premises not falling within the  same area.  
(8) An appeal against the order of rejection for the grant of licence shall lie to the Commissioner of 
Food Safety.  
(9) A licence unless suspended or cancelled earlier shall be in force for such period as may be 
specified by regulations:  
Provid ed that if an application for a renewal of licence is made before the expiry of the period of 
validity of the licence, the licence shall continue to be in force until orders are passed on the application.  
(10) The licence shall subsist for the benefit of t he deceased’s personal representative or any other 
member of his family, until the expiry of – 
(a) the period of three months beginning with his death; or  
(b) such longer period as the Designated Officer may allow.  
32. Improvement notices. –(1) If the Design ated Officer has reasonable ground for believing that any 
food business operator has failed to comply with any regulations to which this section applies, he may, by 
a notice served on that food business operator (in this Act referred to as an ―improvement notice‖) – 
(a) state the grounds for believing that the food business operator has failed to comply with the 
regulations;  
(b) specify the matters which constitute the food business operator’s failure so to comply;  
(c) specify the measures which, in the opinion of the said Authority, the food business operator 
must take, in order to secure compliance; and  
(d) require the food business operator to take those measures, or measures which are at least 
equivalent to them, within a reasonable period (not being less than fourteen days) as may be specified 
in the notice.  
(2) If the food business operator fails to comply with an improvement notice, his licence may be 
suspended.  
(3) If the food business operator still fails to comply with the improvement notice, the  Designated 
Officer may, after giving the licensee an opportunity to show cause, cancel the licence granted to him:  
Provided that the Designated Officer may suspend any licence forthwith in the interest of public 
health for reasons to be recorded in writin g. 
(4) Any person who is aggrieved by – 
(a) an improvement notice; or  
(b) refusal to issue a certificate as to improvement; or  
(c) cancellation or suspension or revocation of licence under this Act,  
may appeal to the Commissioner of Food Safety whose decis ion thereon, shall be final.  
(5) The period within which such an appeal may be brought shall be – 
(a) fifteen days from the date on which notice of the decision was served on the person desiring to 
appeal; or  
(b) in the case of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the said period or the period specified in the 
improvement notice, whichever expires earlier.  24 
 Explanation –For the purpose of this sub -section, the making of the complaint shall be deemed to 
be the bringing of the appeal.  
33. Prohibition orders. –(1) If – 
(a) any food business operator is convicted of an offence under this Act; and  
(b) the court by or before which he is so convicted is satisfied that the health risk exists with 
respect to that food business,  
the court, after giving the food business opera tor an opportunity of being heard, may by an order, impose 
the following prohibitions, namely: – 
(i) a prohibition on the use of the process or treatment for the purposes of the food business;  
(ii) a prohibition on the use of the premises or equipment for t he purposes of the food business or 
any other food business of the same class or description;  
(iii) a prohibition on the use of the premises or equipment for the purposes of any food business.  
(2) The court may, on being satisfied that it is necessary so to do, by an order, impose a prohibition on 
the food business operator participating in the management of any food business, or any food business of 
a class or description specified in the order.  
(3) As soon as practicable after the making of an order unde r sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) (in 
this Act referred to as a ―prohibition order‖), the concerned Food Safety Officer shall – 
(a) serve a copy of the order on the food business operator; and  
(b) in the case of an order under sub -section ( 1), affix a c opy of the order at a conspicuous place 
on such premises used for the purposes of the food business,  
and any person who knowingly contravenes such an order shall be guilty of an offence and be punishable 
with a fine which may extend to three lakh rupees.  
(4) The concerned Food Safety Officer shall with the approval of the Designated Officer issue a 
certificate to the effect that the food business operator has taken sufficient measures justifying lifting of 
the prohibition order, within seven days of his bei ng satisfied on an application made by the food business 
operator for such a certificate or the said officer shall – 
(a) determine, as soon as is reasonably practicable and in any event within fourteen days, whether 
or not he is so satisfied; and  
(b) if he determines that he is not so satisfied, give notice to the food business operator of the 
reasons for that determination.  
(5) A prohibition order shall cease to have effect upon the court being satisfied, on an application 
made by the food business operator  not less than six months after the prohibition order has been passed, 
that the food business operator has taken sufficient measures justifying the lifting of the prohibition order.  
(6) The court shall give a direction on an application by the food busines s operator, if the court thinks 
it proper so to do having regard to all the circumstances of the case, including in particular, the conduct of 
the food business operator since the making of the order; but no such application shall be entertained if it 
is not made – 
(a) within six months after the making of the prohibition order; or  
(b) within three months after the making by the food business operator of a previous application 
for such a direction.  
Explanation. –For the purpose of this section, – 
(i) any reference above shall apply in relation to a manager of a food business as it applies in 
relation to the food business operator; and any reference to the food business operator of the business, 
or to the food business operator, shall be construed according ly; 
(ii) ―manager‖, in relation to a food business, means any person who is entrusted by the food 
business operator with the day -to-day running of the business, or any part of the business.  25 
 34. Emergency prohibition notices and orders. –(1) If the Designate d Officer is satisfied that the 
health risk condition exists with respect to any food business, he may, after a notice served on the food 
business operator (in this Act referred to as an ―emergency prohibition notice‖), apply to the 
Commissioner of Food Sa fety for imposing the prohibition.  
(2) If the Commissioner of Food Safety is satisfied, on the application of such an officer, that the 
health risk condition exists with respect to any food business, he shall, by an order, impose the 
prohibition.  
(3) The D esignated Officer shall not apply for an emergency prohibition order unless, at least one day 
before the date of the application, he has served notice on the food business operator of the business of his 
intention to apply for the order.  
(4) As soon as practicable after the making of an emergency prohibition order, the Designated Officer 
shall require the Food Safety Officer to – 
(a) serve a copy of the order on the food business operator of the business; or  
(b) affix a copy of the order at a conspicuous place on such premises used for the purposes of that 
business;  
and any person who knowingly contravenes such an order shall be guilty of an offence and shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and with fine which may e xtend 
to two lakh rupees.  
(5) An emergency prohibition order shall cease to have effect on the issue by the Designated Officer 
of a certificate to the effect that he is satisfied that the food business operator has taken sufficient 
measures for justifying the lifting of such order.  
(6) The Designated Officer shall issue a certificate under sub -section ( 5) within seven days of an 
application by the food business operator for such a certificate and on his being not satisfied, the said 
officer shall give notic e to the food business operator within a period of ten days indicating the reasons 
for such decision.  
35. Notification of food poisoning. –The Food Authority may, by notification, require registered 
medical practitioners carrying on their profession in any local area specified in the notification, to report 
all occurrences of food poisoning coming to their notice to such officer as may be specified.  
36. Designated Officer. –The Commissioner of Food Safety shall, by order, appoint the Designated 
Officer, who s hall not be below the rank of a Sub -Divisional Officer, to be in -charge of food safety 
administration in such area as may be specified by regulations.  
(2) There shall be a Designated Officer for each district.  
(3) The functions to be performed by the Desig nated Officer shall be as follows, namely: — 
(a) to issue or cancel licence of food business operators;  
(b) to prohibit the sale of any article of food which is in contravention of the provisions of this 
Act and rules and regulations made thereunder;  
(c) to receive report and samples of article of foods from Food Safety Officer under his 
jurisdiction and get them analysed;  
(d) to make recommendations to the Commissioner of Food Safety for sanction to launch 
prosecutions in case of contraventions punishable w ith imprisonment;  
(e) to sanction or launch prosecutions in cases of contraventions punishable with fine;  
(f) to maintain record of all inspections made by Food Safety Officers and action taken by them in 
the performance of their duties;  
(g) to get investi gated any complaint which may be made in writing in respect of any 
contravention of the provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder;  
(h) to investigate any complaint which may be made in writing against the Food Safety Officer;  
and 26 
 (i) to perform such other duties as may be entrusted by the Commissioner of Food Safety.  
37. Food Safety Officer. –(1) The Commissioner of Food Safety shall, by notification, appoint such 
persons as he thinks fit, having the qualifications prescribed by th e Central Government, as Food Safety 
Officers for such local areas as he may assign to them for the purpose of performing functions under this 
Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder.  
(2) The State Government may authorise  any officer of the State Government having the 
qualifications prescribed under sub -section ( 1) to perform the functions of a Food Safety Officer within a 
specified jurisdiction.  
38. Powers of Food Safety Officer. –(1) The Food Safety Officer may – 
(a) take a sample – 
(i) of any food, or any substance, which appears to him to be intended for sale, or to have 
been sold for human consumption; or  
(ii) of any article of food or substance which is found by him on or in any such premises;  
which he has reason to believe that it may be required as evidence in proceedings under any of the 
provisions of this Act or of the regulations or orders made thereunder; or  
(b) seize any article of food which appears to the Food Safety Officer to be in contravention of 
this Act  or the regulations made thereunder; and  
(c) keep it in the safe custody of the food business operator such article of food after taking a 
sample;  
and in both cases send the same for analysis to a Food Analyst for the local area within which such 
sample ha s been taken:  
Provided that where the Food Safety Officer keeps such article in the safe custody of the food 
business operator, he may require the food business operator to execute a bond for a sum of money equal 
to the value of such article with one or mo re sureties as the Food Safety Officer deems fit and the food 
business operator shall execute the bond accordingly.  
(2) The Food Safety Officer may enter and inspect any place where the article of food is 
manufactured, or stored for sale, or stored for the  manufacture of any other article of food, or exposed or 
exhibited for sale and where any adulterant is  manufactured or kept, and take samples of such articles 
of food or adulterant for analysis.  
(3) Where any sample is taken, its cost calculated at the ra te at which the article is usually sold to the 
public shall be paid to the person from whom it is taken.  
(4) Where any article of food seized under clause ( b) of sub -ection ( 1) is of a perishable nature and 
the Food Safety Officer is satisfied that such ar ticle of food is so deteriorated that it is unfit for human 
consumption, the Food Safety Officer may, after giving notice in writing to the food business operator, 
cause the same to be destroyed.  
(5) The Food Safety Officer shall, in exercising the powers of entry upon, and inspection of any place 
under this section, follow, as far as may be, the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 
1974) relating to the search or inspection of a place by a police officer executing a search warrant issue d 
under that Code.  
(6) Any adulterant found in the possession of a manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, any article 
of food or in any of the premises occupied by him as such and for the possession of which he is unable to 
account to the satisfacti on of the Food Safety Officer and any books of account or other documents found 
in his possession or control and which would be useful for, or relevant to, any investigation or proceeding 
under this Act, may be seized by the Food Safety Officer and a sampl e of such adulterant submitted for 
analysis to a Food Analyst:  
Provided that no such books of account or other documents shall be seized by the Food Safety Officer 
except with the previous approval of the authority to which he is subordinate.  27 
 (7) Where the  Food Safety Officer takes any action under clause ( a) of sub -section  (1), or sub -section 
(2), or sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 6), he shall, call one or more persons to be present at the time when 
such action is taken and take his or their signatures.  
(8) Where any books of account or other documents are seized under sub -section ( 6), the Food Safety 
Officer shall, within a period not exceeding thirty days from the date of seizure, return the same to the 
person from whom they were seized after copies ther eof or extracts there from as certified by that person 
in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government have been taken:  
Provided that where such person refuses to so certify and a prosecution has been instituted against 
him under this Act, su ch books of account or other documents shall be returned to him only after copies 
thereof and extracts there from as certified by the court have been taken.  
(9) When any adulterant is seized under sub -section ( 6), the burden of proving that such adulterant  is 
not meant for purposes of adulteration shall be on the person from whose possession such adulterant was 
seized.  
(10) The Commissioner of Food Safety may from time to time issue guidelines with regard to 
exercise of powers of the Food Safety Officer, wh ich shall be binding:  
Provided that the powers of such Food Safety Officer may also be revoked for a specified period by 
the Commissioner of Food Safety.  
39. Liability of Food Safety Officer in certain cases. –Any Food Safety Officer exercising powers 
under  this Act or the rules and regulations made thereunder who – 
(a) vexatiously and without any reasonable ground seizes any article of food or adulterant; or  
(b) commits any other act to the injury of any person without having reason to believe that such 
act is necessary for the execution of his duty,  
shall be guilty of an offence under this Act and shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to one lakh 
rupees:  
Provided that in case any false complaint is made against a Food Safety Officer and it is proved so, 
the complainant shall be guilty of an offence under this Act and shall be punishable with fine which shall 
not be less than fifty thousand rupees but may extend to one lakh rupees.  
40. Purchaser may have food analysed. –(1) Nothing contained in this Act  shall be held to prevent a 
purchaser of any article of food other than a Food Safety Officer from having such article analysed by the 
Food Analyst on payment of such fees and receiving from the Food Analyst a report of his analysis within 
such period as m ay be specified by regulations:  
Provided that such purchaser shall inform the food business operator at the time of purchase of his 
intention to have such article so analysed:  
Provided further that if the report of the Food Analyst shows that the article o f food is not in 
compliance with the Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder, the purchaser shall be entitled to get 
refund of the fees paid by him under this section.  
(2) In case the Food Analyst finds the sample in contravention of the provisions  of this Act and rules 
and regulations made thereunder, the Food Analysts shall forward the report to the Designated Officer to 
follow the procedure laid down in section 42 for prosecution.  
41. Power of search, seizure, investigation, prosecution and proce dure thereof. –(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2) of section 31, the Food Safety Officer may search 
any place, seize any article of food or adulterant, if there is a reasonable doubt about them being involved 
in commission of any offe nce relating to food, and shall thereafter inform the Designated Officer of the 
actions taken by him in writing:  
Provided that no search shall be deemed to be irregular by reason only of the fact that witnesses for 
the search are not inhabitants of the loc ality in which the place searched is situated.  28 
 (2) Save as in this Act otherwise expressly provided, provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974) relating to search, seizure, summon, investigation and prosecution, shall apply, as far as 
may be, to all action taken by the Food Safety Officer under this Act.  
42. Procedure for launching prosecution. –(1) The Food Safety Officer shall be responsible for 
inspection of food business, drawing samples and sending them to Food Analyst for analysis.  
(2) The Food Analyst after receiving the sample from the Food Safety Officer shall analyse the 
sample and send the analysis report mentioning method of sampling and analysis within fourteen days to 
Designated Officer with a copy to Commissioner of Food Saf ety. 
(3) The Designated Officer after scrutiny of the report of Food Analyst shall decide as to whether the 
contravention is punishable with imprisonment or fine only and in the case of contravention punishable 
with imprisonment, he shall send his recommen dations within fourteen days to the Commissioner of Food 
Safety for sanctioning prosecution.  
(4) The Commissioner of Food Safety shall, if he so deems fit decide, within the period prescribed by 
the Central Government, as per the gravity of offence, whethe r the matter be referred to, – 
(a) a court of ordinary jurisdiction in case of offences punishable with imprisonment for a term up 
to three years; or  
(b) a Special Court in case of offences punishable with imprisonment for a term exceeding three 
years where  such Special Court is established and in case no Special Court is established, such cases 
shall be tried by a Court of ordinary jurisdiction.  
(5) The Commissioner of Food Safety shall communicate his decision to the Designated Officer and 
the concerned Fo od Safety Officer who shall launch prosecution before courts of ordinary jurisdiction or 
Special Court, as the case may be; and such communication shall also be sent to the purchaser if the 
sample was taken under section 40.  
CHAPTER VIII  
ANALYSIS OF FOOD  
43. Recognition and accreditation of laboratories, research institutions and referral food 
laboratory. –(1) The Food Authority may notify food laboratories and research institutions accredited by 
National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Labo ratories or any other accreditation agency 
for the purposes of carrying out analysis of samples by the Food Analysts under this Act.  
(2) The Food Authority shall, establish or recognise by notification, one or more referral food 
laboratory or laboratories to carry out the functions entrusted to the referral food laboratory by this Act or 
any rules and regulations made thereunder.  
(3) The Food Authority may frame regulations specifying – 
(a) the functions of food laboratory and referral food laboratory and th e local area or areas within 
which such functions may be carried out;  
(b) the procedure for submission to the said laboratory of samples of articles of food for analysis 
or tests, the forms of the laboratory’s reports thereon and the fees payable in respec t of such reports; 
and 
(c) such other matters as may be necessary or expedient to enable the said laboratory to carry out 
its functions effectively.  
44. Recognition of organisation or agency for food safety audit. –The Food Authority may 
recognise any organisation or agency for the purposes of food safety audit and checking compliance with 
food safety management systems required under this Act or the rules and regulations made thereunder.  
45. Food Analysts. –The Commissioner of Food Safety may, by notifi cation, appoint such persons as 
he thinks fit, having the qualifications prescribed by the Central Government, to be Food Analysts for 
such local areas as may be assigned to them by the Commissioner of Food Safety:  
  29 
 Provided that no person, who has any fi nancial interest in the manufacture or sale of any article of 
food shall be appointed to be a Food Analyst under this section:  
Provided further that different Food Analysts may be appointed for different articles of food.  
46. Functions of Food Analyst. –(1) On receipt of a package containing a sample for analysis from a 
Food Safety Officer or any other person, the Food Analyst shall compare the seal on the container and the 
outer cover with specimen impression received separately and shall note the condition s of the seal 
thereon:  
Provided that in case a sample container received by the Food Analyst is found to be in broken 
condition or unfit for analysis, he shall within a period of seven days from the date of receipt of such 
sample inform the Designated Offi cer about the same and send requisition to him for sending second part 
of the sample.  
(2) The Food Analyst shall cause to be analysed such samples of article of food as may be sent to him 
by Food Safety Officer or by any other person authorised under this Act. 
(3) The Food Analyst shall, within a period of fourteen days from the date of receipt of any sample 
for analysis, send — 
(i) where such sample is received under section 38 or section 47, to the Designated Officer, four 
copies of the report indicating t he method of sampling and analysis; and  
(ii) where such sample is received under section 40, a copy of the report indicating the method of 
sampling and analysis to the person who had purchased such article of food with a copy to the 
Designated Officer:  
Provided that in case the sample cannot be analysed within fourteen days of its receipt, the Food 
Analyst shall inform the Designated Officer and the Commissioner of Food Safety giving reasons and 
specifying the time to be taken for analysis.  
(4) An appeal ag ainst the report of Food Analyst shall lie before the Designated Officer who shall, if 
he so decides, refer the matter to the referral food laboratory as notified by the Food Authority for 
opinion.  
47. Sampling and analysis. –(1) When a Food Safety Officer takes a sample of food for analysis, he 
shall – 
(a) give notice in writing of his intention to have it so analysed to the person from whom he has 
taken the sample and to the person, if any, whose name, address and other particulars have been 
disclosed;  
(b) except in special cases as may be provided by rules made under this Act, divide the sample 
into four parts and mark and seal or fasten up each part in such a manner as its nature permits and 
take the signature or thumb impression of the person from whom the sample has been taken in such 
place and in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government:  
Provided that where such person refuses to sign or put his thumb impression, the Food Safety 
Officer shall call upon one or more witnesses and take h is signature or thumb impression, in lieu of 
the signature or thumb impression of such person;  
(c) (i) send one of the parts for analysis to the Food Analyst under intimation to the Designated 
Officer;  
(ii) send two parts to the Designated Officer for keep ing these in safe custody; and  
(iii) send the remaining part for analysis to an accredited laboratory, if so requested by the food 
business operator, under intimation to the Designated Officer:  
Provided that if the test reports received under sub -clauses ( i) and ( iii) are found to be at variance, 
then the Designated Officer shall send one part of the sample kept in his custody, to referral laboratory for 
analysis, whose decision thereon shall be final.  30 
 (2) When a sample of any article of food or adulterant is taken, the Food Safety Officer shall, by the 
immediate succeeding working day, send the sample to the Food Analyst for the area concerned for 
analysis and report.  
(3) Where the part of the sample sent to the Food Analyst is lost or damaged, the Designat ed Officer 
shall, on a requisition made to him, by the Food Analyst or the Food Safety Officer, despatch one of the 
parts of the sample sent to him, to the Food Analyst for analysis.  
(4) An article of food or adulterant seized, unless destroyed, shall be p roduced before the Designated 
Officer as soon as possible and in any case not later than seven days after the receipt of the report of the 
Food Analyst:  
Provided that if an application is made to the Designated Officer in this behalf by the person from 
whom any article of food has been seized, the Designated Officer shall by order in writing direct the Food 
Safety Officer to produce such article before him within such time as may be specified in the order.  
(5) In case of imported articles of food, the autho rised officer of the Food Authority shall take its 
sample and send to the Food Analyst of notified laboratory for analysis who shall send the report within a 
period of five days to the authorised officer.  
(6) The Designated Officer, the Food Safety Officer , the authorised officer and the Food Analyst 
shall follow such procedure as may be specified by regulations.  
CHAPTER IX  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
48. General provisions relating to offences. –(1) A person may render any article of food injurious 
to health by means of one or more of the following operations, namely: – 
(a) adding any article or substance to the food;  
(b) using any article or substance as an ingredient in the preparation of the food;  
(c) abstracting any constituents from the food; or  
(d) subjecting the food to any other process or treatment,  
with the knowledge that it may be sold or offered for sale or distributed for human consumption.  
(2) In determining whether any food is unsafe or injurious to health, regard shall be had to – 
(a) (i) the normal conditions of use of the food by the consumer and its handling at each stage of 
production, processing and distribution;  
(ii) the information provided to the consumer, including information on the label, or other 
information generally available to  the consumer concerning the avoidance of specific adverse health 
effects from a particular food or category of foods not only to the probable, immediate or short -term 
or long -term effects of that food on the health of a person consuming it, but also on su bsequent 
generations;  
(iii) to the probable cumulative toxic effects;  
(iv) to the particular health sensitivities of a specific category of consumers where the food is 
intended for that category of consumers; and  
(v) also to the probable cumulative effect of food of substantially the same composition on the 
health of a person consuming it in ordinary quantities;  
(b) the fact where the quality or purity of the article, being primary food, has fallen below the 
specified standard or its constituents are presen t in quantities not within the specified limits of 
variability, in either case, solely due to natural causes and beyond the control of human agency, then 
such article shall not be deemed to be unsafe or sub -standard or food containing extraneous matter.  
Explanation .–For the purposes of this section, ―injury‖, includes any impairment, whether 
permanent or temporary, and ―Injurious to health‖ shall be construed accordingly.  31 
 49. General provisions relating to penalty. –While adjudging the quantum of penalty under this 
Chapter, the Adjudicating Officer or the Tribunal, as the case may be, shall have due regard to the 
following: – 
(a) the amount of gain or unfair advantage, wherever quantifiable, made as a result of the 
contravention,  
(b) the Amount of loss caus ed or likely to cause to any person as a result of the contravention,  
(c) the repetitive nature of the contravention,  
(d) whether the contravention is without his knowledge, and  
(e) any other relevant factor.  
50. Penalty for selling food not of the nature or substance or quality demanded. –Any person who 
sells to the purchaser’s prejudice any food which is not in compliance with the provisions of this Act or 
the regulations made thereunder, or of the nature or substance or quality demanded by the purchaser, shall 
be liable to a penalty  not exceeding five lakh rupees:  
Provided that the persons covered under sub -section ( 2) of section 31, shall for such non -compliance 
be liable to  a penalty not exceeding twenty -five thousand rupees.  
51. Penalty for sub -standard  food. –Any person who whether by himself or by any other person on 
his behalf manufactures for sale or stores or sells or distributes or imports any article of food for human 
consumption which is sub -standard, shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to five lakh rupees.  
52. Penalty for misbranded  food. –(1) Any person who whether by himself or by any other person 
on his behalf manufactures for sale or stores or sells or distributes or imports any article of food for 
human consumption which is misbrande d, shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to three lakh 
rupees.  
(2) The Adjudicating Officer may issue a direction to the person found guilty of an offence under this 
section, for taking corrective action to rectify the mistake or such article of food shall be destroyed.  
53. Penalty for misleading advertisement. –Any person who publishes, or is a party to the 
publication of an advertisement, which – 
(a) falsely describes any food; or  
(b) is likely to mislead as to the nature or substance or quality o f any food or gives false 
guarantee,  
shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to ten lakh rupees.  
(2) In any proceeding the fact that a label or advertisement relating to any article of food in respect of 
which the contravention is alleged to have bee n committed contained an accurate statement of the 
composition of the food shall not preclude the court from finding that the contravention was committed.  
54. Penalty for food containing extraneous matter. –Any person whether by himself or by any other 
person on his behalf manufactures for sale or stores or sells or distributes or imports any article of food 
for human consumption containing extraneous matter, shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to 
one lakh rupees.  
55. Penalty for failure to comply with the directions of Food Safety Officer. –If a food business 
operator or importer without reasonable ground, fails to comply with the requirements of this Act or the 
rules or regulations or orders issued thereunder, as directed by the Food Safety Officer , he shall be liable 
to a penalty which may extend to two lakh rupees.  
56. Penalty for unhygienic or unsanitary processing or manufacturing of food. –Any person who, 
whether by himself or by any other person on his behalf, manufactures or processes any arti cle of food for 
human consumption under unhygienic or unsanitary conditions, shall be liable to a penalty which may 
extend to one lakh rupees.  
  32 
 57. Penalty for possessing adulterant. –(1) Subject to the provisions of this chapter, if any person 
who whether  by himself or by any other person on his behalf, imports or manufactures for sale, or stores, 
sells or distribute any adulterant shall be liable – 
(i) where such adulterant is not injurious to health, to a penalty not exceeding two lakh rupees;  
(ii) where such adulterant is injurious to health, to a penalty not exceeding ten lakh rupees.  
(2) In a proceeding under sub -section ( 1), it shall not be a defence that the accused was holding such 
adulterant on behalf of any other person.  
58. Penalty for contraventi ons for which no specific penalty is provided. –Whoever contravenes 
any provisions of this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder, for the contravention of which no 
penalty has been separately provided in this Chapter, shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to two 
lakh rupees.  
59. Punishment for unsafe food. –Any person who, whether by himself or by any other per son on his 
behalf, manufactures for sale or stores or sells or distributes or imports any article of food for human 
consumption which  is unsafe, shall be punishable, – 
(i) where such failure or contravention does not result in injury, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months and also with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees;  
(ii) where such failure or contraventio n results in a non -grievous injury, with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to one year and also with fine which may extend to three lakh rupees;  
(iii) where such failure or contravention results in a grievous injury, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six years and also with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees;  
(iv) where such failure or contravention results in death, with imprisonment for a term which shall 
not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for li fe and also with fine which 
shall not be less than ten lakh r upees.  
60. Punishment for interfering with seized items. –If a person without the permission of the Food 
Safety Officer, retains, removes or tampers with any food, vehicle, equipment, package or l abelling or 
advertising material or other thing that has been seized under this Act, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and also with fine which may extend to two 
lakh rupees.  
61. Punishment for false informa tion. –If a person, in connection with a requirement or direction 
under this Act, provides any information or produces any document that the person knows is false or 
misleading, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three m onths and 
also with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees.  
62. Punishment for obstructing or impersonating a Food Safety Officer. –If a person without 
reasonable excuse, resists, obstructs, or attempts to obstruct, impersonate, threaten, intimidate or as sault a 
Food Safety Officer in exercising his functions under this Act, he shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to three months and also with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.  
63. Punishment for carrying out a business without licence. –If any person or food business 
operator (except the persons exempted from licensing under sub -section ( 2) of section 31 of this Act), 
himself or by any person on his behalf who is required to obtain l icence, manufacturers, sells, stores or 
distributes or imports any article of food without licence, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to six months and also with a fine which may extend to five lakh rupees.  
64. Punishment fo r subsequent offences. –If any person, after having been previously convicted of 
an offence punishable under this Act subsequently commits and is convicted of the same offence, he shall 
be liable to — 
(i) twice the punishment, which might have been imposed on a first conviction, subject to the 
punishment being maximum provided for the same offence;  
(ii) a further fine on daily basis which may extend up to one lakh rupees, where the offence is a 
continuing one; and  33 
 (iii) his licence shall be cancelled.  
(2) The Court may also cause the offender’s name and place of residence, the offence and the penalty 
imposed to be published at the offender’s expense in such newspapers or in such other manner as the 
court may direct and the expenses of such publication shall b e deemed to be part of the cost attending the 
conviction and shall be recoverable in the same manner as a fine.  
65. Compensation in case injury of death of consumer. –(1) Without prejudice to the other 
provisions of this Chapter, if any person whether by hi mself or by any other person on his behalf, 
manufactures or distributes or sells or imports any article of food causing injury to the consumer or his 
death, it shall be lawful for the Adjudicating Officer or as the case may be, the court to direct him to p ay 
compensation to the victim or the legal representative of the victim, a sum — 
(a) not less than five lakh rupees in case of death;  
(b) not exceeding three lakh rupees in case of grievous injury; and  
(c) not exceeding one lakh rupees, in all other cases o f injury:  
Provided that the compensation shall be paid at the earliest and in no case later than six months from 
the date of occurrence of the incident:  
Provided further that in case of death, an interim relief shall be paid to the next of the kin within t hirty 
days of the incident.  
(2) Where any person is held guilty of an offence leading to grievous injury or death, the 
Adjudicating Officer or the court may cause the name and place of residence of the person held guilty, the 
offence and the penalty impose d to be published at the offender’s expense in such newspapers or in such 
other manner as the Adjudicating Officer or the court may direct and the expenses of such publication 
shall be deemed to be  part of the cost attending the conviction and shall be rec overable in the same 
manner as a fine.  
(3)  The Adjudicating Officer or the court may also, — 
(a) order for cancellation of licence, re -call of food from market, forfeiture of establishment and 
property in case of grievous injury or death of consumer;  
(b) issue prohibition orders in other cases.  
66. Offences by companies. –(1) Where an offence under this Act which has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that where a company has different establishments or branches or different units in any 
establishment or branch, the concerned Head or the person in -charge of such establishment, branch, unit 
nominated by the company as responsible for food safety shall be liable for contravention in respect of 
such establishment, branc h or unit:  
Provided further that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to p revent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of or is a ttributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against an d punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, — 
(a)  ―company‖ means anybody corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b)  ―director‖ , in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  34 
 67. Penalty for contravention of provisions of this Act in case of import of articles of food to be 
in addition to penalties provided under any other Act. –Any person who imports any article of food 
which is in contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules and regulat ions made thereunder, shall, in 
addition to any penalty to which he may be liable under the provisions of the Foreign Trade 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 (22 of 1992) and the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962) be also 
liable under this Act and shall b e proceeded against accordingly.  
(2) Any such article of food shall be destroyed or returned to the importer, if permitted by the 
competent authority under the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 (22 of 1992) or 
the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962), or any other Act, as the case may be.  
CHAPTER X  
ADJUDICATION AND  FOOD SAFETY  APPELLATE  TRIBUNAL 
68. Adjudication. –For the purposes of adjudication under this Chapter, an officer not below the rank 
of Additional District Magistrate of the district  where the alleged offence is committed, shall be notified 
by the State Government as the Adjudicating Officer for adjudication in the manner as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government.  
(2) The Adjudicating Officer shall, after giving the person a reas onable opportunity for making 
representation in the matter, and if, on such inquiry, he is satisfied that the person has committed the 
contravention of provisions of this Act or the rules or the regulations made thereunder, impose such 
penalty as he thinks  fit in accordance with the provisions relating to that offence.  
(3) The Adjudicating Officer shall have the powers of a civil court and — 
(a) all proceedings before him shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of 
sections 193 and 228 o f the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);  
(b) shall be deemed to be a court for the purposes of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(4) While adjudicating the quantum of penalty under this Chapter, the Adjudicating Officer  shall have 
due regard to the guidelines specified in section 49.  
69. Power to compound offences. –The Commissioner of Food Safety may, by order, empower the 
Designated Officer, to accept from petty manufacturers who himself manufacture and sell any article  of 
food, retailers, hawkers, itinerant vendors, temporary stall holders against whom a reasonable belief exists 
that he has committed an offence or contravention against this Act, payment of a sum of money by way of 
composition of the offence which such p erson is suspected to have committed.  
(2) On the payment of such sum of money to such officer, the suspected person, if in custody, shall be 
discharged and no further proceedings in respect of the offence shall be taken against such person.  
(3) The sum of money accepted or agreed to be accepted as composition under sub section ( 1), shall 
not be more than one lakh rupees and due regard shall be made to the guidelines specified in section 49:  
Provided that no offence, for which punishment of imprisonment has been prescribed under this Act, 
shall be compounded.  
70. Establishment of Food Safety Appellate Tribunal. –The Central Government or as the case may 
be, the State Government may, by notification, establish one or more tribunals to be known as the Food 
Safet y Appellate Tribunal to hear appeals from the decisions of the Adjudicating Officer under section 68.  
(2) The Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, shall prescribe, the matters 
and areas in relation to which the Tribunal may exerc ise jurisdiction.  
(3) The Tribunal shall consist of one person only (hereinafter referred to as the Presiding Officer of 
the Tribunal) to be appointed, by notification, by the Central Government or the State Government, as the 
case may be:  
Provided that no  person shall be qualified for appointment as a Presiding Officer to the Tribunal 
unless he is or has been a District Judge.  35 
 (4) The qualifications, appointment, term of office, salary and allowances, resignation and removal of 
the Presiding Officer shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(5) The procedure of appeal and powers of the Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government.  
71. Procedure and powers of Tribunal. –(1) The Tribunal shall not be bound by the pr ocedure laid 
down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) but shall be guided by the principles of natural 
justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the Tribunal shall 
have powers to regulate its own p rocedure including the place at which it shall have its sittings.  
(2) The Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act, the same 
powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908),  while trying a 
suit, in respect of the following matters, namely: – 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents or other electronic records;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  
(e) reviewing its decisions;  
(f) dismissing an application for default or deciding it ex parte ; 
(g) any other matter which may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(3) Every proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 
1860), it shall be deemed to be a civil court f or all the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(4) The appellant may either appear in person or authorise one or more legal practitioners or any of its 
officers to represent his case before the Trib unal.  
(5) The provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), shall, except as otherwise provided in 
this Act, apply to an appeal made to the Tribunal.  
(6) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Tribunal may file an appeal to the High 
Court within sixty days from the date of communication of the decision or order of the Tribunal to him on 
any question of fact or law arising out of such order:  
Provided that the High Court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficie nt cause 
from filing the appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further period not exceeding 
sixty days.  
72. Civil court not to have jurisdiction. –No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or 
proceeding in respect o f any matter which an Adjudicating Officer or the Tribunal is empowered by or 
under this Act to determine and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of 
any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred b y or under this Act.  
73. Power of court to try cases summarily. –Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), all offences not triable by a Special Court, shall be tried in a 
summary way by a Judicial Magistrate of  the first class or by a Metropolitan Magistrate and the 
provisions of sections 262 to 265 (both inclusive) of the said Code shall, as far as may be, apply to such a 
trial:  
Provided that in the case of any conviction in a summary trial under this section, it shall be lawful for 
the Magistrate to pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year:  36 
 Provided further that when at the commencement of, or in the course of, a summary trial under this 
section, it appears to the Magistrate that the na ture of the case is such that a sentence of imprisonment for 
a term exceeding one year may have to be passed or that it is, for any other reason, undesirable to try the 
case summarily, the Magistrate shall after hearing the parties, record an order to that  effect and thereafter 
recall any witness who may have been examined and proceed to hear or rehear the case in the manner 
provided by the said Code.  
74. Special courts and Public Prosecutor. –(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in 
the Code  of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the Central Government or the State Government in 
their respective jurisdictions may, if consider expedient and necessary in the public interest, for the 
purposes of the trial of offences relating to grievous injur y or death of the consumer for which 
punishment of imprisonment for more than three years has been prescribed under this Act, constitute, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, as many Special Courts with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of 
the High Court as may be necessary for such area or areas and for exercising such jurisdiction, as may be 
specified in the notification.  
(2) A Special Court may, on its own motion, or on an application made by the Public Prosecutor and 
if it considers it expedient or desirable so to do, sit for any of its proceedings at any place other than its 
ordinary place of sitting.  
(3) The trial under this Act of any offence by a Special Court shall have precedence over the trial of 
any other case against the accused in any ot her court (not being a Special Court) and shall be concluded in 
preference to the trial of such other case and accordingly the trial of such other case shall remain in 
abeyance.  
(4) For every Special Court, the Central Government or the State Government, a s the case may be, 
shall appoint a person to be the Public Prosecutor and may appoint more than one person to be the 
Additional Public Prosecutors:  
Provided that the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, may also appoint 
for any c ase or class or group of cases, a Special Public Prosecutor.  
(5) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed as a Public Prosecutor or an Additional Public 
Prosecutor or a Special Public Prosecutor under this section unless he has been in practice as a n Advocate 
for not less than seven years or has held any post, for a period of not less than seven years, under the 
Union or a State, requiring special knowledge of law.  
75. Power to transfer cases to regular courts. –Where, after taking cognizance of any o ffence, a 
Special Court is of the opinion that the offence is not triable by it, it shall, notwithstanding that it has no 
jurisdiction to try such offence, transfer the case for the trial of such offence to any court having 
jurisdiction under the Code of C riminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) and the court to which the case is 
transferred may proceed with the trial of the offence as if it had taken cognizance of the offence.  
76. Appeal. –(1) Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of a Special Court may, on payment of 
such fee as may be prescribed by the Central Government and after depositing the amount, if any, 
imposed by way of penalty, compensation or damage under this Act, within forty -five days from the date 
on which the order was served, prefer an a ppeal to the High Court:  
Provided that the High Court may entertain any appeal after the expiry of the said period of forty -five 
days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause for filing the appeal within the 
said period.  
(2) An appeal preferred under this section shall be disposed of by the High Court by a bench of not 
less than two judges.  
77. Time limit for prosecutions. –Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no court shall take 
cognizance of an offence under this Act after the expiry of the period of one year from the date of 
commission of an offence:  
Provided that the Commissioner of Food Safety may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, approve 
prosecution within an extended period of up to three years.  37 
 78. Powe r of court to implead manufacturer, etc. –Where at any time during the trial of any offence 
under this Act alleged to have been committed by any person, not being the importer, manufacturer, 
distributor or dealer of any article of food, the court, is satisf ied, on the evidence adduced before it, that 
such importer, manufacturer, distributor or dealer is also concerned with that offence, then the court may, 
notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 3) of section 319 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,  
1973 (2 of 1974), or in section 71 of this Act, proceed against him as though a prosecution has been 
instituted under this Act.  
79. Magistrate’s power to impose enhanced punishment. –Notwithstanding anything contained in 
section 29 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), it shall be lawful for the court of ordinary 
jurisdiction to pass any sentence authorised by this Act, except a sentence of imprisonment for a term 
exceeding six years in excess of his powers under the said section.  
80. Defence s which may or may not be allowed in prosecution under this Act. –(A) Defence 
relating to publication of advertisements – 
(1) In any proceeding for an offence under this Act in relation to the publication of an 
advertisement, it is a defence for a person to prove that the person carried on the business of 
publishing or arranging for the publication of advertisements and that the person published or 
arranged for the publication of the advertisement in question in the ordinary course of that 
business.  
(2) Claus e (1) does not apply if the person — 
(a) should reasonably have known that the publication of the advertisement was an 
offence; or  
(b) had previously been informed in writing by the relevant authority that publication of 
such an advertisement would constitu te an offence; or  
(c) is the food business operator or is otherwise engaged in the conduct of a food business 
for which the advertisements concerned were published.  
(B) Defence of due diligence — 
(1) In any proceedings for an offence, it is a defence  if it is proved that the person took all 
reasonable precautions and exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of the offence 
by such person or by another person under the person’s control.  
(2) Without limiting the ways in which a person may sa tisfy the requirements of clause ( 1), a 
person satisfies those requirements if it is proved — 
(a) that the commission of the offence was due to — 
(i) an act or default of another person; or  
(ii) reliance on information supplied by another person; and  
(b) (i) the person carried out all such checks of the food concerned as were reasonable in 
all the circumstances; or  
(ii) it was reasonable in all the circumstances to rely on checks carried out by the person 
who supplied such food to the person; and  
(c) that the  person did not import the food into the jurisdiction from another country; and  
(d) in the case of an offence involving the sale of food, that — 
(i) the person sold the food in the same condition as and when the person purchased 
it; or  
(ii) the person sold the food in a different condition to that in which the person 
purchased it, but that the difference did not result in any contravention of this Act or the 
rules and regulations made thereunder; and  38 
 (e) that the person did not know and had no reason to susp ect at the time of commission 
of the alleged offence that the person’s act or omission would constitute an offence under the 
relevant section.  
(3) In sub -clause ( a) of clause ( 2), another person does not include a person who was — 
(a) an employee or agent o f the defendant; or  
(b) in the case of a defendant which is a company, a director, employee or agent of that 
company.  
(4) Without limiting the ways in which a person may satisfy the requirements of clause ( 1) 
and item ( i) of sub -clause ( b) of clause ( 2), a person may satisfy those requirements by proving 
that— 
(a) in the case of an offence relating to a food business for which a food safety 
programme is required to be prepared in accordance with the regulations, the person complied 
with a food safety programme for the food business that complies with the requirements of 
the regulations, or  
(b) in any other case, the person complied with a scheme (for example, a quality 
assurance programme or an industry code of practice) that was — 
(i) designed to manag e food safety hazards and based on national or international 
standards, codes or guidelines designed for that purpose, and  
(ii) documented in some manner.  
(C) Defence of mistaken and reasonable belief not available — 
In any proceedings for an offence under the provisions of this Act, it is no defence that the 
defendant had a mistaken but reasonable belief as to the facts that constituted the offence.  
(D) Defence in respect of handling food — 
In proceedings for an offenc e under section 56, it is a defence if it is proved that the person 
caused the food to which the offence relates to be destroyed or otherwise disposed of immediately 
after the food was handled in the manner that was likely to render it unsafe.  
(E) Defences  of significance of the nature, substance or quality of food — 
It shall be no defence in a prosecution for an offence pertaining to the sale of any unsafe or 
misbranded article of food to allege merely that the food business operator was ignorant of the 
nature, substance or quality of the food sold by him or that the purchaser having purchased any 
article for analysis was not prejudiced by the sale.  
CHAPTER XI  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND REPORTS  
81. Budget of Food Authority. –(1) The Food Authority shall pre pare, in such form and at such time 
in each financial year as may be prescribed by the Central Government, its budget for the next financial 
year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Food Authority and forward the same to the 
Central Gove rnment.  
(2) The Food Authority with the prior approval of the Central Government, shall adopt financial 
regulation which specifies in particular, the procedure for drawing up and implementing the Authority’s 
budget.  
82. Finances of the Food Authority. –(1) The Central Government may, after due appropriation, 
make to the Food Authority grants of such sums of money as the Central Government may think fit.  
(2) The Food Authority on the recommendation of the Central Advisory Committee shall specify a 
graded fee from licensed food business operators, accredited laboratories or food safety auditors to be 
charged by the commissioner of Food Safety.  39 
 83. Accounts and audit of Food Authority. –(1) The Food Authority shall maintain proper accounts 
and relevant records an d prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government in consultation with the Comp troller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor -General and any person appointed by him in connection w ith the 
audit of the accounts of the Food Authority under this Act shall have the same rights and privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General generally has in 
connection with the audit of Government account s and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the 
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of 
the offices of the Food Authority.  
(3) The accounts of the Food Authority, as certified by the C omptroller and Auditor - General or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government by the Food Authority and the Central Government shall cause the 
audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.  
84. Annual report of Food Authority. –(1) The Food Authority shall prepare once every year, in 
such form and at such time as may be prescribed by the Central Government, an  annual report giving a 
summary of its activities during the previous year and copies of the report shall be forwarded to the 
Central Government and State Governments.  
(2) A copy of the report received under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be  after it is 
received, before each House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER XII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
85. Power of Central Government to issue directions to Food Authority and obtain reports and 
returns. –(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Food Authority shall, in 
exercise of its powers and in performance of its functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on 
questions of policy, other than those relating to technical and administrative matters, as the Central 
Government may give in writ ing to it from time to time:  
Provided that the Food Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its 
views before any direction is given under this sub -section.  
(2) If any dispute arises between the Central Government and the Food Authority as to whether a 
question is or is not a question of policy, the decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final.  
(3) The Food Authority shall furnish to the Central Government such returns or other information 
with respect to its a ctivities as the Central Government may, from time to time, require.  
86. Power of Central Government to give directions to State Governments. –The Central 
Government may give such directions, as it may deem necessary, to a State Government for carrying out 
all or any of the provisions of this Act and the State Government shall comply with such directions.  
87. Members, officers of Food Authority and Commissioner of Food Safety to be public 
servants. –The Members, officers of the Food Authority and the Commissi oners of Food Safety and their 
officers shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this 
Act, to be public servants within the meaning section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
88. Protection of action  taken in good faith. –No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Central Government, the State Government, the Food Authority and other bodies 
constituted under this Act or any officer of the Central Government, the State Governm ent or any 
member, officer or other employee of such Authority and bodies or any other officer acting under this Act 
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations 
made thereunder.  
89. Overriding effect of this Act over all other food related laws. –The provisions of this Act shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being 
in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law  other than this Act.  40 
 90. Transfer of existing employees of Central Government Agencies governing various foods 
related Acts or Orders to Food Authority. –On and from the date of establishment of the Food 
Authority, every employee holding office under the C entral Government Agencies administering food 
laws immediately before that date shall hold his office in the Food Authority by the same tenure and upon 
the same terms and conditions of service including remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement and 
other terminal benefits as he would have held such office if the Food Authority had not been established 
and shall continue to do so as an employee of the Food Authority or until the expiry of the period of six 
months from that date if such employee opts no t to be the employee of the Food Authority.  
91. Power of Central Government to make rules. –(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without preju dice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: – 
(a) salary, terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members other than ex officio  
Members under sub -section ( 2) and the manner of subscribing to an oath of office and secrecy under 
sub-section ( 3) of section 7;  
(b) qualifications of Food Safety Officer under sub -section ( 1) of section 37;  
(c) the manner of taking the extract of documents seized under sub -clause ( 8) of secti on 38;  
(d) determination of cases for referring to appropriate courts and time -frame for such 
determination under sub -section ( 4) of section 42;  
(e) qualifications of Food Analysts under section 45;  
(f) the manner of sending sample for analysis and details  of the procedure to be followed in this 
regard under sub -section ( 1) of section 47;  
(g) the procedure to be followed in adjudication of cases under sub -section ( 1) of section 68;  
(h) qualifications, terms of office, resignation and removal of Presiding Of ficer under sub -section 
(4), the procedure of appeal and powers of Tribunal under sub -section ( 5) of section 70;  
(i) any other matter relating to procedure and powers of Tribunal under clause of sub -section ( 2) 
of section 71;  
(j) the fee to be paid for preferring an appeal to the High Court under sub -section ( 1) of  
section 76;  
(k) form and time of preparing budget under sub -section ( 1) of section 81;  
(l) form and statement of accounts under sub -section ( 1) of section 83;  
(m) the form and time for preparing annual report by Food Authority under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 84; and  
(n) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of which 
provision is to be made by rules by the Central Government.  
92. Power of Food Auth ority to make regulations. –(1) The Food Authority may, with the previous 
approval of the Central Government and after previous publication, by notification, make regulations 
consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the provisions  of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: – 
(a) salaries and other conditions of service of officers and other employees of the Food Authority 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 9;  
(b) rules of procedure for transaction of business under sub -section ( 5) of section 11;  
(c) other functions of the Central Advisory Committee under sub -section ( 2) of section 12;  
(d) procedure of Scien tific Committee and Panels under sub -section ( 4) of section 15;  
(e) notifying standards and guidelines in relation to articles of food meant for human 
consumption under sub -section ( 2) of section 16;  41 
 (f) procedure to be followed by Food Authority for transaction of business at its meetings under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 17;  
(g)making or amending regulations in view of urgency concerning food safety or public health 
under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 2) of section 18;  
(h) limits of additives under secti on 19;  
(i) limits of quantities of contaminants, toxic substance and heavy metals, etc., under section 20;  
(j) tolerance limit of pesticides, veterinary drugs residues, etc, under section 21;  
(k) the manner of marking and labelling  of foods under section 23;  
(l) form in which guarantee shall be given under sub -section ( 4) of section 26;  
(m) conditions and guidelines relating to food recall procedures under sub -section ( 4) of section 
28; 
(n) regulations relating to functioning of Food Safety Officer under sub -section ( 5) of section 29;  
(o) notifying the registering authority and the manner of registration; the manner of making 
application for obtaining licence, the fees payable therefore and the circumstances under which such 
licence may be cancelled or forfeited under section 31;  
(p) the respective areas of which the Designated Officer shall be in -charge for food safety 
administration under sub -section ( 1) of section 36;  
(q) procedure in getting food analysed, details of fees , etc., under sub -section  of section 40;  
(r) functions, procedure to be followed by food laboratories under sub -section  (3) of section 43;  
(s) procedure to be followed by officials under sub -section ( 6) of section 47;  
(t) financial regulations to be adopted by the Food Authority in drawing up its budget under sub -
section ( 2) of section 81;  
(u) issue guidelines or directions for participation in Codex Meetings and preparation of response 
to Codex matters; and  
(v) any other matter which is required to be, or may b e, specified by regulations or in respect of 
which provisio n is to be made by regulations.  
93. Laying of rules and regulations before Parliament. –Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive se ssions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect,  as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation.  
94. Power of State Government to make rules. –(1) Subject to the powers of the Central 
Government and the Food Authority to make rules and regulations respectively, the State Government 
may, after previous publication and with the previous approval of the Food Authority, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, make rules to carry ou t the functions and duties assigned to the State Government 
and the State Commissioner of Food Safety under this Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules  may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) other functions of the Commissioner of Food Safety under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 30;  
(b) earmarking a fund and the manner in which reward shall be paid to a person renderin g 
assistance in detection of offence or apprehension of offender under section 95; and  42 
 (c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be prescribed or in respect of which 
provision is to be made by rules by the State Government.  
(3) Every rule made b y the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses or where such State 
Legislature consists of one House, before that House.  
95. Reward by State Government. –The State Government may empower the Commissioner of 
Food Safety to order payment of reward to be paid to a person who renders assistance in the detection of 
the offence or the apprehension of the offender, from such fund and in such mann er as may be prescribed 
by the State Government.  
96. Recovery of penalty. –A penalty imposed under this Act, if it is not paid, shall be recovered as an 
arrear of land revenue and the defaulters licence shall be suspended till the penalty is paid.  
97. Repea l and savings. –(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may appoint in 
this behalf, the enactment and Orders specified in the Second Schedule shall stand repealed:  
Provided that such repeal shall not affect: — 
(i) the previous operations of the enactment and Orders under repeal or anything duly done or 
suffered there under; or  
(ii) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under  any of the 
enactment or Orders under repeal; or  
(iii) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offences  committed against 
the enactment and Orders under repeal; or  
(iv) any investigation or remedy in respect of any such penalty, forfeiture or punish ment,  
and any such investigation, legal proceedings or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced and any 
such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed, as if this Act had not been passed.  
(2) If there is any other law for the time being in force in  any State, corresponding to this Act, the 
same shall upon the commencement of this Act, stand repealed and in such case, the provisions of section 
6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897(10 of 1897) shall apply as if such provisions of the State law had been 
repealed.  
(3) Notwithstanding the repeal of the aforesaid enactment and Orders, the licences issued under any 
such enactment or Order, which are in force on the date of commencement of this Act, shall continue to 
be in force till the date of their expiry fo r all purposes, as if they had been issued under the provisions of 
this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for  the time being in force, no court shall 
take cognizance of an offence under  the repealed Act or Orders after the expiry of a period of three years 
from the date of the commencement of this Act.  
98. Transitory provisions for food standards .–Notwithstanding the repeal of the enactment and 
Orders specified in the Second Schedule, the standards, safety requirements and other provisions of the 
Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder and Orders listed in that Schedule shall continue to be 
in force and operate till new standards are specified under this Act or rules and regul ations made 
thereunder:  
Provided that anything done or any action taken under the enactment and Orders under repeal shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act and shall continue in 
force accordingly unless and  until superseded by anything done or by any action taken under this Act.  
99. Milk and Milk Products Order, 1992 shall be deemed to be regulations made under this 
Act.–On and from the date of commencement of this Act, the Milk and Milk Products Order, 1992  issued 
under the Essential commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955) shall be deemed to be the Milk and Milk 
Products Regulations, 1992 issued by the Food Authority under this Act.  43 
 (2) The Food Authority may, with the previous approval of the Central Government and after 
previous publication, by notification, amend the regulations specified in sub -section  to carry out the 
purposes of this Act.  
100. Amendments to the Infant Milk Substitutes, Feeding Bottles and Infant Foods (Regulation 
of Production, Supply and Di stribution) Act, 1992. –As from the notified day, the provisions of the 
Infant Milk Substitutes, Feeding Bottles and Infant Foods (Regulation of Production, Supply and 
Distribution) Act, 1992 (41 of 1992) (herein referred to as the principal Act) shall appl y subject to the 
following  amendments, namely: – 
(a) throughout the principal Act, any reference to ―the Prevention of the Food Adulteration Act, 
1954 (37 of 1954)‖ shall be substituted by reference to ―the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006‖;  
(b) in secti on 12 of the principal Act, the reference to ―any Food Inspector appointed under 
section 9 of the Prevention of the Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954)‖ shall be substituted by 
reference to ―any Food Safety Officer appointed under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006‖;  
(c) throughout the principal Act, any reference to ―Food Inspector‖ shall be substituted by the 
expression ―the Food Safety Officer‖; and  
(d) in section 21 of the principal Act, in sub -section ( 1), the reference to clause ( a) shall be  
substi tuted by the following, namely: – 
―(a) the Designated Officer or the Food Safety Officer directed under sub -section ( 5) of section 
42 of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006; or‖.  
101. Power to remove difficulties. –If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary, for removing the difficulty:  
Provided  that no order shall be made under this section after of the expiry of the period of three years 
from the d ate of commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each  
House of Parliament.  
  44 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 5( 1)(e)] 
 Zone I  
1. Andhra Pradesh  
2. Goa 
3. Karnataka  
4. Kerala  
5. Maharashtra  
6. Orissa  
7. Tamil Nadu  
Zone II  
1. Haryana  
2. Himachal Pradesh  
3. Jammu and Kashmir  
4. Punjab  
5. Uttaranchal  
6. Uttar Pradesh  
Zone III  
1. Bihar  
2. Chhattisgarh  
3. Gujarat  
4. Jharkhand  
5. Madhya Pradesh  
6. Rajasthan  
7. West Bengal  
Zone IV  
1. Arunachal Pradesh  
2. Assam  
3. Manipur  
4. Meghalaya  
5. Mizoram  
6. Nagaland  
7. Sikkim  
8. Tripura  
Zone V  
1. Andaman and Nicobar Islands  
2. Chandigarh  
3. Dadra and Nagar Haveli  
4. Daman and Diu  
5. Delhi  
6. Lakshadweep  
7. Pondicherry.  
 
  45 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 97)  
1. The Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954).  
2. The Fruit Products Order, 1955.  
3. The Meat Food Products Order, 1973.  
4. The Vegetable Oil Products (Control) Order, 1947.  
5. The Edible Oils Packaging (Regulation) Order, 1998.  
6. The Solvent Extracted Oil, De oiled Meal, and Edible Flour (Control) Order, 1967.  
7. The Milk and Milk Products Order, 1992.  
8. Any other order issued under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955) relating to 
food.  
 
--------------------------The Government Securities Act, 2006--------------------------
1 
 THE GOVERNMENT SECURITIES ACT, 2006  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, application and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Forms of Government securities.  
4. Subsidiary general ledger account.  
5. Transfer of Government securities.  
6. Holding of Government securities by holders of public offices.  
7. Recognition of title to Gove rnment security of deceased sole  holder or joint holders.  
8. Right of survivors of joint holders or several payees.  
9. Nomination by holders of Government securities.  
10. Gove rnment securities belonging to minor or insane person.  
11. Issue of duplicate securities and of new securities on conversion, consolidation, sub -division, 
renewal, stripping or reconstruction.  
12. Summary determination by Bank of title to Government security in ca se of dispute.  
13. Law applicable in regard to Government securities.  
14. Postponement of payments and registration of transfers pending the making of vesting order.  
15. Power of Bank to require bonds.  
16. Publication of notices in Official Gazette.  
17. Procedure and scope of  vesting order.  
18. Legal effect of orders made by Bank.  
19. Stay of proceedings on order of Court.  
20. Cancellation by Bank of vesting proceedings.  
21. Discharge in respect of interest on Government securities.  
22. Discharge in respect of bearer bonds.  
23. Period of limitation of Governments ’ liability in respect of interest.  
24. Inspection of documents.  
25. Micro films, facsimile copies of documents, magnetic tapes and computer print outs as 
documents of evidence.  
26. Bank and its officers to be public officers.  
27. Misuse of subsidiary genera l ledger account facility.  
28. Pledge, hypothecation or lien.  
29. Power to call for information, cause inspection and issue directions.  
30. Contravention and penalties.  
31. Certain laws not to apply to Government securities.  
32. Power to make regulations.  
33. Construction of refe rences to laws not in force in Jammu and Kashmir.  
34. Power to remove difficulties.  
35. Repeal and saving.  
 
  2 
 THE GOVERNMENT SECURITIES ACT, 2006  
ACT NO. 38 OF 2006  
[30th August , 2006.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to Government securities and its management 
by the Reserve Bank of India and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating to  Government securities and its 
management by the Reserve Bank of India;  
AND WHEREAS Parliament has no power to make laws for the States with  respect to any of the matters 
aforesaid except as provided in articles 249 and  250 of the Constitution;  
AND WHEREAS in pursuance of clause ( 1) of article 252 of the Constitution,  resolutions have bee n 
passed by the Houses of the Legislatures of all the  States, except the Legislature of the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir, to the  effect that the matters aforesaid should be regulated in those States by  Parliament by 
law; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fi fty-seventh Year of the Republic of India  as follows :— 
1. Short title, application and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called  the Government 
Securities Act, 2006.  
(2) This Act applies to Government securities created and issued whether  before or after the 
commencement of this Act by the Central Government or  a State Government.  
(3) It applies in the first instance to whole of the States, except the State of  Jammu and Kashmir, and 
to all the Union territories and it shall also apply to  the State of Jammu  and Kashmir which adopts this 
Act by resolution passed  in that behalf under clause ( 1) of article 252 of the Constitution.  
(4) It shall come into force in all the States, except the State of Jammu and  Kashmir, and in the Union 
territories on such date1 as the Central Government  may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 
and in the State of  Jammu and Kashmir which adopts this Act under clause ( 1) of article 252 of  the 
Constitution, on the date of such adoption; and any reference in this Act  to the commencement of this Act 
shall, in relation to any State or Union  territory, means the date on which this Act, comes into force in 
such State or  Union territory.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “agent ” means a scheduled bank within the meaning of clause ( e) of section 2 of the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) , or any other person  specified as such;  
(b) “Bank ” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under section 3 of  the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) ; 
(c) “bond ledger account ” means an account with the Bank or an agent in  which the Government 
securities are held in a dematerialised form at the  credit of the holder;  
(d) “constituents ’ subsidiary general ledger account ” means a  subsidiary  general ledger account 
opened and maintained with the Bank by an agent on  behalf of the constituents of such agent;  
(e) “Government ”, in relation to any Government security, means the Central  or State 
Government issuing the security;  
                                                           
1. 30th November, 2007, vide notification no. S.O. 2020, dated 1st December, 2007, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 3 
 (f) “Government security ” means a security created and issued by the  Government for the purpose 
of raising a public loan or for any other purpose  as may be notified by the Government in the Official 
Gazette and having one  of the forms mentioned in section 3;  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by regulations made under this Act;  
(h) “promissory note ” includes a treasury bill;  
(i) “specified ” means specified by the Bank in the Official Gazette.  
3. Forms of Government securities .—A Government security may, subject to such terms and 
conditions as may be specified, be in such forms as may be  prescribed or in one of the following forms, 
namely: — 
(i) a Government promissory note payable to or to the order of a certain  persons; or  
(ii) a bearer bond payable to bearer; or  
(iii) a stock; or  
(iv) a bond held in a bond ledger account.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, “stock ” means a Government  security, — 
(i) registered in the books of the Bank for which a stock certificate is issued;  or 
(ii) held  at the credit of the holder in the subsidiary general ledger account  including the 
constituents subsidiary general ledger account maintained in  the books of the Bank,  
and transferable by registration in the books of the Bank.  
4. Subsidiary general ledger account .—(1) A subsidiary general ledger  account including a 
constituents ’ subsidiary general ledger account and a  bond ledger account may be opened and maintained 
by the Bank subject to  such conditions and restrictions as may be specified and in such form  and on  
payment of such fee as may be prescribed.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Benami  Transactions  (Prohibition) Act, 1988  (45 of 
1988) , or any other law for the time being in force, the  Government securities may be held on behalf of a 
constituent in a  constituents’ subsidiary general ledger account under sub -section ( 1) and  the holder of 
such account shall be deemed to be the holder of the securities  held in that account:  
Provided that the constituent as a beneficial owner of the Government  security shall be entitled to 
claim from the holder all the benefits and be  subjected to all the liabilities in respect of the Government 
securities held in  the constituents’  subsidiary general ledger account.  
(3) The holder of a constituents’  subsidiary general ledger account shall  maintain such records and 
adopt such procedure for safeguarding the  interests of the constituents as may be specified.  
5. Transfer of Government securities .—(1) No transfer of a Government  security shall be valid if i t 
does not purport to convey the full title to the  security.  
(2) The transfer of the Government securities shall be made in such form and  in such manner as may 
be prescribed.  
(3) Any document relating to a Government security or any endorsement on  a promis sory note issued 
by the Government may, on the demand of a  person who for any reason is unable to write, shall be 
executed on his behalf  in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall affect any order made by the Bank under this  Act, or any order made 
by a Court upon the Bank.  4 
 6. Holding of Government securities by holders of public offices .—(1) In the  case of any public 
office to which the Government may, by notification in the  Official Gazette, declare this sub -section to 
apply,  a Government security  may be held in the name of the office.  
(2) When a Government security is so held, it shall be deemed to be  transferred without any or further 
endorsement or transfer deed from each  holder of the office to the succeeding holder of the  office on and 
from the  date on which the latter takes charge of the office.  
(3) When the holder of the office transfers to a party not being his successor  in office where a 
Government security so held, the transfer shall be made by  the signature of the ho lder of the office and 
the name of the office in the  manner laid down in section 5.  
(4) Where the holder of the office is temporarily absent for more than a  fortnight from his office for 
any reason, he may authorise in writing such  other person, who would be incharge of this office during 
the period of such  absence, to effect transfer of the Government securities.  
(5) This section applies as well to an office of which there are two or more  joint holders as to an 
office of which there is a single holder.  
7. Recognition of title to Government security of deceased sole holder or joint  holders .—         
(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), if on the  death of a sole holder or death of all the 
joint holders of a Government  security there is n o nomination in force, the executors or administrators of  
the deceased sole holder or all the deceased joint holders, as the case may  be, or the holder of a succession 
certificate issued under Part X of the Indian  Succession Act, 1925  (39 of 1925)  shall be  the only person 
who may be recognised by the  Bank as having any title to the Government security.  
(2) Nothing contained in this section shall bar the recognition by the Bank of  any person as having a 
title to a Government security on the basis of a  decree , order or direction passed by a competent court 
declaring the person  as having title to the Government security or appointing a receiver to take  possession 
of a security or on the basis of a certificate issued or order passed  by any other authority who might have 
been empowered under any statute  to confer on any such person a title to the Government security or on 
the basis of such other documents as may be prescribed.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section or in any other law for  the time being in force, 
where the outstanding value of Government security  held by a deceased sole holder or deceased joint 
holders, as the case may  be, does not exceed an amount of rupees one lakh or such higher amount  not 
exceeding rupees one crore as may b e fixed by the Central Government  by notification in the Official 
Gazette from time to time, the Bank may  recognise a person as having title to such Government security 
of the  deceased sole holder or deceased joint holders in such manner and subject to  such conditions as 
may be prescribed.  
8. Right of survivors of joint holders or several payees .—Notwithstanding  anything contained in 
section 45 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872  (9 of 1872)  and subject  to the p rovisions of sections 7 and 
10,— 
(a) when  a Government security is held by two or more persons jointly, and  either or any of them 
dies, the title to the Government security shall vest in  the survivor or survivors of those persons; and  
(b) when a Government security is payable to two or more perso ns severally  and either or any of 
them dies, the Government security shall be payable to  the survivor or survivors of those persons or 
to the representative of the  deceased or to any one of them:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall affect  any claim which  any representative of a 
deceased joint holder or deceased holders of a  Government security or a surviving joint holder or holders 
of a Government  security, as the case may be, may have against the survivor or survivors or  
representatives u nder or in respect of any Government security to which this  section applies.  5 
 Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, a body incorporated or deemed  to be incorporated 
under the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , or the Co -operative  Societies Act, 1912  (2 of 1912) , or any 
other enactment for the time being in force  relating to the incorporation of associations of individuals, 
shall be deemed to  die when it is dissolved.  
9. Nomination by holders of Government securities .—(1) Notwithstanding  anything contained in 
sections 7 and 8 or any other law for the time being in  force, except the  provisions of sub -section ( 2),— 
(a) where a Government security other than in the form of promissory note  or bearer bond is held 
by a person in his name or jointly with any other name  or names, as the case may be, the sole holder 
or all the joint holders of the  Government security together may nominate one or more persons in 
such form and in such manner as may be prescribed, who in the event of the  death of the sole holde r 
or the death of all the joint holders, as the case may  be, would become entitled to the Government 
security and to payment  thereon to the exclusion of all other persons, unless the nomination is varied  
or cancelled in the prescribed manner;  
(b) where  a nomination in respect of a Government security has been made  in favour of two or 
more nominees and either or any of them is dead, the  surviving nominee or nominees, as the case may 
be, shall be entitled to the  Government security and payment thereon;  
(c) where the nominee is a minor, it shall be lawful for the sole holder or all  the joint holders of a 
Government security, as the case may be, to appoint in  the prescribed manner any person in whom the 
Government security would  be deemed to have vested in t he event of death of such holder or joint  
holders of the Government security during the minority of the nominee;  
(d) the recognition of right and claim of the nominee or nominees to the  Government security 
held by a sole holder or joint holders, as the cas e may  be, and any payment made by the Government 
or the Bank to the nominee  or nominees shall constitute a full discharge and shall absolve the  
Government or the Bank of its liability in respect of the said Government  security.  
(2) Any nomination or appoin tment made under sub -section ( 1) shall become  void if the nominee 
predeceases, or where there are two or more nominees,  if all the nominees predecease the holder or joint 
holders of the Government  security making the nomination.  
(3) Where the amount due fo r the time being on a Government security is  payable to two or more 
nominees and either or any of them dies, the title to  the Government security shall vest in the survivor or 
survivors of those  nominees and the amount for the time being due thereon shall be paid  accordingly.  
(4) A transfer of a Government security made in accordance with sub -section  (2) of section 5 shall 
automatically cancel the nomination previously made:  
Provided that where a Government security is in the possession of a person  either a s a pledge or by 
way of security for any purpose, such possession  shall not have the effect of cancelling the nomination, 
but the right of the  nominee shall be subject to the right of the person so possessing it.  
(5) The Government may, on the recommendati on of the Bank, by  notification in the Official Gazette, 
extend the facility of nomination to any  Government security as may be specified therein.  
(6) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall affect the right or claim which  any person may have 
against the person whose right and title to a  Government security is recognised by the Government or the 
Bank or to  whom the payment of the amount due on the Government security is made  by the Government 
or the Bank under sub -section ( 1). 
(7) No notice of any clai m of any person, other than the person or persons in  whose name a 
Government security is held or the nominees thereof, shall  be receivable by the Bank or the Government, 
nor shall the Bank or the  Government be bound by any such notice even though expressly  given to it:  6 
 Provided that where any decree, order, certificate or other authority from a  court of competent 
jurisdiction relating to such Government security is  produced before the Bank or the Government, the 
Bank or the Government  shall take due note of  such decree, order, certificate or other authority.  
10. Government securities belonging to minor or insane person .—(1) Where  any Government 
security is held on behalf of a minor, the payment of the  same for the time being due on a Government 
security either by way of  outstanding principal or interest thereon may be made to the father or  mother of 
such minor and where neither parent is alive or where the living  parents are or only living parent is 
incapable of action, to a person entitled  under the law for the time being in force to have care of the 
property of the  minor.  
(2) When a Government security belongs to a minor or a person who is  insane and incapable of 
managing his affairs and the outstanding principal  value of the Government security does not  in the 
aggregate exceed rupees  one lakh or such higher amount not exceeding rupees one crore as the  Central 
Government may, by a notification in the Official Gazette from time  to time, fix, the Bank may make 
such order as it thinks fit for the vesting of  such Government security in such person as it considers 
represents the  minor or insane person.  
11. Issue of duplicate securities and of new securities on conversion,  consolidation, sub -division, 
renewal, stripping or reconstitution .—(1) If the  person entit led to a Government security applies to the 
Bank alleging that  the Government security has been lost, stolen or destroyed, or has been  defaced or 
mutilated, the Bank may, on proof to its satisfaction of the loss,  theft, destruction, defacement or 
mutilatio n of the Government security, and  subject to such conditions and on payment of such fees as 
may be  prescribed, order the issue of a duplicate Government security to the  applicant.  
(2) If the person entitled to a Government security applies to the Bank to  have the Government 
security converted into a Government security of  another form, or into a Government security issued in 
connection with  another loan or to have it consolidated with other like Government securities,  or to have 
it sub -divided, or to have i t renewed, stripped or  reconstituted, the Bank may, subject to such conditions 
and on payment of  such fees as may be prescribed, cancel the Government security and order  the issue of 
a new Government security or Government securities.  
Explanation .—A Government security may be stripped separately for interest  and principal or 
reconstituted on the application of the holder subject to such  terms and conditions as may be specified.  
(3) The person to whom a duplicate Government security or a new  Governmen t security is issued 
under this section shall be deemed for the  purposes of section 18 to have been recognised by the Bank as 
the holder of  the Government security; and a duplicate Government security or new  Government security 
so issued to any person shal l be deemed to constitute a  new contract between the Government and such 
person and all persons  deriving title thereafter through him:  
Provided that the issue of new security under this section shall not affect the  interest of third parties in 
whose favour  a charge or other interest was  lawfully created and was subsisting at the time of issue of the 
new security.  
12. Summary determination by Bank of title to Government security in case  of dispute .—(1) If 
the Bank is of opinion that a doubt exists as to the title to  a Government security, it may proceed to 
determine, in accordance with  such regulations as may be made, the person who shall for the purposes of  
the Bank be deemed to be the person entitled thereto.  
(2) For the purpose of making any order which it  is empowered to make  under this Act, the Bank may 
request a District Magistrate to record or to  have recorded the whole or any part of such evidence as any 
person whose  evidence the Bank requires may produce and the District Magistrate so  requested may 
either himself record, or may direct any Executive Magistrate  empowered in this behalf by general or 7 
 special order of the State  Government to record the evidence, and shall forward a copy thereof to the  
Bank.  
(3) For the purpose of making a vesting order u nder this Act, the Bank may  direct one of its officers 
to record the evidence of any person whose evidence  the Bank requires or may receive evidence upon 
affidavit.  
(4) A Magistrate or an officer of the Bank acting in pursuance of this section  may administ er an oath 
to any witness examined by him.  
13. Law applicable in regard to Government securities .—Notwithstanding  that as a matter of 
convenience, the Government may have arranged for  payments on a Government security to be made 
elsewhere than in India, th e rights of all persons in relation to Government securities shall be determined  
in connection with all such questions as are dealt with by this Act by the law  and in the Courts of India.  
14. Postponement of payments and registration of transfers pending t he making of vesting 
order .—Where the Bank contemplates making an order  under this Act to vest a Government security in 
any person, the Bank may  suspend payment of interest on or the maturity value of the Government  
security or postpone the making of any o rder under section 7, section 10,  section 11 or section 12 or the 
registration of any transfer of the Government  security, as the case may be, until the vesting order has 
been made.  
15. Power of Bank to require bonds .—(1) Before making any order which it is empowered to make 
under this Act, the Bank may require the person in  whose favour the order is to be made to execute an 
indemnity bond with one  or more sureties in such form as may be prescribed or to furnish security not  
exceeding twice the value of th e subject -matter of the order, to be held at  the disposal of the Bank, to pay 
to the Bank or any person to whom the Bank  may assign the indemnity bond or security in furtherance of 
sub-section ( 2) the amount thereof.  
(2) A Court before which a claim in res pect of the subject -matter of any such  order is established may 
order the indemnity bond or security to be assigned  to the successful claimant who shall thereupon be 
entitled to enforce the  indemnity bond or realise the security to the extent of such claim . 
16. Publication of notices in Official Gazette .—Any notice required to be given  by the Bank under 
this Act may be served by post, but every such notice  shall also be published by the Bank in the Official 
Gazette or the Official  Gazette of a State, accord ing as the notice relates to a Government security,  issued 
by the Central Government or a State Government, and on such  publication shall be deemed to have been 
delivered to all persons for whom it  is intended.  
17. Procedure and scope of vesting order .—(1) The Bank shall, while making  a vesting order under 
section 7, section 10, section 11 or section 12, follow  such procedure as may be prescribed.  
(2) An order made by the Bank under this Act may either confer full title to a  Government security or 
a title only to the accrued and accruing interest on  the Government security pending a further order 
vesting full title.  
18. Legal effect of orders made by Bank .—No recognition by the Bank of a  person as the holder of 
a Government security, and no order made by th e Bank under this Act shall be called in question by any 
Court so far as such  recognition or order affects the relations of the Government or the Bank with  the 
person recognised by the Bank as the holder of a Government security or  with any person claiming  an 
interest in such security; and any such  recognition by the Bank of any person or any order by the Bank 
vesting a  Government security in any person shall operate to confer on that person a  title to the security 
subject only to his personal liability to the rightful owner  of the security for money had and received on 
his account.  
19. Stay of proceedings on order of Court .—Where the Bank contemplates  making with reference 
to any Government security any order which it is  empowered to make under this Act, an d before the order 8 
 is made the Bank  receives from a Court in India an order to stay the making of such order, the  Bank shall 
either — 
(a) hold the security together with any interest unpaid or accruing thereon  until further orders of 
the Court are received;  or 
(b) apply to the Court to have the security transferred to the Official Trustees  appointed for the 
State in which such Court is situated, pending the disposal  of the proceedings before the Court.  
20. Cancellation by Bank of vesting proceedings .—Where the Bank  contemplates making an order 
under this Act vesting a Government security  in any person, the Bank may, at any time before the order is 
made, cancel  any proceedings already taken for that purpose and may, on such  cancellation, proceed anew 
to the m aking of such order.  
21. Discharge in respect of interest on Government securities .—Save as  otherwise expressly 
provided in the terms of a Government security, no  person shall be entitled to claim interest on such 
security in respect of any  period which ha s elapsed after the earliest date on which demand could have  
been made for the payment of the amount due on such security.  
22. Discharge in respect of bearer bonds .—The Government shall be  discharged from all liability 
on a bearer bond or on any interest c oupon of  such a bond on payment to the holder of such bond or 
coupon on  presentation on or after the date when it becomes due of the amount  expressed therein, unless 
before such payment, an order of a Court in India  has been served on the Government restra ining it from 
making payment.  
23. Period of limitation of Government ’s liability in respect of interest .—(1) Where no shorter 
period of limitation is fixed by any law for the time being in  force, the liability of the Government in 
respect of any interest payment due  on a Government security shall terminate on the expiry of six years 
from the  date on which the amount due by way of interest became payable:  
Provided that the Government may allow a bona fide  claim for payment of  interest after the expiry of 
the period of six years in those cases where the  holders of securities could not prefer their claims within 
the said period of six  years.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Bank may  specify the securities in 
respect of which, the circumstances under which,  and the terms and conditions subject to which, interest 
may be paid even  after the expiry of the period specified in the said sub -section.  
24. Inspection of documents .—No person shall be entitled to inspect or to  receive informat ion 
derived from any Government security in the possession  or custody of the Government or from any book, 
register or other document  kept or maintained by or on behalf of the Government in relation to  
Government securities or any Government security, save in such  circumstances and manner and subject to 
such conditions as may be  prescribed.  
25. Micro films, facsimile copies of documents, magnetic tapes and computer  print outs as 
documents of evidence .—(1) Notwithstanding anything  contained in any other l aw for the time being in 
force, — 
(a) a micro film of a document or the reproduction of the image or images  embodied in such 
micro film (whether enlarged or not); or  
(b) a facsimile copy of a document; or  
(c) a statement contained in a document and included in  a printed material  produced by a 
computer, magnetic tape or any other form of mechanical or  electronic data retrieval mechanism 
(hereinafter referred to as computer  print out), if the conditions mentioned in sub -section ( 2) and the 
other  provisions contai ned in this section are satisfied in relation to the statement  and the computer in 
question,  9 
 shall be deemed to be also a document for the purposes of this Act and the  regulations made thereunder 
and shall be admissible in any proceedings  thereunder, witho ut further proof or production of the original, 
as evidence of  any contents of the original or of any fact stated therein of which direct  evidence would be 
admissible.  
(2) The conditions referred to in sub -section ( 1) in respect of a computer  print out shall be the 
following, namely: — 
(a) the computer print out containing the statement was produced by the  computer during the 
period over which the computer was used regularly to  store or process information for the purposes of 
any activities regularly  carried on over that period by the person having lawful control over the use  of 
the computer;  
(b) during the said period, there was regularly supplied to the computer in  the ordinary course of 
the said activities, information of the kind contained in  the state ment or of the kind from which the 
information so contained is  derived;  
(c) throughout the material part of the said period, the computer was  operating properly or, if not, 
then any respect in which it was not operating  properly or was out of operation dur ing that part of that 
period was not such  as to affect the production of the document or the accuracy of the contents;  and 
(d) the information contained in the statement reproduced or is derived from  information supplied 
to the computer in the ordinary cou rse of the said  activities.  
(3) Where over any period, the function of storing or processing information  for the purposes of any 
activities regularly carried on over that period as  mentioned in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) was regularly 
performed by  compu ters, whether — 
(a) by a combination of computers operating over that period; or  
(b) by different computers operating in succession over that period; or  
(c) by different combinations of computers operating in succession over that  period; or  
(d) in any other  manner involving the successive operation over that period,  in whatever order, of 
one or more computers and one or more combinations  of computers,  
all the computers used for that purpose during that period shall be treated  for the purposes of this section  
as constituting a single computer; and  references in this section to a computer shall be construed 
accordingly.  
(4) In any proceeding under this Act and the regulations made thereunder  where it is desired to give a 
statement in evidence by virtue of this section, a  certificate doing any of the following thin gs, that is to 
say,— 
(a) identifying the document containing the statement and describing the  manner in which it was 
produced;  
(b) giving such particulars of any device involved in the production of tha t document as may be 
appropriate for the purpose of showing that the  document was produced by a computer;  
(c) dealing with any of the matters to which the conditions mentioned in sub -section  (2) relate, 
and purporting to be signed by a person occupying a  responsible official position in the Bank in 
relation to the operation of the  relevant device or the management of the relevant activities 
(whichever is  appropriate),  
shall be evidence of any matter stated in the certificate; and for the purposes  of this sub-section it shall be 
sufficient for a matter to be stated to the best  of the knowledge and belief of the person stating it.  
 10 
 (5) For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) information shall be taken to be supplied to a computer if it is supplied  thereto in any 
appropriate form and whether it is so supplied directly or (with  or without human intervention) by 
means of any appropriate equipment;  
(b) whether in the course of activities carried on by any official, information  is supplied with a 
view to its being stored or processed for the purposes of  those activities by a computer operated 
otherwise than in the course of those  activities, that information, if duly supplied to that computer, 
shall be taken  to be supplied to it in the course of those activities;  
(c) a document shall be taken to have been produced by a computer whether  it was produced by it 
directly or (with or without human intervention) by  means of any appropriate equipment.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “computer ” means any electronic, magnetic, optical or other high -speed  data processing 
service device or system which performs logical, arithmetical  and memory functions by manipulation 
of electronic, magnetic or optical  impulses and includes all input, output, proc essing, storage, 
computer  software or communication facilities which are connected or related to the  computer in a 
computer system or computer network;  
(b) “computer print out ” shall include ledgers, day -books, account books and  other records, 
maintained i n the ordinary course of business of the Bank or  of the agent, printed on paper from the 
information stored in the computer  or derived from such information; and  
(c) any reference to information being derived from other information shall  be a reference to its 
being derived therefrom by calculation, comparison or  any other process.  
26. Bank and its officers to be public officers .—For the purposes of section  124 of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872  (1 of 1872) , the provisions of Part IV of the Code of  Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 
1908) relating to suits by or against public officers in their  official capacity, and the provisions of rule 27 
of Order V, and rule 52 of  Order XXI of the said Code, the Bank and any officer of the Bank acting in his  
capacity a s such shall be deemed to be a public officer.  
27. Misuse of subsidiary general ledger account facility .—Where a subsidiary  general ledger 
account is opened by the Bank in favour of any holder of a  Government  security in terms of section 4 
and,— 
(a) it com es to the notice of the Bank that the said account is being operated  contrary to the terms 
and conditions subject to which the account was  opened; or  
(b) the subsidiary general ledger account transfer form has bounced due to  insufficiency of 
Government sec urity or funds; or  
(c) the Bank is of opinion that the account is being operated contrary to the  banking practice or in 
a manner prejudicial to the interests of the holders of  Government securities in general; or  
(d) the subsidiary general ledger account is being misused in any manner,   
the Bank may, by order in writing, after giving an opportunity of being heard,  debar the holder of such 
account from trading with the subsidiary general  ledger account facility temporarily  or permanently as it 
deems fit.  
28. Pledge, hypothecation or lien .—(1) Subject to such terms and conditions  as may be prescribed, 
the holder of a Government security may create a  pledge or hypothecation or lien in respect of such 
security.  
(2) On receipt of notice of pledge or hypothecation or lien from the holder of  the Government 
security, the Bank or any agent maintaining the account in  respect of such security shall make necessary 11 
 entry in its record and such  entry shall be evidence of the pledge, hypo thecation or lien thereof, as the  
case may be.  
29. Power to call for information, cause inspection and issue directions .—(1) The Bank may at 
any time, for the purposes of this Act, call for such  information as it deems necessary in relation to a 
Government  security from  any agent, or holder of subsidiary general ledger account including  
constituents’  subsidiary general ledger account and cause an inspection or  scrutiny to be made by one or 
more of its officers or other persons, of any  agent or holder of a subsidiary general ledger account 
including  constituents’  subsidiary general ledger account.  
(2) The Bank may, if it considers necessary so to do, issue such directions as  it thinks fit, in rel ation to 
a Government security, — 
(i) to the holders of the subs idiary general ledger accounts including  constituents’ subsidiary 
general ledger account;  
(ii) to the agents maintaining bond ledger account; and  
(iii) to any other person dealing with the Government securities,  
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
30. Contravention and penalties .—(1) If any person, for the purpose of  obtaining for himself or for 
any other person any title to a Government  security, makes to any authority in any application made under 
this Act or in  the course of any inquiry undertaken  in pursuance of this Act any statement  which is false 
and which he either knows to be false or does not believe to be  true, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend  to six months, or with fine, or with both.  
(2) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence under sub -section ( 1) except on the complaint of 
the Bank.  
(3) Without prejudice to any other action which the Bank may deem fit to  take, the Bank, after giving 
a reasonable opportunity of being heard, may  impose on any perso n who contravenes any provision of 
this Act, or  contravenes any regulation, notification or direction issued under this Act, or  violates the 
terms and conditions for opening and maintenance of a  subsidiary general ledger account, including 
constituents ’ subsidiary general  ledger account, a penalty, not exceeding five lakh rupees and where such  
contravention is a continuing one, further penalty which may extend to five  thousand rupees for every day 
after first day during which the contravention  continues.  
31. Certain laws not to apply to Government securities .—(1) The Public Debt  Act, 1944                    
(18 of 1944) shall cease to apply to the Government securities to which this Act  applies and to all matters 
for which provisions have been made by this Act. 
(2) Notwithstanding such cessation anything done or any action taken in the  exercise of any power 
conferred by or under that Act shall be deemed to  have been done or taken in the exercise of the powers 
conferred by or under  this Act as if this Act was  in force at all material times.  
(3) Nothing contained in the Depositories Act, 1996 (22 of 1996) or the regulations made  thereunder 
shall apply to Government securities covered by this Act unless  an agreement is executed to the contrary 
by any depository under the  Depositories Act, 1996 with the Government or the Bank, as the case may  be. 
32. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Bank may, with the previous  approval of the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette,  make regulations to carry out the purposes of this 
Act. 
  12 
 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing  power such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters,  namely: — 
(a) the  form in which and the terms and conditions subject to which the  Government securities 
may be issued under section 3;  
(b) the form in which and the fee to be charged for opening and maintenance  of subsidiary 
general ledger account including constituents’  subsidiary  general ledger account and bond ledger 
account by the Bank under sub -section  (1) of section 4;  
(c) the form and manner in which Government securities shall be transferred  under                               
sub-section ( 2) of section 5 and the ma nner in which any document  relating to any Government 
security or any endorsement on a promissory  note may be executed on behalf of a person who is 
unable to write under  sub-section ( 3) of that section;  
(d) the documents to be produced for recognition of title to the Government  security of a 
deceased sole holder or all deceased joint holders under sub -section  (2) of section 7 and the manner in 
which and the conditions subject  to which the Bank may recognise title to a Government security 
under sub -section  (3) of that section;  
(e) the form and the manner in which a nomination may be made, varied or  cancelled and the 
manner in which any person may be appointed in whom  the Government security would be deemed 
to have vested in the event of  death of holder or jo int holders of Government security during the 
minority of  a nominee under  section 9;  
(f) the conditions governing the issue of duplicate Government securities and  the fees to be paid 
therefor under section 11;  
(g) the manner in which the Bank may determine  title to a Government  security under section 12;  
(h) the form of bond under sub -section ( 1) of section 15;  
(i) the procedure for making vesting order referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 17;  
(j) the circumstances and the manner in which and the condi tions subject to  which inspection of 
Government securities, books, registers and other  documents may be allowed or information 
therefrom may be given under  section 24;  
(k) the terms and conditions subject to which pledge or hypothecation or lien  be created  under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 28.  
(3) Every regulation made by the Bank under this Act shall be laid, as soon  as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in  session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one  session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the  session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions  aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the regulation or  both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation  
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as  the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall  be without prejudice to the validity of anything pr eviously 
done under that  regulation.  
33. Construction of references to laws not in force in Jammu and Kashmir .—Any reference in 
this Act to a law which is not in force in the State of Jammu  and Kashmir shall, wherever, necessary, be 
constructed as includin g a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that State.  
34. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect  to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, not  inconsistent with the provision s of this Act, remove 
the difficulty:  13 
 Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two  years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be  after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
35. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Indian Securities Act, 1920  (10 of 1920)  is hereby  repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken in the  exercise of any power 
conferred by or under the Act shall be deem ed to have  been done or taken in the exercise of the powers 
conferred by or under this  Act as if this Act was in force on the day on which such thing was done or  
action was taken.  
--------------------------The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006--------------------------
1 
 THE MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES DEVELOPMENT ACT, 2006  
__________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
NATIONAL  BOARD FOR MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES  
3. Establishment of Board.  
4. Removal of member from Board.  
5. Functions of Board.  
6. Powers and functions of Member -Secretary of Board.  
 
CHAPTER III  
CLASSIFICATION OF ENTERPRISES, ADVISORY COMMITTEE AND  MEMORANDUM  
OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES  
7. Classification of enterprises.  
8. Memorandum of micro, small and m edium enterprises.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
MEASURES FOR PROMOTION, DEVELOPMENT AND ENHANCEMENT OF  COMPETITIVENESS OF MICRO,  
 SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES  
9. Measures for promotion and development.  
10. Credit faci lities.  
11. Procurement preference policy.  
12. Funds.  
13. Grants by Central Government.  
14. Administration and utilisation of Fund or Funds.  
 
CHAPTER V  
DELAYED PAYMENT S TO MICRO AND SMALL ENTERPRISES  
15. Liability of buyer to make payment.  
16. Date from which and rate at which interest is payable.  2 
 SECTIONS  
17. Recovery of amount due.  
18. Reference to Micro and small Enterprises Facilitation Council.  
19. Application for setting aside decree, award or order.  
20. Establishment of Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council.  
21. Composition of Mic ro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council.  
22. Requirement to specify unpaid amount with interest in the annual statement of accounts.  
23. Interest not to be allowed as deduction from income.  
24. Overriding effect.  
25. Scheme for closure of business of micro, small an d medium enterprises.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
26. Appointment of Officers and other employees.  
27. Penalty for contravention of section 8 or section 22 or section 26.  
28. Jurisdiction of courts.  
29. Power to make rules.  
30. Power to make rules by State Government.  
31. Power to remove difficulties.  
32. Repeal of Act 32 of 1993.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 THE MICRO, SMALL AND  MEDIUM ENTERPRISES DEVELOPMENT  
ACT, 2006  
ACT NO. 27 OF 2006  
[16th June , 2006.]  
An Act to provide for facilitating the promotion and development and enhancing the 
competitiveness of micro, small and medium enterprises and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  a declaration as to expediency of control of certain industries by the Union was made 
under section 2 of the Industries (Development a nd Regulation) Act, 1951;  
AND WHEREAS  it is expedient to provide for facilitating the promotion and development and 
enhancing the competitiveness of micro, small and medium enterprises and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto;  
BE it enacte d by Parliament in the Fifty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises Development Act, 2006.  
 (2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint; 
and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such 
provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to th e coming into force of 
that provision.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, —  
(a) “Advisory Committee” means the committee constituted by the Central Government under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 7;  
(b) “appointed day” means the day following immediately after the expiry of the period of fifteen 
days from the day of acceptance or the day of deemed acceptance of any goods or any services by a 
buyer from a supplier.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, —  
(i) “the day of acceptance” means,— 
(a) the day of the actual delivery of goods or the rendering of services; or  
(b) where any objection is made in writing by the buyer regarding acceptance of goods or 
services within fifteen days from the day of the delivery of g oods or the rendering of services, 
the day on which such objection is removed by the supplier;  
(ii) “the day of deemed acceptance ” means, where no objection is made in writing by the  
buyer regarding acceptance of goods or services within fifteen days from  the day of the delivery 
of goods or the rendering of services, the day of the actual delivery of goods or the rendering of 
services;  
(c) “Board ” means the National Board for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises established 
under section 3;  
(d) “buyer” means whoever buys any goods or receives any services from a supplier for 
consideration;  
                                                           
1. 2nd October, 2006, vide notification No. S.O. 1154(E) dated 18th July, 2006, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary Part II 
sec.3( ii). 4 
 (e) “enterprise ” means an industrial undertaking or a business concern or any other establishment, 
by whatever name called, engaged in the manufacture or production of  goods, in any manner, 
pertaining to any industry specified in the First Schedule to the Industries (Devel opment and 
Regulation) Act, 1951 (55 of 1951)  or engaged in providing or rendering of any service or services;  
(f) “goods ” means every kind of movable  property other than actionable claims and money;  
(g) “medium enterprise ” means an enterprise classified as such under sub -clause ( iii) of clause ( a) 
or sub -clause ( iii) of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 7;  
(h) “micro enterprise ” means an enterpr ise classified as such under sub -clause ( i) of clause ( a) or 
sub-clause ( i) of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 7;  
(i) “National Bank ” means the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development established 
under section 3 of the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development Act, 1981  (51 of 1981) ; 
(j) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(k) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(l) “Reserve Bank ” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under section 3 of the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) ; 
(m) “small enterprise ” means an enterprise classified as such under sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( a) or 
sub-clause ( ii) of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 7;  
(n) “supplier ” means a micro or small enterprise, which has filed a memorandum with the 
authority referred to in sub-section ( 1) of section 8, and includes, — 
(i) the National Small Industries Corporation, being a company, registered under the 
Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) ; 
(ii) the Small Industries Development Corporation of a State or a Union territory, by 
whateve r name called, being a company registered under the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) ; 
(iii) any company, co -operative society, trust or a body, by whatever name called, registered 
or constituted under any law for the time being in force and engaged in selli ng goods produced by 
micro or small enterprises and rendering services which are provided by such enterprises;  
(o) “Small Industries Bank ” means the Small Industries Development Bank of India established 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Small Indu stries Development Bank of India Act, 1989  (39 
of 1989) ; 
(p) “State Government ”, in relation to a Union territory, means the Administrator thereof 
appointed under article 239 of the Constitution.  
CHAPTER II  
NATIONAL  BOARD  FOR MICRO , SMALL  AND MEDIUM  ENTERPRISES  
3. Establishment of Board .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification, appoint, there shall be established, for the purposes of this Act, a Board to be known as the 
National Board for Micro , Small and Medium En terprises.  
(2) The head office of the Board shall be at Delhi.  
(3) The Board shall consist of  the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Minister in charge of the Ministry or Department of the Central Government having 
administrative control of the micro, small and medium enterprises who shall be the ex officio  
Chairperson of the Board;  
(b) the Minister of State or a Deputy Minister, if any, in the Ministry or Department of the Central 
Government having administrative control of the micro, small and medium enterprises who shall be 
ex officio  Vice -Chairperson of the Board, and where there is  no such Minister of State or Deputy 5 
 Minister, such person as may be appointed by the Central Government to be the Vice -Chairperson of 
the Board;  
(c) six Ministers of the State Governments having administrative control of the departments of 
small scale ind ustries or, as the case may be, micro, small and medium enterprises, to be appointed by 
the Central Government to represent such regions of the country as may be notified by the Central 
Government in this behalf, ex officio ; 
(d) three Members of Parliament  of whom two shall be elected by the House of the People and 
one by the Council of States;  
(e) the Administrator of a Union territory to be appointed by the Central Government, ex officio ; 
(f) the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Minis try or Department of the 
Central Government having administrative control of the micro, small and medium enterprises, ex 
officio ; 
(g) four Secretaries to the Government of India, to represent the Ministries of the Central 
Government dealing with commerce and industry, finance, food processing industries, labour and 
planning to be appointed by the Central Government, ex officio ; 
(h) the Chairman of the Board of Directors of the National Bank, ex officio ; 
(i) the chairman and managing director of the Board of Directors of the Small Industries Bank, ex 
officio ; 
(j) the chairman, Indian Banks Association, ex officio ; 
(k) one officer of the Reserve Bank, not below the  rank of an Executive Director , to be appointed 
by the Central Government to represent the Reserve Bank;  
(l) twenty persons to represent the associations of micro, small and midium enterprises, including 
not less than three perso ns representing associations of women's enterprises and not less than three 
persons representing associations of micro enterprises, to be appointed by the Central Government;  
(m) three persons of eminence, one each from the fileds of economics, industry an d science and 
technology, not less than one of whom shall be a woman, to be appoint ed by the Central Government;  
(n) two representatives of Central Trade Union Organisations, to be appointed by the Central 
Government; and  
(o) one officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry or 
Department of the Central Government having administrative control of the micro, small and medium 
enterprises to be appointed by the Central Government, who shall be the Member -Secretary  of the 
Board, ex officio . 
(4) The term of office of the members of the Board, other than ex officio  members of the Board, the 
manner of filling vacancies, and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions by the 
members of the Board, sh all be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the term of office of an ex officio  member of the Board shall continue so long as he 
holds the office by virtue of which he is such a member.  
(5) No act or proceedings of the Board shall be invalid merely by reason of— 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Board; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits of the case.  
(6) The Board shall meet at least once in every three months in a year.  
(7) The Board may associate with itself, in such manner and for such purposes as it may deem 
necessary, any person or persons whose assistance or advice it may desire in complying with a ny of the 6 
 provisions of this Act and a person so associated shall have the right to take part in the discussions of the 
Board relevant to the purposes for which he has been associated but shall not have the right to vote.  
(8) Without prejudice to sub -section (7) the Chairperson of the Board shall, for not less than two of 
the meetings of the Board in a year, invite such Ministers of the State Governments having administrative 
control of the departments of small scale industries or, as the case may be, the m icro, small and medium 
enterprises, or the Administrators of Union territories and representatives of such other associations of 
micro, small and medium enterprises, as he may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(9) It is hereby delca red that the office of member of the Board shall not disqualify its holder for 
being chosen as, or for being, a member of either House of Parliament.  
4. Removal of member from Board .—(1) The Central Government may remove a member of the 
Board from it, if h e— 
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudged as insolvent; or  
(b) is, or becomes, of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or  
(c) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting as a member of the Board; or  
(d) has  been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude; or  
(e) has so abused, in the opinion of the Central Government, his position as a member of the 
Board as to render his continuance in the Board detrime ntal to the interests of the general public.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), no member shall be removed from his 
office on the grounds specified in clauses ( c) to ( e) of that sub -section unless he has been given a 
reasonable oppo rtunity of being heard in the matter.  
5. Functions of Board .—The Board shall, subject to the general directions of the Central 
Government, perform all or any of the following functions, namely: — 
(a) examine  the factors affecting the promotion and development of micro, small and medium 
enterprises and review the policies and programmes of the Central Government in regard to 
facilitating the promotion and development and enhancing the competitiveness of such e nterprises 
and the impact thereof on such enterprises;  
(b) make recommendations on matters referred to in clause ( a) or on any other matter referred to 
it by the Central Government which, in the opinion of that Government, is necessary or expedient for 
facilitating the promotion and development and enhancing the competitiveness of the micro, small 
and medium enterprises; and  
(c) advise the Central Government on the use of the Fund or Funds constituted under section 12.  
6. Powers and functions  of Member -Secr etary of Board .—Subject to other provisions of this Act, 
the Member -Secretary of the Board shall exercise such powers and perform such functions as may be 
prescribed.  
CHAPTER III  
CLASSIFICATION OF ENT ERPRISES, ADVISORY C OMMITTEE AND MEMORAN DUM OF  
MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENT ERPRISES  
7. Classification of enterprises .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 11B of the 
Industries (Develop ment and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951) , the Central Government may, for the 
purposes of this Act, by notific ation and having regard to the provisions of sub -sections ( 4) and ( 5), 
classify any class or classes of enterprises, whether proprietorship, Hindu undivided family, association of 
persons, co -operative society, partnership firm, company or undertaking, by whatever name called, — 
(a) in the case of the enterprises engaged in the manufacture or production of goods pertaining to 
any industry specified in the First Schedule to the Industries (Developmen t and Regulation) Act, 1951 
(65 of 1951) , as— 7 
 (i) a micro enterprise, where the investment in plant and machinery does not exceed twenty -
five lakh rupees;  
(ii) a small enterprise, where the investment in plant and machinery is more than twenty -five 
lakh rupees but does not exceed five crore rupees; or  
(iii) a medium enterprise, where the investment in plant and machinery is more than five 
crore rupees but does not exceed ten crore rupees;  
(b) in the case of the enterprises engaged in providi ng or rendering of services, as — 
(i) a micro enterprise, where the investment in equipment does not exceed ten lakh rupees;  
(ii) a small enterprise, where the investment in equipment is more than ten lakh rupees but 
does not exceed two crore rupees; or  
(iii) a medium enterprise, where the inve stment in equipment is more than two crore rupees 
but does not exceed five crore rupees.  
Explanation  1.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that in calculating the investment in 
plant and machinery, the cost of pollution control, research and  development, industrial safety devices 
and such other items as may be specified, by notification, shall be excluded.  
Explanation  2.—It is clarified that the provisions of section 29B of the Industries (Develop ment and 
Regulation) Act, 1951 ( 65 of 1951) , shall be applicable to the enterprises specified in sub -clauses ( i) and 
(ii) of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of this section.  
(2) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute an Advisory Committee consisting of 
the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry or Department of the Central 
Government having administrative control of the small and medium enterprises who shall be the 
Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(b) not more than five officers of the Central Government possessing necessary expertise in 
matters relating to micro, small and medium enterprises, members, ex officio ; 
(c) not more than three representatives of the State Governments, members, ex officio ; and  
(d) one representative each of the associa tions of micro, small and medium enterprises, members, 
ex officio . 
(3) The Member -Secretary of the Board shall also be the ex officio  Member -Secretary of the Advisory 
Committee.  
(4) The Central Government shall, prior to classifying any class or classes of  enterprises under  
sub-section ( 1), obtain the recommendations of the Advisory Committee.  
(5) The Advisory Committee shall examine the matters referred to it by the Board in connection with 
any subject referred to in section 5 and furnish its recommendations to the Board.  
(6) The Central Government may seek the advice of the Advisory Committee on any of the matters 
specified in section 9, 10, 11, 12 or 14 of Chapter IV.  
(7) The State Government may seek advice of the Advisory Committee on any o f the matters 
specified in the rules made under section 30.  
(8) The Advisory Committee shall, after considering the following matters, communicate its 
recommendations or advice to the Central Government or, as the case may be, State G overnment or the 
Board , namely :— 
(a) the level of employment in a class or classes of enterprises;  
 (b) the level of investments in plant and machinery or equipment in a class or classes of 
enterprises;  8 
 (c) the  need of higher investment in plant and machinery or equipment for technological 
upgradation, employment generation and enhanced competitiveness of the class or classes of 
enterprises;  
(d) the possibility of promoting and diffusing entrepreneurship in  micro, small or medium 
enterprises; and  
(e) the international standards for classification of small and medium enterprises.  
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 11B of the Industries (Develo pment and 
Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951) and clause ( h) of section 2 of the Khadi and Village I ndustries 
Commission Act, 1956 (61 of 1956) , the Central Government may, while classifying any class or classes 
of enterprises under sub -section ( 1), vary, from time to time, the criterion of investment and also co nsider 
criteria or standards in respect of employment or turnover of the enterprises and include in such 
classification the micro or tiny enterprises or the village enterprises, as part of small enterprises.  
8. Memorandum of micro,  small and medium enterpr ises.—(1) Any person who intends to 
establish,— 
(a) a micro or small ent erprise, may, at his discretion;  or 
(b) a medium enterprise engaged in providing or rendering of services may, at his discretion; or  
(c) a medium enterprise engaged in the manufacture or production of goods pertaining to any 
industry specified in the First Schedule to the Industries (Develo pment and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 
of 1951) , 
shall file the memorandum of mic ro, small or, as the case may be, of medium enterprise with such 
author ity as may be specified by the State Government under sub -section ( 4) or the Central Government 
under sub -section ( 3): 
Provided that any person who, before the commen cement of this Act, established — 
(a) a small scale industry and obtained a registration certificate, may, at his discretion; and  
(b) an industry engaged in the manufacture or production of goods pertaining to any industry 
specified in the First Schedule to the Industries (Develop ment and Regul ation) Act, 1951 (65 of 
1951) , having investment in plant and machinery of more than one crore rupees but not exceeding ten 
crore rupees and, in pursuance of the notification of the Government of India in the erstwhile Ministry 
of Industry (Department of I ndustrial Development) number S.O. 477(E) , dated the 25th July, 1991 
filed an Industrial Entrepreneur's Memorandum , 
shall within one hundred and eighty days from the commencement of this Act, file the memorandum, in 
accordance with the provisions of this A ct. 
(2) The form of the memorandum, the procedure of its filing and other matters incidental thereto shall 
be such as may be notified by the Central Government after obtaining the recommendations of the 
Advisory Committee in this behalf.  
(3) The authority with which the memorandum shall be filed by a medium enterprise shall be such as 
may be specified , by notification, by the Central Government.  
(4) The State Government shall, by notification, specify the authority with which a micro or small 
enterprise may  file the memorandum.  
(5) The authorities specified under sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) shall follow, for the purposes of this 
section, the procedure notified by the Central Government under sub -section ( 2). 
  9 
 CHAPTER IV  
MEASURES FOR PROMOTIO N, DEVELOPMENT AND ENHANCEMENT OF  
COMPETITIVENESS OF M ICRO, SMALL AND MEDI UM ENTERPRISES  
9. Measures for promotion and development .—The Central Government may, from time to time, 
for the purposes of facilitating the promotion and development and enhancing the competitiveness  of 
micro, small and medium enterprises, particularly of the micro and small enterprises, by way of 
development of skill in the employees, management and entrepreneurs, provisioning for technological 
upgradation , marketing assistance or infrastructure faci lities and cluster development of such enterprises 
with a view to strengthening backward and forward linkages, specify, by notification, such programmes, 
guidelines or instructions, as it may deem fit.  
10. Credit facilities .—The policies and practices in r espect of credit to the micro, small and medium 
enterprises shall be progressive and such as may be specified in the guidelines or instructions issued by 
the Reserve Bank, from time to time, to ensure timely and smooth flow of credit to  such enterprises, 
minimise the incidence of sickness among and enhance the competitiveness of such enterprises.  
11. Procurement preference policy .—For facilitating promotion and development of micro and 
small enterprises, the Central Government or the State Government may, by order notify from time to 
time, preference policies in respect of procurement of goods and services, produced and provided by 
micro and small enterprises, by its Ministries or departments, as the case may be, or its aided institutions 
and public sector enterprises.  
12. Funds .—There shall be constituted, by notification, one or more Funds to be called by such name 
as may be specified in the notification and there shall be credited thereto any grants made by the Central 
Government under section 13.  
13. Gra nts by Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law in this behalf, credit to the Fund or Funds by way of grants for the purposes of this 
Act, such sums of money as that Government may consider necessary  to provide.  
14. Administration and  utilisation of Fund or Funds .—(1) The Central Government shall have the 
power to administer the Fund or Funds in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Fund or Funds shall be utilised exclusively for the measures specified in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 9.  
(3) The Central Government shall be responsible for the coordination and ensuring timely utilisation 
and release of sums in accordance with such criteria as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER V  
DELAYED PAYMENTS TO M ICRO A ND SMALL ENTERPRISES  
15. Liabi lity of buyer to make payment .—Where any supplier supplies any goods or renders any 
services to any buyer, the buyer shall make payment therefor on or before the date agreed upon between 
him and the supplier in writing or, where there is no agreement in this behalf, before the appointed day:  
Provided that in no case the period agreed upon between the supplier and the buyer in writing shall 
exceed forty -five days from the day of acceptance or the day of deemed acceptance.  
16. Date from which and rate  at which interest is payable .—Where any buyer fails to make 
payment of the amount to the supplier, as required under section 15, the buyer shall, notwithstanding 
anything contained in any agreement between the buyer and the suppli er or in any law for the time being 
in force, be liable to pay compound interest with monthly rests to the supplier on that amount from the 
appointed day or, as the case may be, from the date immediately following the date agreed upon, at three 
times of th e bank rate notified by the Reserve Bank.  
17. Recovery of amount due .—For any goods supplied or services rendered by the supplier, the 
buyer shall be liable to pay the amount with interest thereon as provided under section 16.  10 
 18. Reference to Micro and Small Ent erprises  Facilitation Council .—(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, any party to a dispute may, with regard to 
any amount due under section 17, make a reference to the Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation 
Council.  
(2) On receipt of a reference under sub -section ( 1), the Council shall either itself conduct conciliation 
in the matter or seek the assistance of any institution or centre providing alternate dispute resolution 
services by making a re ference to such an institution or centre, for conducting conciliation and the 
provisions of sections 65 to 81 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996  (26 of 1996)  shall apply to 
such a dispute as if the conciliation was initiated under Part III of th at Act.  
(3) Where the conciliation initiated under sub -section ( 2) is not successful and stands terminated 
without any settlement between the parties, the Council shall either itself take up the dispute for 
arbitration or refer it  to any institution or cen tre providing alternate dispute resolution services for such 
arbitration and the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996  (26 of 1996) shall then apply 
to the dispute as if the arbitration was in pursuance of an arbitration agreement referr ed to in   
sub-section  (1) of section 7 of that Act.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the Micro and 
Small Enterprises Facilitation Council or the centre providing alternate dispute resolution services shal l 
have jurisdiction to act as an Arbitrator or Conciliator under this section in a dispute between the supplier 
located within its jurisdiction and a buyer located anywhere in India.  
(5) Every reference made under this section shall be decided within a per iod of ninety days from the 
date of making such a reference.  
19. Application for setting  aside decree, award or order .—No application for setting aside any 
decree, award or other order made either by the Council itself or by any institution or centre providing 
alternate dispute resolution services to which a reference is made by the Council, shall be entertained by 
any court unless the appellant (not being a supplier) has deposited with it seventy -five per cent . of the 
amount in terms of the decree, aw ard or, as the case may be, the other order in the manner directed by 
such court:  
Provided that pending disposal of the application to set aside the decree, award or order, the court 
shall order that such percentage of the amount deposited shall be paid to  the supplier, as it considers 
reasonable under the circumstances of the case , subject to such conditions as it deems necessary to 
impose.  
20. Establishment of Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation  Council .—The State Government 
shall, by notification, establish one or more Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Councils, at such 
places, exercising such jurisdiction and for such areas, as may be specified in the notification.  
21. Composition of Micro and Small En terprises Facilitation Council .—(1) The Micro and Small 
Enterprise Facilitation Council shall consist of not less than three but not more than five members to be 
appointed from among st the following categories, namely: — 
(i) Director of Industries, by whatever name called, or any other officer no t below the rank of 
such Director, in the Department of the State Government having administrative control of the small 
scale industries or, as the case may be, micro, small and medium enterprises; and  
(ii) one or more office -bearers or representatives of associations of micro or small industry or 
enterprises in the State; and  
(iii) one or more representatives of banks and financial institutions lending to micro or small 
enterprises; or  
(iv) one  or more persons having special knowledge in the field of industry, finance, law, trade or 
commerce.  
(2) The person appointed under clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) shall be the Chairperson of the Micro and 
Small Enterprises Facilitation Council.  11 
 (3) The composition of the Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council, the manner of filling 
vacancies of its members and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions by the 
members shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Governme nt. 
22. Requirement to specify unpaid amount with interest in the annual statement of accounts .—
Where any buyer is required to get his annual accounts audited under any law for the time being in force, 
such buyer shall furnish the following additional info rmation in his annual statement of accounts, 
namely:— 
(i) the principal amount and the interest due thereon (to be shown separately) remaining unpaid to 
any supplier as at the end of each accounting year;  
(ii) the amount of interest paid by the buyer in terms of se ction 16, along with the amount of the 
payment made to the supplier beyond the appointed day during each accounting year;  
(iii) the amount of interest due and payable for the period of delay in making pay ment (which 
have been paid but beyond the appointed day during the year) but without adding the interest 
specified under this Act;  
(iv) the amount of interest accrued and remaining unpaid at the end of each accounting year; and  
(v) the amount of further in terest remaining due and payable even in the succeeding years, until 
such date when the interest dues as above are actually paid to the small enterprise, for the purpose of 
disallowance as a deductible expenditure under section 23.  
23. Interest not to be a llowed as deduction from income .—Notwithstanding anything contain ed in 
the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) , the amount of interest payable or paid by any buyer, under or in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, shall not, for the purposes of comput ation of income under the 
Income -tax Act, 1961, be allowed as deduction.  
24. Overriding effect .—The provisions of sections 15 to 23 shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.  
25. Scheme for closure of business of micro, small and medium enterprises .—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in any law for the time being in force, the Central Government may, with a view to 
facilitating closure of business by a micro, small or medium en terprise, not being a company registere d 
under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) , notify a Scheme within one year from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
26. Appointment of officers and other employees .—(1) The Central Government or the State 
Government may appoint such officers with such designations and such other employees as it thinks fit 
for the purposes of this Act and may entrust to them such of the powers and functions under this Act as it 
may deem fit.  
(2) The O fficers appointed under sub -section ( 1) may, for the purposes of this Act, by order require 
any person to furnish such information, in such form, as may be prescribed.  
27. Penalty for contravention of section 8 or section 22 or section 26 .—(1) Whoever inte ntionally 
contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of any of the provisions contained in 
sub-section ( 1) of section 8 or sub -section ( 2) of section 26 shall be punishable — 
(a) in the case of the first conviction, with fine which may  extend to rupees one thousand; and  
(b) in the case of second or subsequent conviction, with fine which shall not be less than rupees 
one thousand but may extend to rupees ten thousand.  
(2) Where a buyer contravenes the provisions of section 2 2, he shall be punishable with fine 
which shall not be less than rupees ten thousand.  12 
 28. Jurisdiction of courts .—No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Magistrate of 
the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
29. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry 
out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the term of office of the members of the Board, the manner of filling vacancies, and the 
procedure to be followed in the discharge of functions by the members of the Board under  
sub-section ( 4) of section 3;  
(b) the powers and functions of the Member -Secretary under section 6;  
(c) the manner in which the Fund may be administered under sub -section ( 1) of section 14;  
(d) the criteria based on which sums may be released under sub -section ( 3) of section 14;  
(e) the information t o be furnished and the form in which it is to be furnished under  
sub-section ( 2) of section 26; and  
(f) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed under this Act.  
(3) Every notification issued under section 9 and every rule made by the Central Government under 
this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is 
in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if,  before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the notification or rule or 
both Houses agree that the notification or rule should not be made, the no tification or rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that notifi cation or rule.  
30. Power to make rules by State Government. —(1) The State Government may, by notification, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the composition of the Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council, the manner of filling 
vacancies of the members and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions b y the 
members of the Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council under sub -section ( 3) of section 21 ; 
(b) any other matter which is to be , or may be, prescribed under this Act.  
(3) The rule made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of the State Legislature where there are two Houses, and where there is one House of the State 
Legislature, before that House.  
31. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions  of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.   13 
 32. Repeal of Act  32 of 1993 .—(1) The Interest on Delayed Payments to Small Scale and Ancillary 
Industrial Undertakings Act, 1993  is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Act so repealed under 
sub-section ( 1), shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this 
Act.     
--------------------------The National Institute of Fashion Technology Act, 2006--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF FASHION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2006  
__________ _ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________ _ 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
THE INSTITUTE  
3. Establishment of the Institute.  
4. Vesting of properties.  
5. Effect of incorporation of Institute.  
6. Functions of Institute.  
7. Powers of Board.  
8. Institute be  open to all races, creeds and classes.  
9. Teaching at Institute.  
10. Visitor.  
11. Authorities of Institute.  
12. Senate.  
13. Functions of Senate.  
14. Functions, powers and duties of Chairperson.  
15. Director -General.  
16. Registrar.  
17. Powers and duties of other authorities and officers.  
18. Grants by Central Government.  
19. Fund by Institute.  
20. Setting up of endowment fund.  
21. Accounts and audit.  
22. Pension and provident fund.  
23. Appointment.  
24. Statutes.  
25. Statutes how made.  
26. Ordinances.  
27. Ordinances how made.  
28. Tribunal of Arbitration  
  2 
 CHAPTER II I 
MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS  
29. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc.  
30. Sponsored schemes.  
31. Power of Institute to grant degrees, etc.  
32. Powers to remove difficulties.  
33. Trans itional provi sions.  
34. Statutes and Ordinances to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before Parliament.  
 
 
 
  3 
 THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF FASHION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2006  
ACT NO. 28 OF 2006  
[13th July , 2006.]  
An Act to establish and incorporate the National Institute of Fashion Technology for the 
promotion and development of education and research in fashion technology and for matters 
connected  therewith  and incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -seventh Year  of the Republic of India as follows: — 
 
CHAPTER I  
PREMILINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the National Institute of Fashion 
Technology Act, 2006.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the d ate of establishment of the National Institute of Fashion 
Technology under sub -section ( 1) of section 3;  
(b) “Board " means the Board of Governors of the Institute constituted under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 3;  
(c) “Chairperson ” means the Chairperson of th e Institute nominated under clause ( a) of                      
sub-section ( 3) of section 3;  
(d) “Director -General” means the Director -General of the Institute appointed under section 15;  
(e) “fashion” includes a popular trend or a lifestyle, specially in styles of dress and ornament or 
manners of behaviour or the business of creating, promoting or studying styles in vogue or the 
designing, production and marketing of new styles of goods such as, clothi ng, accessories, craft and 
cosmetics; and the words “fashion technology ” with their grammatical variations and cognate 
expressions, shall be construed accordingly;  
(f) “Fund” means the Fund of the Institute to be maintained under section 19;  
(g) “Institute” means the National Institute of Fashion Technology established under                         
sub-section ( 1) of section 3;  
(h) “Institute Campus ” means an Institute Campus located at New Delhi, Gandhinagar, Chennai, 
Mumbai, Hyderabad, Bangalore, Kolkata or any other place in India or abroad as may be decided by 
the Board of Governors;  
  
                                                      
1. 1st April, 2007, vide notification  No. S.O. 2159(E), dated 27th December, 2006, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 4 
 (i) “Senate” means the Senate of the Institute referred to in section 12;  
(j) “Society” means the National Institute of Fashion Technology, New Delhi registered as a 
socie ty under the Societies Registration Act, 1860  (21 of 1860) ; 
(k) “Statutes and Ordinances ” mean respectively the Statutes and the Ordinances of the Institute 
made under this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
THE INSTITUTE  
3. Establishment of t he Institute .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette appoint, the National Institute of Fashion Technology shall be 
established as a body corporate by the name aforesaid.  
(2) The Institute shall have perpetual succession an d a common seal with power, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract, and shall, by that name, 
sue or be sued.  
(3) The Institute shall consist of the Board of Governors having the following persons, na mely:— 
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be an eminent academician, scientist or technologist or professional, 
to be nominated by the Visitor;  
(b) three Members of Parliament, two from Lok Sabha to be nominated by the Speaker of Lok 
Sabha and one from Rajya Sab ha to be nominated by the Chairman of Rajya Sabha;  
(c) the Director -General of the Institute, ex officio ; 
(d) the Financial Adviser of the Ministry or Department in the Government of India dealing with 
the National Institute of Fashion Technology, ex offic io; 
(e) the Joint Secretary, in the Ministry or Department in the Government of India dealing with the 
National Institute of Fashion Technology, ex officio ; 
(f) the representative of the Ministry or Department in the Government of India dealing with 
higher  education to be nominated by the Secretary of that Ministry or Department, ex officio ; 
(g) five persons to be nominated by the Central Government, representing the States in which the 
campus of the Institute is located, from amongst persons who are academ icians or industrialists of 
repute engaged in area of fashion technology; and  
(h) two eminent experts in fashion technology, one of whom shall be an educationist, to be 
nominated by the Visitor on the recommendations of the Central Government.  
(4) The term  of office of the Chairperson and other members of the Board other than ex officio  
members thereof shall be three years and they shall be entitled for such allowances as may be determined 
by the Central Government.  
(5) The term of office of members of the Board nominated to fill a casual vacancy shall continue for 
the remainder of the term of the member in whose place he has been nominated.  
(6) The Board shall meet at least four times in a year at such place and time and observe such rules of 
procedure in r egard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be determined by the Board.  5 
 (7) It is hereby declared that the office of member of the Board of Governors shall not disqualify its 
holder for being chosen as, or for being, a member of either Hous e of Parliament.  
4.Vesting of properties .—On and from the appointed day, subject to the other provisions of this Act, 
all properties which had vested in the Society, immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall 
on and from such commencement, vest  in the Institute.  
5. Effect of incorporation of Institute .—On and from the appointed day — 
(a) any reference to the Society in any contract or other instrument shall be deemed as a reference 
to the Institute;  
(b) all the rights and liabilities of the Society shall be transferred to, and be the rights and 
liabilities of, the Institute; and  
(c) every person employed by the Society, immediately before the appointed day, shall hold 
office or service in the Institute by the same tenure, at the same remunera tion and upon the same 
terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension, leave, gratuity, provident 
fund and other matters as he would have held the same, if this Act had not been passed, and shall 
continue to be so, unless and un til his employment is terminated or until such tenure, remuneration, 
terms and conditions are duly altered by the Statutes:  
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee, his employment may 
be terminated by the Institute in acc ordance with the terms of the contract with the employee or, if no 
provision is made therein in this behalf, on payment to him by the Institute of compensation 
equivalent to three months remuneration  in the case of permanent employee and one month ’s 
remune ration in the case of other employee.  
6. Functions of Institute. —The functions of the Institute shall be — 
(i) to nurture and promote quality and excellence in education and research in area of fashion 
technology;  
(ii) to lay down courses leading to graduate and post -graduate degrees, doctoral and post -doctoral 
courses and research in area of fashion technology;  
(iii) to hold examinations and grant degrees in area of fashion technology;  
(iv) to confer honorary degrees, awards or other distinctions in area of fashion technology;  
(v) to cooperate with educational or other institutions in any part of the world having objects 
wholly or partly similar to those of the Institute by exchange of faculty members and scholars and 
generally in such manner as may b e conducive to their common objective;  
(vi) to conduct courses for teachers, fashion technologists and other professionals;  
(vii) to undertake research and studies in area of fashion technology and application thereof, 
particularly concerning the integrati on of locally produced materials, the requirements of mass 
production, improved quality and design and international marketing;  
(viii) to collect and maintain literature and materials available in area of fashion technology so as 
to develop a modern inform ation centre within the country;  6 
 (ix) to create a central faculty of fashion technology resource and analysis for use by the 
researchers;  
(x) to have a centre to experiment and innovate and to train persons in the area of fashion 
technology;  
(xi) to develo p an international centre for creation and transmission of information in the area of 
fashion technology, with focus on educational, professional and industrial commitments;  
(xii) to develop a multi -disciplinary approach in carrying out research and traini ng in area of 
fashion technology so that the larger interests of the profession, academia and fashion industry are 
better served;  
(xiii) to organise national or international symposia, seminars, conferences and exhibitions in 
selected area of fashion techn ology, from time to time;  
(xiv) to arrange courses catering to the special needs of the developing countries;  
(xv) to act as a nucleus for interaction between academia and industry by encouraging exchange 
of fashion technologists and other technical staff between the Institute and the industry and by 
undertaking sponsored and funded research as well as consultancy projects by the Institute;  
(xvi) to provide technical assistance to artisans, craftsmen, manufacturers, designers and exporters 
of fashion produc ts; and  
(xvii) to carry out any other activity in the area of fashion technology not specifically listed 
above.  
7. Powers of Board .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board, under overall control of 
the Central Government, shall be responsible for the general superintendence, direction and control of the 
affairs of the Institute and shall exercise all the powers not otherwise  provided for by this Act, the Statutes 
and the Ordinances, and shall have the power to review the acts of the Senate.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Board shall — 
(a) take decisions on questions of policy relating to the a dministration and working of the 
Institute;  
(b) take decisions on the establishment of new campuses of the Institute at any location in India 
or abroad;  
(c) fix, demand and receive fees and other charges;  
(d) establish, maintain and manage halls and hostel s for the residence of the students;  
(e) supervise and control the residence and regulate the discipline of students of the Institute and 
to make arrangements for promoting their health, general welfare and cultural and corporate life;  
(f) institute academ ic and other posts and to make appointments thereto (except in the case of the 
Director -General);  
(g) frame Statutes and Ordinances and to alter, modify or rescind the same;  
(h) institute and award fellowships, scholarships, prizes and medals;  7 
 (i) consider  and pass resolutions on the annual report, the annual accounts and the budget 
estimates of the Institute for the next financial year as it thinks fit together with a statement of its 
development plans;  
(j) receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from the Government and to receive bequests, 
donations and transfers of movable or immovable properties from the testators, donors or transferors, 
as the case may be; and  
(k) do all such things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment  of all or any 
of the aforesaid powers.  
(3) The Board shall have the power to appoint such committees, as it considers necessary for the 
exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties under this Act.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2) of section 3, the Board shall not dispose of 
in any manner any immovable property without the prior approval of the Central Government.  
(5) The Central Government may appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress of the 
Institute and to hold inquiries into the affairs thereof and to report thereon in such manner as the Central 
Government may direct.  
(6) Upon receipt of any such report, the Central Government may take such action and issue such 
directions as it considers necessary i n respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report and the 
Institute shall be bound to comply with such directions.  
(7) The Visitor shall have the power to remove the Chairperson or other members of the Board 
nominated by him, on the recommendations of the Central Government.  
(8) The Central Government shall have the power to remove other members, if it considers it 
appropriate to do so.  
(9) No Chairperson or member shall be removed under sub -section ( 7) or sub -section ( 8) unless he 
has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
8. Institute be open to all races, creeds and classes .—(1) The Institute shall be open to persons of 
either sex and of whatever race, creed, caste or class, and no test or condition shall be imposed as t o 
religious belief or profession in admitting or appointing members, students, teachers or workers or in any 
other connection whatsoever.  
(2) No bequest, donation or transfer of any property shall be accepted by the Institute, which in the 
opinion of the Board involves conditions or obligations opposed to the spirit and object of this section.  
9. Teaching at Institute. —All teaching at the campuses of the Institute shall be conducted by or in 
the name of the Institute in accordance with the Statutes and the  Ordinances made in this behalf.  
10. Visitor. —The President of India shall be the Visitor of the Institute.  
11. Authorities of Institute .—The following shall be the authorities of the Institute, namely: — 
(a) a Board of Governors;  
(b) a Senate; and  
(c) such  other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the Institute.  8 
 12. Senate. —The Senate of the Institute shall consist of the following persons, namely: — 
(a) the Director -General, ex officio  who shall be the Chairperson of the Senate;  
(b) all Institute Campus Directors and Senior Professors;  
(c) three persons, not being employees of the Institute, to be nominated by the Chairperson in 
consultation with the Director -General, from amongst  educa tionists of repute, one each from the 
fields of science, engineering and humanities and one of them shall be either from the Scheduled 
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes;  
(d) one alumnus of the Institute to be nominated by the Chairperson in consultation with the 
Director -General by rotation; and  
(e) such other members of the staff as may be laid down in the Statutes.  
13. Functions of Senate .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the 
Senate of the Institute shall have the contr ol and general regulation, and be responsible for the 
maintenance of standards of instruction, education and examination in the Institute and shall exercise such 
other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed upon it by the Statu tes. 
14. Functions, powers and duties of Chairperson. —(1) The Chairperson shall ordinarily preside at 
the meetings of the Board and at the Convocations of the Institute.  
(2) The Chairperson shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be 
assigned to him by this Act or the Statutes.  
15. Director -General.—(1) The Director -General of the Institute shall be appointed by the Board 
with the prior approval of the Central Government for a tenure of three years.  
(2) The Director -General shall be the principal executive officer of the Institute and shall be 
responsible for the proper administration of the Institute and for imparting of instruction and maintenance 
of discipline therein.  
(3) The Director -General shall submit annual reports a nd accounts to the Board.  
(4) The Director -General shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be 
assigned to him by this Act, Statutes and Ordinances.  
(5) The Central Government shall have the power to remove the Director -General  before the tenure of 
three years, if it considers it appropriate to do so.  
16. Registrar .—(1) The Registrar of the Institute shall be appointed on such terms and conditions as 
may be laid down by the Statutes and shall be the custodian of records, the com mon seal, the funds of the 
Institute and such other property of the Institute as the Board shall commit to his charge.  
(2) The Registrar shall act as the Secretary of the Board, the Senate and such committees as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(3) The R egistrar shall be responsible to the Director -General for the proper discharge of his 
functions.  
(4) The Registrar shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be assigned 
to him by this Act or the Statutes or by the Director -Gener al. 9 
 17. Powers and duties of other authorities and officers.—The powers and duties of authorities and 
officers, other than those hereinbefore mentioned, shall be determined by the Statutes.  
18. Grants by Central Government .—For the purpose of enabling the Institute to discharge its 
functions efficiently under this Act, the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Institute in each financial year such sums of money and in 
such manner as it may think  fit. 
19. Fund of Institute. —(1) The Institute shall maintain a Fund to which shall be credited — 
(a) all moneys provided by the Central Government;  
(b) all fees and other charges received by the Institute;  
(c) all moneys received by the Institute by way of  grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests 
or transfers; and  
(d) all moneys received by the Institute in any other manner or from any other source.  
(2) All moneys credited to the Fund shall be deposited in such banks or invested in such manner as 
the Institute may, with the approval of the Central Government, decide.  
(3) The fund shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of the Institute including expenses 
incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its duties under this Act.  
20. Se tting up of endowment fund .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 19, the Central 
Governm ent may direct the Institute to — 
(a) set up an endowment fund and any other fund for specified purpose; and  
(b) transfer money from its Fund to endowment fund or any other fund.  
21. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Institute shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the balance -sheet, in such form as may be 
specified, in accordance with such gener al directions as may be issued by the Central Government in 
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Institute shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and 
any expenditure incurred by h im in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Institute to the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Institu te shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India, generally has in connection 
with the audit of the Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to demand  the 
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of 
the offices of the Institute.  
(4) The accounts of the Institute as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person app ointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  10 
 22.  Pension and provident fund. —(1) The Institu te shall constitute, for the benefit of its employees, 
including the Director -General, in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by 
the Statutes, such pension, insurance and provident funds as it may consider necessary.  
(2) Where a ny such provident fund has been so constituted, the Central Government may declare that 
the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925  (19 of 1925)  shall apply to such fund as if it were a 
Government Provident Fund.  
23.  Appointment. —All appointments of the staff of the Institute,  except that of the Director -
General, shall be made in accordance with the procedu re laid down in the Statutes by — 
(a) the Board, if the appointment is made on the academic staff in the post of Assistant Professor 
or above or if the appointment is made on the non -academic staff in any cadre, the maximum of the 
pay-scale for which is the same or higher than that of Assistant Professor; and  
 (b) the Director -General, in any other case.  
24. Statutes.—Subject to the provisions of this  Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely: — 
(a) the formation of departments of teaching;  
(b) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes;  
(c) the classification, the method of appointme nt and the determination of the terms and 
conditions of service of officers, teachers and other staff of the Institute;  
(d) the reservation of posts for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and other backward 
categories of persons as may be determine d by the Central Government;  
(e) the constitution of pension, insurance and provident funds for the benefit of the officers, 
teachers and other staff of the Institute;  
(f) the constitution, powers and duties of the authorities of the Institute;  
(g) the establishment and maintenance of halls and hostels;  
(h) the manner of filling up of vacancies among members of the Board;  
(i) the authentication of the orders and decisions of the Board;  
(j) the meetings of the Senate, the quorum at such meetings and the p rocedure to be followed in 
the conduct of their business; and  
(k) any other matter which by this Act is to be or may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
25.Statutes how made .—(1) The first Statutes of the Institute shall be framed by the Board with the 
previous  approval of the Visitor and a copy of the same shall be laid as soon as may be before each House 
of Parliament.  
(2) The Board may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend or repeal the 
Statutes in the manner hereafter in this secti on provided.  
 11 
 (3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statute or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require 
the previous approval of the Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold assent or remit it to the Board for 
consideration.  
(4) A new Statut e or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless 
it has been assented to by the Visitor.  
26. Ordinances. —Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances of the 
Institute may provide for all or an y of the following matters, namely: — 
 (a) the admission of the students to the Institute;  
(b) the reservation for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and other backward categories 
of persons;  
(c) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees,  diplomas and certificates of the Institute;  
(d) the conditions under which students shall be admitted to the degree, diploma and certificate 
courses and to the examinations of the Institute and award of degrees, diplomas and certificates;  
(e) the conditio ns for award of fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes;  
(f) the conditions and mode of appointment and duties of examining body, examiners and 
moderators;  
(g) the conduct of examinations;  
(h) the maintenance of discipline among the stude nts of the Institute;  
(i) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the Institute and for admission to the 
examinations of degrees, diplomas and certificates of the Institute;  
(j) the conditions of residence of students of the Institute and the levyin g of the fees for residence 
in the halls and hostels and other charges; and  
(k) any other matter which by this Act or the Statutes is to be or may be provided for by the 
Ordinances.  
27. Ordinances how made. —(1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, Ordinances shall be 
made by the Senate.  
(2) All Ordinances made by the Senate shall have effect from such date as it may direct, but every 
Ordinance so made shall be submitted, as soon as may be, to the Board and shall be considered by the 
Board at its nex t succeeding meeting.  
(3) The Board shall have power by resolution to modify or cancel any such Ordinance and such 
Ordinance shall from the date of such resolution stand modified accordingly or cancelled, as the case may 
be. 
28. Tribunal of Arbitration. —(1) Any dispute arising out of a contract between the Institute and any 
of its employees shall, at the request of the employee concerned or at the instance of the Institute, be 
referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by the I nstitute, one member 
nominated by the employee and an umpire appointed by the Visitor.  
(2) The decision of the Tribunal of Arbitration shall be final and shall not be questioned in any court.  12 
 (3) No suit or proceeding shall lie in any court in respect of a ny matter which is required by                    
sub-section ( 1) to be referred to the Tribunal of Arbitration.  
(4) The Tribunal of Arbitration shall have power to regulate its own procedure.  
(5) Nothing in any law for the time being in force relating to arbitration shall apply to arbitration 
under this section.  
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
29. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc .—No act of the Institute or Board 
or Senate or any other body set up under this Act or the Statutes, shall  be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution thereof; or  
(b) any defect in the election, nomination or appointment of a person acting as a member thereof; 
or 
(c) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the case.  
30. Sponsored schemes .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, whenever the Institute 
receives funds from any Government, the University Grants Commission or any other agency including 
industry sponsoring a research scheme or a consultancy assignment or a teaching programme or a chaired 
professorship or a scholarship, etc., to be execut ed or endowed at the Institute: — 
(a) the amount received shall be kept by the Institute separately from the Fund of the Institute and 
utilised onl y for the purpose of the scheme; and  
 (b) the staff required to execute the same shall be recruited in accordance with the terms and 
conditions stipulated by the sponsoring organisations:  
Provided that any money remaining unutilised shall be transferred to  the endowment fund created 
under section 20 of this Act.  
31. Power of I nstitute to grant degrees, etc. —The Institute shall have the power to grant degrees, 
diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions under this Act, which shall be equivalent to  such 
corresponding degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions granted by any University 
or Institute established or incorporated under any other law for the time being in force.  
32. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provision or 
give such direction not inconsistent with the purposes of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or 
expedient for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the appointed day.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
  13 
 33. Transitional provisions. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act — 
(a) the Board of Governors of the Society functioning as such immediately before the 
commencement of this Act shall continue to so function until a new Board is constituted for  the 
Institute under this Act, but on the constitution of a new Board under this Act the members of the 
Board holding office before such constitution shall cease to hold office; and  
(b) until the first Statutes and the Ordinances are made under this Act, t he rules and regulations, 
instructions and guidelines of the Society as in force, immediately before the commencement of this 
Act, shall continue to apply to the Institute in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act.  
34. Statutes  and Ordinances to be published in the Official Gazette an d to be laid before 
Parliament. —(1) Every Statute or Ordinance made under this Act shall be published in the Official 
Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute or Ordinance made under this Act shall be laid, as so on as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately foll owing the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the Statute or Ordinance or both Houses agree that the Statute or Ordinance should not be 
made, the Statute or Ordinance shall thereafter have effect on ly in such modified form or be of no effect, 
as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to 
the validity of anything previously done under that Statute or Ordinance.  
(3) The power to make Statutes or Ordinances shall include the power to give retrospective effect 
from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act to Statutes or Ordinances or any of 
them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any Statute or Ordinance so as to preju dicially affect the 
interests of any person to whom such Statutes or Ordinances may be applicable.  
 
--------------------------The Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006--------------------------
 
1 
 THE PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS REGULATORY BOARD ACT, 2006  
_______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Shor t title, extent, commencement and application.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS REGULATORY  BOARD  
3. Establishment and incorporation of the Board.  
4. Qualification s for appointment of Chairperson and other members.  
5. Term of office, conditions of service, etc., of Chairperson and other members.  
6. Powers of Chairperson.  
7. Removal of Chairperson or any other member f rom office.  
8. Meetings of the Board.  
9. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the Board.  
10. Officers and other employees of the Board.  
 
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE BOARD  
11. Function s of the Board.  
12. Powers regarding complaints and resolu tion of disputes by the Board.  
13. Procedure of the Board.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
REGISTRATION AND AUTHORISATION  
14. Register.  
15. Registration of entities.  
16. Authorisation.  
17. Application for authorisation.  
18. Publicity of applications.  
19. Grant of authorisation.  
20. Declaring, laying, buildi ng, etc., of common carrier or contract carrier and city or local natural 
gas distribution network.  
21. Right of first use, etc.  
22. Transportation tariff.  
23. Suspension or cancellation of authorisation.  
 
CHAPTER V  
SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES  
24. Board to settle disputes.   
2 
  
SECTIONS  
25. Filing of complaints.  
26. Power to investigate.  
27. Factors to be taken into account by the Board.  
28. Civil penalty for contravention of directions given by the Board.  
29. Orders passed by Board deemed to be decrees.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
APEALS TO APPELLATE TRIBUNAL  
30. Appell ate Tribunal.  
31. Technical Member (Petroleum and Natural Gas).  
32. Terms and conditions of service of Technical Member (Petroleum and Natural Gas).  
33. Appeals to Appellate Tribunal.  
34. Procedure and powers of the Appellate Tribunal.  
35. Power of Appellate Tribunal to make rules.  
36. Orders passed by Appellate Tribunal to be execut able as a decree.  
37. Appeal to Supreme Court.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
38. Grants by Central Government.  
39. Fund.  
40. Accounts and audit.  
41. Annual report and its laying before Parliament.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
POWER OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  
42. Power of Central Government to issue directions.  
43. Taking over control and management of facilities and business premises of any entity and retail 
outlets in public interest.  
 
CHAPTER IX  
OFFENCES AND PUNISHMENT  
44. Punishment for con travention of directions of the Board.  
45. Penalty for wilful failure to comply with orders o f Appellate Tribunal.  
46. Punishment for unauthorised activities.  
47. Punishment for establishing or operating a liquefied natural gas terminal without registration.  
48. Punishmen t for laying, building, operating or expanding a common carrier or contract carrier 
without authorisation.  
49. Punishment for wilful damages to common carrier or contract carrier.  
50. Offences by companies.  
 
CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
51. Maintenance of data bank and inf ormation.   
3 
  
SECTIONS  
52. Obligation s of entities.  
53. Furnishing of returns, etc., to Central Government.  
54. Chairperson, members, etc., to be public servants.  
55. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
56. Civil courts not to have jurisdiction.  
57. Cognizance of certain offen ces. 
58. Delegation.  
59. Power to remove difficulties.  
60. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
61. Power of Board to make regulations.  
62. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
63. Transitional a rrange ments.  
  
4 
 THE PETROLEUM AND NATURAL  GAS REGULATORY BOARD AC T, 2006  
ACT NO. 19 OF 2006  
[31st March , 2006 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board to 
regulate the refining, processing, storage, transportation, distribution, marketing and sale of 
petroleum, petroleum pro ducts and natural gas excluding production of crude oil and natural 
gas so as to protect the interests of consumers and entities engaged in specified activities 
relating to petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas and to ensure uninterrupted and 
adequ ate supply of petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas in all parts of the country 
and to promote competitive markets and for matters connected t herewith or incidental 
thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -seventh Year of th e Republic of I ndia as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, c ommencement and application .—(1) This Act may be called the Petroleum 
and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such da te1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be constr ued as a reference to the coming 
into force of that provision.  
(4) It applies to refining, processing, storage, transportation, distribution, marketing and sale of 
petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas excluding production of crude oil and natural gas. 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “affiliate code of conduct ” means the code of conduct governing entities engaged in storage, 
transmission, distribution, marketing and sale of natural gas under sub -section ( 1) of section 21;  
(b) “Appellate Tribunal ” means the Appellate Tribunal referred to in section 30;  
(c) “appointed day ” means the date on which the B oard is established under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 3;  
(d) “authorised entity ” means an entity — 
(A) registered  by the Board under section 15 — 
(i) to market any notified petroleum, petroleum products or natural gas, or  
(ii) to establish and operate liquef ied natural gas terminals, or  
(B) authorised  by the Board under section 16 — 
(i)   to lay, build, operate or expan d a common carrier or contract carrier, or  
(ii) to lay, build, operate or expand a city or local natural gas distribution network;  
(e) “auto liquefied petroleum gas ” means a mixture of certain light hydrocarbons derived from 
petroleum, which are gaseous at  normal ambient temperature and atmospheric pressure but may be 
                                                 
1. 1st October, 2007 (except s. 16), vide notification No. G.S.R. 637(E) dated 1st October, 2007, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part  II, sec. 3( ii).   
5 
 condensed to the liquid state at normal ambient temperature by the application of moderate pressure, 
and which conform to such specifications for use as fuel in vehicles, as the Central Govern ment may, 
in consultation with the Bureau of Indian Standards, notify from time to time;  
(f) „„Board” means the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board established under sub -
section ( 1) of section 3;  
(g) “Bureau of Indian Standards ” means the Bureau of Indian Standards established under section 
3 of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 (63 of 1986);  
(h) “Chairperson ” means the Chairperson of the Board appointed under sub -section ( 1) of   
section 4;  
(i) “city or local natural gas distribution network ” means an inter -connected network of gas 
pipelines and the associated equipment used for transporting natural gas from a bulk supply high 
pressure transmission main to the medium pressure distribution grid and subsequently to the service 
pipes supplying na tural gas to domestic, industrial or commercial premises and CNG stations situated 
in a specified geographical area.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, the expressions “high pressure ” and “medium 
pressure” shall mean such pressure as the Central  Government may, by notification, specify to be 
high pressure or, as the case may be, medium pressure;  
(j) “common carrier ” means such pipelines for transportation of petroleum, petroleum products 
and natural gas by more than one entity as the Board may de clare or authorise from time to time on a 
non-discriminatory open access basis under sub -section ( 3) of section 20, but does not i nclude 
pipelines laid to supply — 
(i) petroleum products or natural gas to a specific consumer; or  
(ii) crude oil;  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, a contract carrier shall be t reated as a common 
carrier, if— 
(i) such contract carrier has surplus capacity over and above the firm contracts entered      
into; or  
(ii) the fi rm contract period has expired.  
(k) “CNG statio n” means filling station where one or more dispensing units are provided for sale 
of compressed natural gas;  
(l) “compressed natural gas or CNG ” means natural gas used as fuel for vehicles, typically 
compressed to the pressure ranging from 200 to 250 bars in the gaseous state;  
(m) “contract carrier ” means such pipelines for transportation of petroleum, petroleum products 
and natural gas by more than one entity pursuant to firm contracts for at least one year as may be 
declared or authorised by the Board fro m time to time under sub -section ( 3) of section 20;  
(n) “dealer” means a person, association of persons, firm, company or co -operative society, by 
whatsoever name called or referred to, and appointed by an oil company to purchase, receive, store 
and sell m otor spirit, high speed diesel, superior kerosene oil, auto liquefied petroleum gas or natural 
gas; 
(o) “distributor ” means a person, association of persons, firm, company or co -operative society, 
by whatsoever name called or referred to, and appointed by an oil company to purchase, receive, store 
and sell to consumers liquefied petroleum gas in cylinders;  
(p) “entity” means a person, association of persons, firm, company or co -operative society, by 
whatsoever name called or referred to, other than a dealer  or distributor, and engaged or intending to 
be engaged in refining, processing, storage, transportation, distribution, marketing, import and export 
of petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas including laying of pipelines for transportation of  
6 
 petrol eum, petroleum products and natural gas, or laying, building, operating or expanding city or 
local natural gas distribution network or establishing and operating a liquefied natural gas terminal;  
(q) “exchange of products ” shall mean giving and receiving o f a petroleum product in accordance 
with an agreement entered into by the concerned entities;  
(r) “high speed diesel ” means any hydrocarbon oil (excluding mineral colza oil and turpentine 
substitute), which conforms to such specifications for use as fuel i n compression ignition engines, as 
the Central Government may, in consultation with the Bureau of Indian Standards, notify from time to 
time;  
(s) “kerosene or superior kerosene oil ” means a middle distillate mixture of hydrocarbons which 
conforms to such s pecifications, as the Central Government may, in consultation with the Bureau of 
Indian Standards, notify from time to time;  
(t) “liquefied natural gas terminal ” means the facilities  and infrastructure required to — 
(i) receive liquefied natural gas;  
(ii) store liquefied natural gas;  
(iii) enable r egasification of liquefied natural gas; and  
(iv) transport r egasified liquefied natural gas till the outside bound aries of the facility;  
(u) “liquefied petroleum gas ” means a mixture of light hydrocarbons containin g propane, 
isobutene, normal butane, butylenes, or such other substance which is gaseous at normal ambient 
temperature and atmospheric pressure but may be condensed to liquid state at normal ambient 
temperature by the application of pressure and conforms t o such specifications, as the Central 
Government may, in consultation with the Bureau of Indian Stand ards, notify from time to time;  
(v) “local distribution entity ” means an entity authorised by the Board under section 20 to lay, 
build, operate or expand a  city or local natural gas distribution network;  
(w) “marketing service  obligations ” means obligations — 
(i) to set up marketing infrastructure and retail outlets in remote areas in respect of notified 
petroleum and petroleum products;  
(ii) to maintain mini mum stock of notified petroleum and petroleum products;  
(iii) of a local distribution entity to supply natural gas to consumers; and  
(iv) such other obligations as may be specified by regulations;  
(x) “maximum retail price ” means the maximum price fixed by  an entity at which the petroleum, 
petroleum products and natural gas may be sold to the retail consumers and includes all taxes, cess 
and levies, local or otherwise and freight or commission payable to the dealers;  
(y) “member” means a member of the Board  appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 4 and 
includes the Member (Legal) and the Chairperson;  
(z) “motor spirit ” means any hydrocarbon oil (excluding crude mineral oil) used as fuel in spark 
ignition engines which conforms to such specifications, as t he Central Government may, in 
consultation with the Bureau of Indian Stand ards, notify from time to time;  
(za) “natural gas ” means gas obtained from bore -holes and consisting primari ly of hydrocarbons 
and includes — 
(i) gas in liquid state, namely, liquefie d natural gas and regasified liquefied natural gas,  
(ii) compressed natural gas,  
(iii) gas impo rted through transnational pipe lines, including CNG or liquefied natural gas,  
(iv) gas recovered from gas hydrates as natural gas,   
7 
 (v) methane obtained from coal  seams, namely, coal bed methane,  
but does not include helium occurring in association with such hydrocarbons;  
(zb) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression 
“notified” with its cognate meanings and grammatica l variations, shall be construed accordingly;  
(zc) “notified petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas ” means such petroleum, petroleum 
products and natural gas as the Central Government may notify from time to time, after being 
satisfied that it is ne cessary or expedient so to do for maintaining or increasing their supplies or for 
securing their equitable distribution or ensuring adequate availability;  
(zd) “oil company ” means a company registered under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) and 
includes an association of persons, society or firm, by whatsoever name called or referred to, for 
carrying out an activity relating to petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas;  
(ze) “petroleum ” means any liquid hydrocarbon or mixture of hydrocarbons, and any inflammable 
mixture (liquid, viscous or solid) containing any liquid hydrocarbon, including crude oil and liquefied 
petroleum gas, and the expression „petroleum product ‟ shall mean any product manufactured from 
petroleum;  
(zf) “pipeline access code ” means the code to establish a framework for third party access to 
pipelines under sub -clause ( i) of clause ( e) of section 11;  
(zg) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government  under this Act;  
(zh) “regulations ” means regulations made by  the Board under this Act;  
(zi) “restrictive trade practice ” means a trade practice which has, or may have, the effect of 
preventing, distorting or restricting competition i n any manner and in particular, — 
(i)  which tends to obstruct the flow of capital o r resources into the stream of  production, or  
(ii)  which tends to bring about manipulation of prices, or conditions of delivery or to  affect 
the flow of supplies in the market relating to petroleum, petroleum products or natural gas or 
services in such manner as to impose on the consumers unjustified costs or restrictions;  
(zj) “retail outlet ” means filling station where one or more dispensing pumps have been provided 
for sale of motor spirit, high speed diesel, auto -liquefied petroleum gas or natural ga s and includes 
distributorship for liquefied petroleum gas or dealership for superior kerosene oil or CNG stations;  
(zk) “retail service obligations ” means obligations of dealers and distributors for maintaining 
supplies to consumers throughout the specifi ed working hours and of specified quality, quantity and 
display of maximum retail price of notified petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas including 
CNG and such other obligations, as may be specified by regulations;  
(zl) “rules” means rules made by  the Central Government under this Act;  
(zm) “Secretary ” means the Secretary of the Board;  
(zn) “transportation rate ”, in relation to common carrier or contract carrier or a city or local 
natural gas distribution network, means such rate for moving each un it of petroleum, petroleum 
products or natural gas as may be fixed by regulations.  
CHAPTER II  
PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS REGULATORY BOARD  
3. Establishment a nd incorporation of the Board .—(1)  With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by noti fication, appoint, there shall be established, for the purposes of this Act, a Board 
to be called the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board.  
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, 
both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.   
8 
 (3) The Board shall consist of a Chairperson, a Member (Legal) and three other members to be 
appointed by the Central Government.  
(4) The head office of the Board shall be at New Delhi and regional offices at such places as the 
Board may deem necessary having regard to public interest and magnitude of the work.  
4. Qualification s for appointment of Chairperson and other members .—(1) The Central 
Government shall appoint the Chairperson and other members of the Board from amongst persons of 
eminence in the fields of petroleum and natural gas industry, management, finance, law, admi nistrat ion or 
consumer affairs : 
Provided that no person shall be appointed as Member (Legal) unless he — 
(a) is qualified to be a Judge of a High Court; or  
(b) has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and has held a post in Grade I of that Service 
for at least three years.  
(2) The Central Government shall, for the purposes of selecting the Chairperson and other  members 
of the Board and for preparing a panel of persons to be considered for appointment as the Technical 
Member (Petroleum and Natural Gas) o f the Appellate Tribunal, constitute a  Search Committee 
consisting of — 
(i) Member, Planning Commission in charge of the energy sector -Chairperson;  
(ii) Secretary to the Government of India, Minist ry of Petroleum and Natural Gas -Member;  
(iii) Secretary to t he Government of India, Ministry of Finance, D epartment of Economic Affairs -
Member;  
(iv) Secretary to the Government of India in charge of Commerce, Min istry of Commerce and 
Industry -Member; and  
(v) Secretary to the Government of India, Department of Legal  Affairs, Ministry of Law and 
Justice -Member.  
5. Term of office, conditions of service, etc. of Chairperson and other members .—(1) Before 
appointing any person as the Chairperson or other member, the Central Government shall satisfy itself 
that such person  does not have any financial or other interest which is likely to affect prejudicially his 
functions as Chairperson or such other member.  
(2) The Chairperson and other members shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on 
which they enter upo n their offices or until they attain the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that the Chairperson and other members shall not be eligible for re -appointment.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, appointment of a member as Chai rperson shall not be 
deemed to be re -appointment.  
(3) A person in the service of the Central Government, a State Government or an undertaking, 
corporation or company owned or controlled by the Central Government or a State Government or from 
any other non -Governmental or corporate body shall resign or retire from such service before joining as 
the Chairperson or other member, as the case may be.  
(4) The salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson and t he other members shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson or any other member shall be varied to his disadvantage after appointment.  
(5) The Chairpe rson or other member may resign his office by giving notice thereof in writing to the 
Central Government and on such resignation being accepted, the Chairperson or such other member shall 
be deemed to have vacated his office.  
(6) The Chairperson or any oth er member, upon ceasing  to hold office as such, shall — 
(a) be ineligible for further employment under the Central Government or any State Government; 
and  
9 
 (b) not accept any commercial employment for a period of two years from the date he ceases to 
hold suc h office.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “commercial employment ” means employment in 
any capacity under, or agency of, a person engaged in trading, commercial, industrial or financial 
business in  any field and includes also a director of a company or partner of a firm or setting up practice 
either independently or as partner of a firm or as an advisor or a consultant.  
6. Powers of Chairperson .—The Chairperson shall have the powers of general superintendence and 
directions in the conduct of t he affairs of the Board and shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of 
the Board, exercise and discharge such other powers and functions of the Board, as may be assigned to 
him by the Board.  
7. Removal of Chairperson or  any other member from offi ce.—The Central Government may 
remove from office the Chairpers on or any other member, who — 
(a) has been adjudged as insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Governmen t, involves 
moral turpitude; or  
(c) has be come physically or mentally incapable of acting as a member; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
a member; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office preju dicial to the public 
interest:  
Provided that no Chairperson or other member shall be removed from office under clause ( d) or 
clause ( e) unless the Central Government, after holding an inquiry by any person appointed or authority 
constituted for the purpose  and in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed in this behalf, is 
satisfied that such person ought on such ground or grounds to be removed.  
8. Meetings of the Board .—(1) The Board shal l meet at such times and places,  and shall observe 
such pro cedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at such 
meetings) as may be provided by regulations.  
(2) The Chairperson or, if he is unable to attend a meeting of the Board, the senior -most member 
present, reckoned fr om the date of appointment to the Board, shall preside at the meeting:  
Provided that in case of common date of appointment of members, the member senior in age shall be 
considered as senior to the other members.  
(3) All questions which come up before any m eeting of the Board shall be decided by a majority of 
the members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson or in his 
absence, the person presiding shall  have a second or casting vote.  
(4) All orders and decisions of the  Board shall be authenticated by the Secretary or any other officer 
of the Board duly authorised by the Chairperson in this behalf.  
9. Vacancies, etc., not to invali date proceedings of the Board .—No act or proceeding of the Board 
shall be invalid merely by  reason of— 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Board; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits of the case.  
10. Officers and other employees of t he Board .—(1) The Central Government may, in consultation 
with the Board, appoint a Secretary to exercise and perform such powers and duties, under the control of  
  
10 
 the Chairperson as may be specified by regulations:  
Provided that no such consultation shall be necessary for appointment of the first Secretary of the 
Board.  
(2) The Board may, with the approval of the Central Government, determine the number, nature and 
categories of other officers and employees required to assist the Board in the efficient discharge of its 
functions.  
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of the 
Secretary, the other officers and employees of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(4) The Board may appoint consultants required to assist in the discharge of its functions on such 
terms and conditions as may be determined by regulations.  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE BOARD  
11. Functions of the Board .—The Board shall — 
(a) protect t he interest of consumers by fostering fair trade and competition amongst the entities;  
(b) register entities to — 
(i) market notified petroleum and petroleum products and, subject to the contractual 
obligations of the Central Government, natural gas;  
(ii) establish and operate liquefied natural gas terminals;  
(iii) establish storage facilities for petroleum, petroleum products or natural gas exceeding 
such capacity as may be specified by regulations;  
(c) authorise entities to — 
(i)   lay, build, operate or ex pand a common carrier or contract carrier;  
(ii) lay, build, operate or expand city or local natural gas distribution network;  
(d) declare pipelines as common carrier or contract carrier;  
(e) regulate, by regulations, — 
(i) access to common carrier or contra ct carrier so as to ensure fair trade and competition 
amongst entities and for that purpose specify pipeline access code;  
(ii) transportation rates for common carrier or contract carrier;  
(iii) access to city or local natural gas distribution network so as  to ensure fair trade and 
competition amongst entities as per pipeline access code;  
(f) in respect of notified petroleum, pet roleum products and natural gas — 
(i)  ensure adequate availability;  
(ii) ensure display of information about the maximum retail pri ces fixed by the entity for 
consumers at retail outlets;  
(iii) monitor prices and take corrective measures to prevent restrictive trade practice by the 
entities;  
(iv) secure equitable distribution for petroleum and petroleum products;  
(v) provide, by regul ations, and enforce, retail service obligations for retail outlets and 
marketing service obligations for entities;  
(vi) monitor transportation rates and take corrective action to prevent restrictive trade practice 
by the entities;  
(g) levy fees and other c harges as determined by regulations;   
11 
 (h) maintain a data bank of information on activities relating to petroleum, petroleum products 
and natural gas;  
(i) lay down, by regulations, the technical standards and specifications including safety standards 
in act ivities relating to petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas, including the construction and 
operation of pipeline and infrastructure projects related to downstream petroleum and natural gas 
sector;  
(j) perform such other functions as may be entrusted  to it by the Central Government to carry out 
the provisions of this Act.  
12. Powers regarding complaints and resolution of disputes by the Board .—(1) The B oard shall 
have jurisdiction to — 
(a) adjudicate upon and decide any dispute or matter arising amongs t entities or between an entity 
and any other person on issues relating to refining, processing, storage, transportation, distribution, 
marketing and sale of petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas according to the provisions of 
Chapter V, unless the  parties have agreed for arbitration;  
(b) receive any complaint from any person and conduct any inquiry and investigation connected 
with the activities relating to petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas on contravention of — 
(i) retail service obliga tions;  
(ii) marketing service obligations;  
(iii) display of retail price at retail outlets;  
(iv) terms and conditions subject to which a pipeline has been declared as common carrier or 
contract carrier or access for other entities was allowed to a city or local natural gas distribution 
network, or authorisation has been granted to an entity for laying, building, expanding or 
operating a pipeline as common carrier or contract carrier or authorisation has been granted to an 
entity for laying, building, expand ing or operating a city or local natural gas distribution network;  
(v) any other provision of this Act or the rules or the regulations or orders made thereunder.  
(2) While deciding a complaint under sub -section ( 1), the Board may pass such orders and issue  such 
directions as it deems fit or refer the matter for investigation according to the provisions of Chapter V.  
13. Procedure of the Board .—(1) The Board shall have, for the purposes of discharging its 
functions under this Act, the same powers as are vest ed in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit, in respect of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) subject to the provisions of  sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 
1872), requisitioning any public record or document or a copy of such record or document, from any 
office and production of such documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) issuing commi ssions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  
(e) dismissing an application for default or deciding it, ex parte ; 
(f) setting aside any order of dismissal of any application for default or any order passed by it, ex 
parte ; 
(g) granting interim reli ef; 
(h) reviewing its decision; and  
(i) any other matter which may be prescribed.   
12 
 (2) Every proceeding before the Board shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196, of the Ind ian Penal Code (45 of 
1860) and the Board shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter 
XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(3) The Board shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and subje ct to other provisions of 
this Act and of any rules made thereunder, shall have powers to regulate its own procedure including the 
places at which it shall conduct its business.  
CHAPTER IV  
REGISTRATION AND AUTHORISATION  
14. Register .—(1) For the purposes o f this Act, a register to be called the Petroleum and Natural Gas 
Register shall be kept at the head office of the Board cont aining such details of entities — 
(a) registered for — 
(i) marketing notified petroleum, petroleum products or natural gas, or  
(ii) establishing and operating liquefied natural gas terminals, or  
(iii) establishing storage facilities for petroleum, petroleum products or natural gas  exceeding 
such capacity as may be specified by regulations, or  
(b) authorised for — 
(i) laying, building, o perating or expanding a common carrier, or  
(ii) laying, building, operating or expanding a city or local natural gas distribution network, as 
may be provided by the Board by regulations.  
(2) A copy of any entry in the register purporting to be maintained b y the Board and certified as such 
by an officer authorised by the Board, shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and in all proceedings 
without further proof or production of the original.  
(3) The register shall be open to public inspection at the head  office of the Board.  
(4) Any person may, on application to the Board, and on payment of such fee as may be determined 
by the Board, by regulations, obtain a certified copy of any entry in the register.  
15. Registration of entities .—(1) Every entity desiro us of— 
(a) marketing any notified petroleum or petroleum products or natural gas; or  
(b) establishing or operating a liquefied natural gas terminal; or  
(c) establishing storage facilities for petroleum, petroleum products or natural gas exceeding such 
capacity as may be specified by regulations,  
and fulfilling the eligibility conditions as may be prescribed shall make an application to the Board for its 
registration under this Act:  
Provided that no registration under this Act shall be required for any entit y carrying on any activity 
referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) immediately before the appointed day but shall inform 
the Board about such activity within six months from the appointed day.  
(2) Every application for registration under sub -section ( 1) shall be made in such form and in such 
manner and shall be accompanied by such fee as may be determined by the Board by regulations.  
(3) The Board may, after making such enquiry and subject to such terms and conditions as it may 
specify, grant a certificate of registration to the entity allowing to commence and carry on the activity 
referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c), as the case may be, of sub -section ( 1). 
(4) The Board may, by order, suspend or cancel a certificate of regist ration granted under sub -section 
(3) in such manner as may be determined by regulations:  
Provided that no order under this sub -section shall be made unless the entity concerned has been 
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.   
13 
 16. Authorisation .—No e ntity shall— 
(a) lay, build, operate or expand any pipeline as a common carrier or contract carrier,  
(b) lay, build, operate or expand any city or local natural gas distribution network, without 
obtaining authorisation under this Act:  
Provided that an enti ty,— 
(i) laying, building, operating or expanding any pipeline as common carrier  or contract carrier; or  
(ii) laying, building, operating or expanding any city or local natural gas distribution network,  
immediately before the appointed day shall be deemed  to have such authorisation subject to the 
provisions of this Chapter, but any change in the purpose or usage shall require separate authorisation 
granted by the Board.  
17. Application for authorisation .—(1) An entity which is laying, building, operating o r expanding, 
or which proposes to lay, build, operate or expand, a pipeline as a common carrier or contract carrier shall 
apply in writing to the Board for obtaining an authorisation under this Act:  
Provided that an entity laying, building, operating or ex panding any pipeline as common carrier or 
contract carrier authorised by the Central Government at any time before the appointed day shall furnish 
the particulars of such activities to the Board within six months from the appointed day.  
(2) An entity which  is laying, building, operating or expanding, or which proposes to lay, build, 
operate or expand, a city or local natural gas distribution network shall apply in writing for obtaining an 
authorisation under this Act:  
Provided that an entity laying, buildin g, operating or expanding any city or local natural gas 
distribution network authorised by the Central Government at any time before the appointed day shall 
furnish the particulars of such activities to the Board within six months from the appointed day.  
(3) Every application under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be made in such form and in such 
manner and shall be accompanied with such fee as the Boar d may, by regulations, specify.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act and consistent with the norms and policy guidelines laid 
down by the Central Government, the Board may either reject or accept an application made to it, subject 
to such amendments or conditions, if any, as it may think fit.  
(5)  In the case of refusal or conditional acceptance o f an application, the Board shall record in 
writing the grounds for such rejection or conditional acceptance, as the case may be.  
18. Publicity of applications .—When an application for registration for marketing notified 
petroleum, petroleum products and n atural gas, or for establishing and operating a liquefied natural gas 
terminal, or for establishing storage facilities for petroleum, petroleum products or natural gas exceeding 
such capacity as may be specified by regulations, is accepted whether absolute ly or subject to conditions 
or limitations, the Board shall, as soon as may be, cause such acceptance to be known to the public in 
such form and manner as may be provided by regulations.  
19. Grant of authorisation .—(1) When, either on the basis of an appli cation for authorisation for 
laying, building, operating or expanding a common carrier or contract carrier or for laying, building, 
operating or expanding a city or local natural gas distributi on network is received or on suo motu basis, 
the Board forms an  opinion that it is necessary or expedient to lay, build, operate or expand a common 
carrier or contract carrier between two specified points, or to lay, build, operate or expand a city or local 
natural gas distribution network in a specified geographic ar ea, the Board may give wide publicity of its 
intention to do so and may invite applications from interested parties to lay, build, operate or expand such 
pipelines or city or local natural gas distribution network.  
(2) The Board may select an entity in an objective and transparent manner as specified by r egulations 
for such activities.   
14 
 20. Declaring, laying, building, etc., of common carrier or contract carrier and city or local 
natural gas distribution network .—(1) If the Board is of the opinion that it i s necessary or expedient, to 
declare an existing pipeline for transportation of petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas or an 
existing city or local natural gas distribution network, as a common carrier or contract carrier or to 
regulate or allow acc ess to such pipeline or network, it may give wide publicity of its intention to do so 
and invite objections and suggestions within a specified time from all persons and entities likely to be 
affected by such decision.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the Board shall provide the entity owning, the pipeline or 
network an opportunity of being heard and fix the terms and conditions subject to which the pipeline or 
network may be declared as a common carrier or contract carrier and pass such orders as it  deems fit 
having regard to the public interest, competitive transportation rates and right of first use.  
(3) The Board may, after following the procedure as specified by regulations under section 19 and 
sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2), by notification, — 
(a) decl are a pipeline or city or local natural gas distribution network as a common carrier or 
contract carrier; or  
(b) authorise an entity to lay, build, operate or expand a pipeline as a common carrier or contract 
carrier; or  
(c) allow access to common carrier or contract carrier or city or local natur al gas distribution 
network; or  
(d) authorise an entity to lay, build, operate or expand a city or local natural gas distribution 
network.  
(4) The Board may decide on the period of exclusivity to lay, build, operat e or expand a city or local 
natural gas distribution network for such number of years as it may by order, determine in accordance 
with the principles laid down by the regulations made by it, in a transparent manner while fully protecting 
the consumer inter ests. 
(5) For the purposes of this section, the Board shall be guided by the objectives of promoting 
competition among entities, avoiding infructuous investment, maintaining or increasing supplies or for 
securing equitable distribution or ensuring adequate  availability of petroleum, petroleum products and 
natural gas throughout the country and follow such principles as the Board may, by regulations, determine 
in carrying out its functions under this section.  
21. Right of first use, etc .—(1) The entity layin g, building, operating or expanding a pipeline for 
transportation of petroleum and petroleum products or laying, building, operating or expanding a city or 
local natural gas distribution network shall have right of first use for its own requirement and the  
remaining capacity shall be used amongst entities as the Board may, after issuing a declaration under 
section 20, determine having regard to the needs of fair competition in marketing and availability of 
petroleum and petroleum products throughout the cou ntry: 
Provided that in case of an entity engaged in both marketing of natural gas and laying, building, 
operating or expanding a pipeline for transportation of natural gas on common carrier or contract carrier 
basis, the Board shall require such entities t o comply with the affiliate code of conduct as may be 
specified by regulations and may require such entity to separate the activities of marketing of natural gas 
and the transportation including ownership of the pipeline within such period as may be allowe d by the 
Board and only within the said period, such entity shall have right of first use.  
(2) An entity other than an entity authorised to operate shall pay transportation rate for use of 
common carrier or contract carrier to the entity operating it as an  authorised entity.  
(3) An entity authorised to lay, build, operate or expand a pipeline as common carrier or contract 
carrier or to lay, build, operate or expand a city or local natural gas distribution network shall be entitled 
to institute proceedings b efore the Board to prevent, or to recover damages for, the infringement of any 
right re lating to authorisation.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, “infringement of any right ” means doing of any 
act by any person which interferes with common  carrier or contract carrier or causes prejudice to the 
authorised entity.   
15 
 22. Transportation tariff .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board shall lay down, by 
regulations, the transportation tariffs for common carriers or contract carriers o r city or local natural gas 
distribution network and the manner of determining such tariffs.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the Board shall be g uided by the following, namely: — 
(a) the factors which may encourage competition, efficiency, economic  use of the  resources, 
good perfo rmance and optimum investments;  
(b) safeguard the consumer interest and at the same time recovery of cost of  transportation in a 
reasonable manner;  
(c) the principles rewarding efficiency in performance;  
(d) the connected  infrastructure such as compressors, pumps, metering units, storage and the like 
connected to the common carriers or contract carriers;  
(e) benchmarking against a reference tariff calculated based on cost of service, internal rate of 
return, net present va lue or alternate mode of transport;  
(f) policy of the Central Government applicable to common carrier, contract carrier and city or 
local distribution natural gas network.  
23. Suspension or cancellation of authorisation .—If the Board, on an application of an affected 
party or on its own motion, is satisfied that the entity in favour of which authorisation has been granted 
under section 19 has failed to comply with any conditions of authorisation, it may, after giving an 
opportunity to such entity of being h eard, either suspend the authorisation for such period as the Board 
may think fit or cancel the authorisation:  
Provided that where the Board is of the opinion that an authorised entity persistently acts in a manner 
prejudicial to the interests of consumers , it may take action for the suspension of the authorisation 
immediately subject to the opportunity of hearing being given subsequently, after which action so taken 
may be confirmed or revoked.  
CHAPTER V  
SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES  
24. Board to settle disputes .—(1) Save as otherwise provided for arbitration in the relevant 
agreements between entities or between an entity or any other person, as the case may be, if any dispute 
arises, in respect of matters referred to in sub -section  (2) among entities or between an entity and any 
other person, such dispute shall be decided by a Bench consisting of the Member (Legal) and one or more 
members nominated by the Chairperson:  
Provided that if the members of the Bench differ on any point or points, they shall state the po int or 
points on which they differ and refer the same to a member other than a member of the Bench for hearing 
on such point or points and such point or points shall be decided according  to the opinion of that member.  
(2) The Bench constituted under sub -section ( 1) shall exercise, on and from the appointed day, all 
such jurisdiction, powers and authority as were exercisable by a civil c ourt on any matter relating to — 
(a) refining, processing, storage, transportation and distribution of petroleum, petroleum products 
and natural gas by the entities;  
(b) marketing and sale of petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas including the quality of 
service and security of supply to the consumers by the entities; and  
(c) registration or authorisation issued by the Board under section 15 or  section 19.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), the Board 
shall have the power to decide matters referred to in sub -section ( 2) on or after the appointed day.  
  
16 
 25. Filing of co mplaints .—(1) A complaint may be filed before the Board by any person in respect 
of matters relating to entities or between entities on any matter arising out  of the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that the complaints of individual consumers maintainable before a consumer disputes 
redress al forum under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (68 of 1986) shall not be taken up by the Board 
but shall be heard and disposed of by such forum.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression “consumer  disputes redress al 
forum” shall mean the district forum, State Commission or, the National Commission, as the case may be, 
constituted under the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (68 of 1986).  
(2) Every complaint made under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed within sixty days from the date on 
which any act or conduct constituting a contravention took place and shall be in such form and shall be 
accompanied by such fee as may be provided by regulations:  
Provided that the Board may entertain a comp laint after the expiry of the said period if it is satisfied 
that there was sufficient cause for not filing the complaint within that period.  
(3) On receipt of a complaint under sub -section ( 1), the Board shall decide within thirty days whether 
there is a prima facie case against the entity or entities concerned and may either conduct enquiry on its 
own or refer the matter for investigation under this Chapter, to an Investigating Officer having 
jurisdiction; and, where the matter is referred to such Investi gating Officer, on receipt of a report from 
such Investigating Officer, the Board may, hear and dispose of the complaint as a dispute if it falls under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 27 and in any other case, it may pass such orders and issue such directions a s it 
deems fit.  
(4) Where the Central Government considers that a matter arising out of the provisions of this Act is 
required to be investigated, it shall make a reference to the Board and the provisions of this Act shall 
apply as if such reference were a  complaint made to the Board.  
26. Power to investigate .—(1) For the purposes of provisions of section 25, the Board shall, subject 
to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), appoint by general or special order, an officer of the Board as an 
Investigating Office r for holding an investigation in the  manner provided by regulations : 
Provided that where the Board considers it necessary that the matter should be investigated by any 
investigating agency of the State or Central Government including the special police fo rce constituted 
under section 2 of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946  (25 of 1946) , the Board may request 
the concerned Gove rnment for directing or authoris ing such agency to investigate and the agency so 
directed or authorised shall, then, b e competent to exercise the powers and to discharge the duties of an 
Invest igating Officer under this Act.  
(2) No person shall be appointed as an Investigating Officer unless he possesses such qualifications 
and experience as may be determined by the Board  by regulations.  
(3) Where more than one Investigating Officer is appointed, the Board shall specify, by order, the 
matters and the local limits of jurisdiction with respect to which each such officer shall exercise his 
jurisdiction.  
27. Factors to be take n into account by the Board .—The Board shall, while deciding a dispute 
under this Chapter, have due regard to the provisions of this Act and to  the following factors, namely: — 
(a) the amount of disproportionate gain made or unfair advantage derived, wherev er quantifiable, 
as a result of the default;  
(b) the amount of loss caused to an entity as a result of the default;  
(c) the repetitive nature of the default.  
28. Civil penalty for contravention of directions given by the Board .—In case any complaint is 
filed before the Board by any person or if the Board is satisfied that any person has contravened a 
direction issued by the Board under this Act to provide access to, or to adhere to the transportation rate in 
respect of a common carrier,  or to display maximu m retail price at retail outlets, or violates the terms and  
17 
 conditions subject to which registration or authorisation has been granted under section 15 or section 19 
or the retail service obligations or marketing service obligations, or does not furnish in formation, 
document, return of report required by the Board, it may, after giving such person an opportunity of being 
heard in the matter, by order in writing, direct that, without prejudice to any other penalty to which he 
may be liable under this Act, su ch person shall pay, by way of civil penalty an amount which shall not 
exceed one crore rupees for each contravention and in case of a continuing failure with additional penalty 
which may extend to ten lakh rupees for every day during which the failure con tinues after contravention 
of the first such direction:  
Provided that in the case of a complaint on restrictive trade practice, the amount of civil penalty may 
extend to five times the unfair gains made by the entity or ten crore rupees, whichever is highe r. 
29. Orders passed by Board deemed to be decrees .—Every order made by the Board under this 
Act shall, on a certificate issued by an officer of the Board, shall be executable in the same manner as if it  
were a decree of a civil court : 
Provided that where an appeal lies against an order of the Board and no appeal is preferred then the 
order of the Board shall be deemed to be a final decree under this section on the expiry of the period 
allowed for preferring an appeal against such order before the Appellate  Tribunal.  
CHAPTER VI  
APPEALS TO APPELLATE TRIBUNAL  
30. Appellate Tribunal .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal 
established under section 110 of the Electricity Act, 2003 (36 of 2003) shall be the Appellate Tribunal for 
the pu rposes of this Act and the said Appellate Tribunal shall exercise the jurisdiction, powers and 
authority conferred on it by or under this Act:  
Provided that the Technical Member of the Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of this Act shall be 
called the Tec hnical Member (Petroleum and Natural Gas) and shall have the qualifications specified in 
sub-section  (2) of section 31.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Electricity Act, 2003 (36 of 2003), the Central 
Government may, for the purposes of this A ct, appoint one or more Technical Members (Petroleum and 
Natural Gas) on the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity or designate a Technical Member of the said 
Tribunal having the qualifications specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 31 and when a Technical 
Member (Petroleum and Natural Gas) is appointed, he shall be in addition to the three other members 
appointed under the said Act.  
31. Technical Member (Petroleum and Natural Gas) .—(1) The Technical Member (Petroleum and 
Natural Gas) shall be appointed from the panel prepared by the Search Committee constituted under sub -
section ( 2) of section 4.  
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Technical Member (Petroleum and Natural 
Gas) of t he Appellate Tribunal unless he — 
(i) is, or has been, a Sec retary for at least one year in the Ministry or Department of the Central 
Government having adequate experience in energy sector, especially in matters relating to Petroleum 
and Natural Gas sector; or  
(ii) is, or has been, a person of ability and standing,  having adequate knowledge or experience in 
dealing with matters relating to exploration, production, transmission pipelines, marketing or 
regulation of petroleum, petroleum products or natural gas, economics, commerce, law or 
management.  
32. Terms and con ditions of service of Technical Member (Petroleum and Natural Gas) .—The 
term of office, the salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of the 
Technical Member (Petroleum and Natural Gas) shall be the same as applicable  to the other members of 
the Appellate Tribunal.   
18 
 33. Appeals to Appellate Tribunal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order or decision made by the 
Board under this Act may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal:  
Provided that any person preferring an app eal against an order or decision of the Board levying any 
penalty shall, while filing the appeal, deposit the amount of such penalty:  
Provided further that where in any particular case, the Appellate Tribunal is of the opinion that 
deposit of such penalty would cause undue hardship to such person, it may dispense with such deposit 
subject to such conditions as it may deem fit to impose so as to safeguard the realisation of penalty.  
(2) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed within a period of thi rty days from the date on 
which a copy of the direction or order of decision made by the Board is received by the aggrieved person 
and it shall be in such form, verified in such manner and be accompanied by such fee as may be 
prescribed:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period.  
(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the Appellate Tribuna l may, after giving the parties 
an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit.  
(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the parties to the appeal and 
to the Board.  
(5) The appeal filed under sub -section ( 1) shall be dealt with by the Appellate Tribunal as 
expeditiously as possible and endeavor shall be made by it to dispose of the appeal finally within ninety 
days from  the date of receipt of appeal:  
Provided that where any such appeal could not be d isposed of within the said period of ninety days, 
the Appellate Tribunal shall record its reasons in writing for not disposing of the appeal within the said 
period.  
(6) The Appellate Tribunal may, for the purpose of examining the legality or propriety or c orrectness 
of any order or decision of the Board referred to in the appeal filed under sub -section ( 1), either on its 
own motion or otherwise, call for the records relevant to disposing of such appeal and make such orders 
as it thinks fit.  
34. Procedure an d powers of the Appellate Tribunal .—The provisions of sections 120 to 124 
(both inclusive) of the Electricity Act, 2003 (36 of 2003) shall mutatis mutandis  apply to the Appellate 
Tribunal in the discharge of its functions under this Act as they apply to it  in the discharge of its functions 
under the Electricity Act, 2003.  
35. Power of App ellate Tribunal to make rules .—The Appellate Tribunal may, by notification, 
make rules consistent with the provisions of this Act as to the conduct and procedure in respect  of all 
proceedings before it under this Act.  
36. Orders passed by Appellate Tribunal to be executable as a decree .—(1) Every order made by 
the Appellate Tribunal under this Act shall be executable by the Appellate Tribunal as a decree of a civil 
court, an d for this purpose, the Appellate Tribunal shall have all the powers of a civil court.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Appellate Tribunal may transmit any 
order made by it to a civil court having jurisdiction and such civil c ourt shall execute the order as if it 
were a decree made by that court.  
37. Appeal to Supreme Court .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) or in any other law, an appeal shall lie against any order, not bei ng an 
interlocutory order, of the Appellate Tribunal to the Supreme Court on one or more of the grounds 
specifi ed in section 100 of that Code.  
(2) No appeal shall lie against any decision or order made by the Appellate Tribunal with the consent 
of the part ies.  
19 
 (3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of ninety days from the date of 
the decision or order appealed against:  
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of ninety 
days,  if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal in 
time.  
CHAPTER VII  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
38. Grants by Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by  law in this behalf, make to the Board grants of such sums of money as are required to 
pay salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and the other members and the administrative 
expenses including the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to t he officers and employees of the 
Board.  
39. Fund .—(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Petroleum and Natural Gas 
Regulatory Board Fund and there shall be credited thereto — 
(i)  all grants, fees, penalties and charges receive d by the Board  under this Act;  
(ii) all sums received by the Board from such other sources as may be approved by the Central 
Government.  
(2) The Fund shall be applie d for making payments towards — 
(i) the salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and other membe rs and the 
administrative expenses including the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the officers and 
employees of the Board;  
(ii) the expenses incurred or to be incurred in carrying out the provisions of this  Act.  
(3) The Central Government shal l— 
(i) constitute a committee consisting of such persons as it thinks fit to recommend to that 
Government the budgetary requirements of the Board for salaries, allowan ces and all other expenses; 
and 
(ii) fix the budgetary ceiling of the Board on the basis of the recommendations of the committee.  
40. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government in consultation  with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India at 
such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall  be payable by the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the decisions of the Board taken 
in the discharge of its functions under this Act, being matters appealable to the Appellate Tribunal, shall 
not be subject to audit under this section.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any other person appointed by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Board shall have the same rights and privileges and 
authority in connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right 
to demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and 
inspection of offices of the Board.  
(4) The ac counts of the Board as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall caus e the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament.   
20 
 41. Annual report and  its laying before Parliament .—(1) The Board shall prepare once every year 
in such form and at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report giving a summary of its activities 
including information relating to the proceedings and policies during the previous years and such report 
shall also contain statements of annual accounts of the Board.  
(2) A copy of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government and the Central Gov ernment 
shall cause such report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, b efore each House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER VIII  
POWER OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  
42. Power of Central G overnment to issue directions .—(1) The Central Government may, from 
time to time, by writing issue to the Board such directions as it may think necessary in the interest of the 
sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States or public 
order.  
(2) Without prejudice to the foregoi ng provision, the Central Government may, if it finds necessary or 
expedient so to do in public interest or for maintaining or increasing supplies of petroleum, petroleum 
products or natural gas or all or any of them or for securing their equitable distrib ution and ensuring 
adequate availability, issue policy directives to the Board in writing and such policy directives shall be 
binding upon the Board:  
Provided that no such directive shall relate to any day-to-day affairs of the Board : 
Provided further that  the Board shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity of expressing its 
views before any directive is issued under this sub -section.  
(3) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not shall be final.  
43. Taking  over control and management of facilities and business premises of any entity and 
retail outlets in public interest .—(1) In the event of war or natural calamity or such other similar 
circumstances leading to disruption of supply of petroleum, petroleum pr oducts or natural gas, the Central 
Government may, for ensuring the continuous supply of petroleum, petroleum products or natural gas, by 
notification, either take over the control and management of any storage site, facilities and business 
premises of any  entity and retail outlets or suspend its operations or entrust, to any agency of the Central 
or State Government for such time and manage it in such manner, as may be  specified in that notification : 
Provided that the affected entities shall be given an op portunity of being heard before issuing orders 
to take over the control and management of retail outlets and other business premises:  
Provided further that in case of any urgency or in cases where the circumstances do not permit 
serving of notice for want of sufficient time or otherwise upon the entity against whom the order is 
directed, the opportunity of hearing may be dispensed with in public interest in order to maintain the 
uninterrupted supply of petroleum, petroleum products or natural gas for a spec ified period.  
(2) The collector of the revenue district in which the property referred to in the notification issued 
under sub -section ( 1) is situated shall determine the amount of compensation payable for taking over of 
the property.  
(3) The form and mann er in which an application for claiming compensation under this section shall 
be made, the procedure for determining the compensation and the time within which such compensation 
shall be payable, shall be such as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER IX  
OFFENCES AND PUNI SHMENT  
44. Punishment for contraventi on of directions of the Board .—If a person contravenes the 
directions of the Board, such person shall be punishable with fine which may extend to twenty -five crore 
rupees and in case of continuing contravention with  additional fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees 
for every day during which the contravention continues.   
21 
 45. Penalty for wilful failure to comply wit h orders of Appellate Tribunal .—If any person 
willfully fails to comply with the order of the Appellate  Tribunal, he shall be punishable with fine which 
may extend to one crore rupees and in case of a second or subsequent offence with fine which may extend 
to two crore rupees and in the case of continuing contravention with additional fine which may extend to 
twenty lakh rupees for every day during which such default continues.  
46. Punishmen t for unauthori sed activities .—If any person, being an entity, markets any notified 
petroleum, petroleum products or natural gas without a valid registration, or authoris ation such person 
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to 
twenty -five crore rupees or with both, and in case of continuing contravention with additional fine which 
may extend to ten lakh rupees  for every day during which the contravention continues.  
47. Punishment for establishing or operating a liquefied natural gas terminal without 
registration .—If a person establishes or operates a liquefied natural gas terminal without registration as 
requir ed under section 15, such person shall be liable for punishment with an imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three years or penalty of twenty -five crore rupees or with both, and in case of 
continuing contravention with additional fine which may exte nd to ten lakh rupees for every day during 
which the contravention continues.  
48. Punishment for laying, building, operating or expanding a common carrier or contract 
carrier without authori sation .—If a person lays, builds, operates or expands a common car rier or 
contract carrier or a city or local natural gas distribution network without obtaining authorisation required 
under section 19, such person shall be liable for punishment with an imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years or penalty of  twenty -five crore rupees or with both, and in case of continuing 
contravention with additional fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees for every day during which the 
contravention continues.  
49. Punishment for wilful damages to common carrier or contract  carrier .—Every person who 
willfully removes, destroys or damages any pipeline or city or local natural gas distribution network or 
other work of the common carrier or contract carrier for supplying petroleum, petroleum products or 
natural gas shall for ea ch such offence be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three years 
or with fine which may extend to twenty -five crore rupees or with both, and, in case of continuing 
contravention with additional fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees for ev ery day during which such 
contravention continues.  
50. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any s uch person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he has exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved `that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or othe r 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
 
  
22 
 CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
51. Maintenance  of data bank and information .—(1) The Board shall maintain a data bank and 
information system relating to activities of entities dealing with petroleum, petroleum products and 
natural gas in such form and manner as may be provided by regulations.  
(2) The Board shall have power to verify the data supplied by the en tities and appoint any person or 
persons for the purpose and take such measures as it may consider necessary.  
52. Obligations of  entities .—(1) Every entity shall — 
(a) maintain such documentary records as may be specified by the Board by regulations;  
(b) allow inspection of such facilities and documentary records, as may be specified by the Board, 
by any person authorised by the Board;  
(c) commence operation of activities for which authorisation has been granted within such period 
as may be specified by the Board in the document of authorisation;  
(d) register— 
(i) agreements with the Board relating to use of pipelines for supply of petroleum, petrole um 
products and natural gas; or  
(ii) any other document which the Board may determine by regulations;  
(e) compl y with marketing service obligations and retail service obligations.  
(2) The Board may call for any information from any entity including information which is 
considered necessary for ensuring transparency or ascertaining true ownership of the entity.  
(3) The Board or any officer authorised by the Board shall have the power to inspect and obtain 
information, wherever necessary, from the entities.  
(4) For the effective enforcement of the terms and conditions of authorisation, the Board or any 
officer authori sed by it for that purpose, shall have all the powers of an inspecting officer as provided 
under section 209A of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).  
(5) It shall be the duty of every entity to carry out the directions of the Board given under this section . 
(6) The Board shall maintain confidentiality in respect of any information and record received by it 
from the entities and shall not disclose information contained therein to any person or authority except on 
the grounds of public interest.  
53. Furnishin g of returns , etc., to Central Government .—The Board shall furnish to the Central 
Government at such time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed or as the Central 
Government may direct, such returns and statements and such particulars in regard t o any matter in 
connection with proposed or existing activities under this Act, as the Central Government ma y, from time 
to time, require.  
54. Chairperson, members , etc., to be public servants .—The Chairperson, Members, Officers and 
other employees of the Board and Technical Member (Petroleum and Natural Gas) of the Appellate 
Tribunal shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this 
Act, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal  Code (45 of 1860).  
55. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government, Board, Technical Authority or Appellate Tribunal or any officer of 
the Central Government or any Chai rperson, Member, officer or other employee of the Board or 
Technical Member (Petroleum and Natural Gas) of the Appellate Tribunal for anything which is in good 
faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.  
  
23 
 56. Civil co urts not to have jurisdiction .—No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit 
or proceeding in respect of any matter which the Board or the Appellate Tribunal is empowered by or 
under this Act to determine, and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect 
of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act.  
57. C ognizance of certain offences .—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable 
under Chapte r IX save on a complaint made by the Board or by any investigating agency directed by the 
Central Government.  
(2) No court inferior to that of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or of a Chief Judicial Magistrate shall 
try any offence punishable under  Chapter IX. 
(3) Every offence punishable under sections 44, 45, 46 and 47 shall be cognizable.  
58. De legation .—The Board may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to any member or 
officer of the Board subject to such conditions, if any, as may be speci fied in the order, such of its powers 
and functions under this Act (except the power to settle a dispute under Chapter VI and to make 
regulations under section 61), as it may deem necessary.  
59. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in  giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as it may deem necessa ry for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that  no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
60. Power of Cen tral Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any  of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the salaries and allowances payable to and the other conditions of service of the Chairperson 
and the other members under sub-section  (4) of section 5;  
(b) the procedure for appointment of any person or constitution of any authority and conducting 
inquiry under section 7;  
(c) the salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of the 
Secretary, officers and other employees of the Board, under sub -section ( 3) of section 10;  
(d) any othe r matter in respect of which the Board may exercise the powers of a civil court under 
clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of section 13;  
(e) the eligibility conditions which an entity shall fulfill for registration under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 15;  
(f) the fo rm of appeal and the manner of verifying such form, and the fee which shall accompany 
such form, under sub -section ( 2) of section 33;  
(g) the manner in which the accounts of the Board shall be maintained under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 40;  
(h) the time an d manner in which the annual report of the Board shall be prepared under                  
sub-section ( 1) of section 41;  
(i) the form and manner in which applications for claiming compensation shall be made, the 
procedure for determining the compensation a nd the time within which such compensation shall be 
payable, under sub -section ( 3) of section 43;  
(j) the time and manner in which returns and statements are to be furnished by the Board to the 
Central Government under section 53;   
24 
 (k) any other matter whic h is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to 
be made, by rules.  
61. Power of Board to make r egulations .—(1) The Board may, by notification, make regulations 
consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out th e provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the time and places of meetings of the Board and the procedure ( including quorum necessary 
for the transaction of business) to be followed at such meetings under sub -section ( 1) of section 8;  
(b) the powers and duties of the Secretary under sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(c) the terms and conditions of the consultants appointed under sub-section  (4) of section 10;  
(d) the capacity of storage facilities for petroleum, petroleum products or natural gas requiring 
registration under sub -clause  (iii) of clause ( b) of section 11;  
(e) regulating open access to and transportati on rate for the common carrier or contract carrier or 
city or local natural gas distribution network and other matters referred to in clause ( e) of section 11;  
(f) marketing service obligations for entities and retail service obligations for retail outlets  under 
sub-clause  (v) of clause  (f) of section 11;  
(g) levy of fees and other charges under clause ( g) of section 11;  
(h) the technical standards and specifications including safety standards in activities relating to 
petroleum, petroleum products and natu ral gas under clause ( i) of section 11;  
(i) the procedure to be followed by the Board including the places at which it shall conduct its 
business under sub -section ( 3) of section 13;  
(j) the manner of maintaining the Petroleum and Natural Gas Register unde r sub -section ( 1) of 
section 14;  
(k) the form and manner of making application for obtaining certified copy of any entry in the 
register and the fee which shall accompany such application, under sub -section ( 4) of section 14;  
(l) the form and manner in whi ch an application under sub -section  (1) of section 15 shall be made 
and the fee which shall accompany such application under sub -section ( 2) of section 15;  
(m) the manner by which a certificate of registration granted under sub -section ( 3) of section 15 
may be suspended or cancelled under sub -section ( 4) of section 15;  
(n) the form and manner in which an application under sub -section  (1) or sub -section ( 2) of 
section 17 shall be made and the fee which shall accompany such application under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 17;  
(o) the form and manner in which publicity of acceptance of applications for registration shall be 
made under section 18;  
(p) the manner of selection of an entity under sub -section ( 2) of section 19;  
(q) the principles for determining the num ber of years for which a city or local natural gas 
distribution network shall be excluded from the purview of a common carrier or contract carrier under 
sub-section ( 4) of section 20;  
(r) the guiding principles to be followed by the Board and the objective s for declaring, or 
authorising to lay, build, operate or expand a common carrier or contract carrier for declaring, or 
authorising to lay, build, operate or expand a city or local natural gas distribution network, under           
sub-section ( 5) of sectio n 20;  
(s) the affiliate code of conduct under which the entities are required to comply with under the 
proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 21;   
25 
 (t) the transportation tariffs for common carriers or contract carriers or city or local natural gas 
distributi on network and the manner of determining such tariffs under sub -section ( 1) of section 22;  
(u) the form in which a complaint may be made and the fee which shall accompany such 
complaint, under sub -section ( 2) of section 25;  
(v) the manner of holding an inv estigation by an Investigating Officer under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 26;  
(w) the qualifications and experience which any person for appointment as an Investigating 
Officer shall possess, under sub-section  (2) of section 26;  
(x) the form and manner of ma intaining data bank and information system by the Board under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 51;  
(y) maintenance of documentary records by an entity, under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 52;  
(z) any other type of documents which are to be registered with the Board under sub -clause ( ii) of 
clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 52;  
(za) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations or in respect of 
which provision is to be or may be made by regulations.  
62. Rules and r egulations  to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule made by the Central 
Government and every regulation made by the Board under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total  period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modificatio n in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should 
not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.  
63. Transitional arrangements .—(1) Where, before the commencement of this Act, an agreement 
or agreements have been entered into between one oil company and another for the purpose of sharing of 
petroleum products or sharing of infrastructure facilities among the oil companies and such agreements 
have been approved by the Central Government, the Board may monitor the implementation of such 
agreements for the transition period.  
(2) The Board shall monitor setting up of dealerships and distributorships of motor spirit, high speed 
diesel, superior kerosene oil, liquefied petroleum gas and CNG stations for natural gas during transition 
period by the  entities without encroaching on the retail network of the existing entities.  
Explanation I .—For the purposes of this section, the expression “transition period ” shall mean a 
period of three years from the date of commencement of this Act.  
Explanation II .—For the purposes of this section, “infrastructure facilities ” shall mean facilities at 
ports, refineries, terminals, depots and aviation fuelling stations including hydrant lines and shall include 
loading and unloading facilities.  
Explanation III .—For the purposes of this section “encroaching ” includes taking over of retail outlet 
of one entity by another.  
_____________  
--------------------------The Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006--------------------------
1 
 THE PONDICHERRY (ALTERATION OF NAME) ACT, 2006  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Alteration of name of the Union territory of Pondicherry . 
4. Amendment of Part VIII of the Constitution . 
5. Amendment of First Schedule to the Constitution . 
6. Amendment of Fourth Schedule to the Constitution . 
7. Amendment of section 2 of Act 20 of 1963 . 
8. Power to adapt laws . 
9. Power to construe laws . 
10. Legal proceedings . 
 
  2 
 THE PONDICHERRY (ALTERATION OF NAME) ACT, 2006  
ACT NO. 44 OF 2006  
[13th September, 2006 .] 
An Act to alter the name of the Union territory of Pondicherry.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Pondicherry (Alteration of 
Name) Act, 2006 . 
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification i n the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires ,— 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date appointed under sub -section ( 2) of section 1 for the coming 
into force of this Act;  
(b) “appropriate Government ” means the Central Government, and as respects a law relating to a 
matter enumerated in the State List or the Concurrent List in  the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution 
in so far as any such matter is applicable in relation to the Union territory of Puducherry, also the 
administrator of the Union territory of Puducherry;  
(c) “law” includes any enactment, Ordinance, regulation, ord er, bye -law, rule, scheme, 
notification or other instrument having the force of law in the whole or any part of the Union territory 
of Pondicherry.  
3. Alteration of name of the Union territory of Pondicherry .—As from the appointed day, the 
Union territo ry of Pondicherry shall be known as the Union territory of Puducherry.  
4. Amendment of Part VIII of the Constitution .—In Part VIII of the Constitution, for the word 
“Pondicherry ”, wherever it occurs, the word “Puducherry ” shall be substituted.  
5. Amendment of First Schedule to the Constitution .—In the First Schedule to the Constitution, 
under the heading “II. THE UNION TERRITORIES ”, in entry 6, under the column “Name”, for the word 
“Pondicherry ”, the word “Puducherry ” shall be substituted.  
6. Amendment of Fo urth Schedule to the Constitution .—In the Fourth Schedule to the 
Constitution, under the heading “TABLE”, in entry 30, in the second column, for the word “Pondicherry ” 
the word “Puducherry ” shall be substituted.  
7. Amendment of section 2 of Act 20 of 1963 .—In the Government  of Union Territories Act, 1963, 
in section 2, in sub -section ( 1), in clause ( h), for the word  “Pondicherry ”, the word “Puducherry ” shall be 
substituted.  
8. Power to adapt laws .—(1) For the purpose of giving effect to the alteration of the name of the 
Union territory of Pondicherry by section 3, the appropriate Government may, before the expiration of 
one year from the appointed day, by order, make such adaptations and modifications of any law made 
before the appointed day, whether by wa y of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and 
thereupon every such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to prevent Parliament or Legislative Assembly of  the 
Union territory of Puducherry or other competent authority from repealing or amending any law adapted 
or modified by the appropriate Government under the said sub -section.  
9. Power to construe laws .—Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient pr ovision has been 
made under section 8 for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal or 
authority, required or empowered to enforce such law, may cons true the law in such manner, without 
                                                           
1. 1st October, 2006, vide notification No. S.O. 1627(E) , dated, 28th September, 2006, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part 
II, sec. 3( ii). 3 
 affecting the substance, as may be ne cessary or proper in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or 
authority.  
10. Legal proceedings .—Where immediately before the appointed day any legal proceedings are 
pending to which the administrator of the Union territory of Pondicherry is a par ty, or the Union of India 
represented by the said administrator is a party, then, for the purposes of those proceedings,  any reference 
to the administrator of the Union territory of Pondicherry shall be construed as a reference to the 
administrator of the Union territory of Puducherry.  
_____  
--------------------------The Produce Cess Laws (Abolition) Act, 2006--------------------------
 
1 
 THE PRODUCE CESS LAWS (ABOLITION) ACT, 2006  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Repeal of Act 27 of 1940 . 
3. Repeal of Act 15 of 1966 . 
4. Savings . 
5. Collection and payment of arrears of duties . 
 
   
2 
 THE PRODUCE CESS LAWS (ABOLITION) ACT, 2006  
ACT NO. 46 OF 2006  
[25th September,  2006.]  
An Act to repeal the Agricultural Produce Cess Act, 1940 and the Produce Cess Act, 1966.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Produce Cess Laws (Abolition) Act, 2006.  
2. Repeal  of Act  27 of 1940 .—The Agric ultural Produce Cess Act, 1940  is hereby repealed.  
3. Repeal  of Act  15 of 1966 .—The Produce Cess Act, 1966 is hereby repealed.  
4. Savings .—(1) The  repeal by this Act of any enactment shall not, — 
(a) affect any other enactment in which the repealed enactment has been applied, incorporated or 
referred to;  
(b) affect the validity, invalidity, effect or consequences of anything already done or suffered,  or 
any right, title, obligation or liability already acquired, accrued or incurred or any remedy or 
proceeding in respect thereof, or any release or discharge of or from any debt, penalty, obligation, 
liability, claim or demand, or any indemnity already g ranted, or the proof of any past act or thing;  
(c) affect any principle or rule of law, or established jurisdiction, form or course of pleading, 
practice or procedure, or existing usage, custom, privilege, restriction, exemption, office or 
appointment, not withstanding that the same respectively may have been in any manner affirmed or 
recognised or derived by, in or from any enactment hereby repealed;  
(d) revive or restore any jurisdiction, office, custom, liability, right, title, privilege, restriction, 
exemption, usage, practice, procedure or other matter or thing not now existing or in force.  
(2) The mention of particular matters in sub -section ( 1) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the 
general application of section 6 o f the General Clauses Act, 1897  (10 of 1897) , with regard to the effect of 
repeals.  
5. Collection and payment of arrears of duties .—Notwithstanding the repeal of the enactments 
specified in section 2 and section 3, the proceeds of duties levied under the said enactments immediately 
preceding the date on which the Produce Cess Laws (Abolition) Bill, 2006 receive s the assent of the 
President, — 
(i) if collected by the co llecting agencies but not paid into the Reserve Bank of India;  and 
(ii) if not collected by the collecting agencies,  
shall be paid or as the case may be, collected and paid into the Reserve Bank of India for being credited to 
the Cons olidated Fund of India.  
_____________  
--------------------------The Union Duties of Excise (Electricity) Distribution Repeal Act, 2006--------------------------
THE UNION DUTIES OF EXCISE (ELECTRICITY) DISTRIBUTION  
REPEAL ACT, 2006  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Repeal of Act 14 of 1980.  
3. Savings.  
 
  THE UNION DUTIES OF EXCISE (ELECTRICITY) DISTRIBUTION  
REPEAL ACT, 2006  
ACT NO. 30 OF 2006  
[13th July , 2006.]  
An Act to repeal the Union Duties of Excise (Electricity) Distribution Act, 1980.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Union Duties of Excise (Electricity) Distribution Repeal 
Act, 2006.  
2. Repeal of Act 14 of 1980 .—The Union Duties of Excise (Electricity) Distribution Act, 1980 is 
hereby repealed.  
3. Savings .—(1)The repeal by this Act of the repealed enactment shall not affect any other enactment 
in which the repealed enactment has been applied, incorporated or referred to;  
and this Act shall not affect the validity, invalidity, effect or consequences of anything already done 
or suffered, or any right, title, obligation or liabi lity already acquired, accrued or incurred, or any 
remedy or proceedings in respect thereof, or any release or discharge of or from any debt, penalty, 
obligation, liability, claim or demand, or any indemnity already granted, or the proof of any past act 
or thing;  
nor shall this Act affect any principle or rule of law, or established jurisdiction, form or course of 
pleading, practice or procedure, or existing usage, custom, privilege, restriction, exemption, office or 
appointment, notwithstanding that the sa me respectively may have been in  any manner affirmed or 
recognis ed or derived by, in or from the enactment hereby repealed;  
nor shall the repeal by this Act of the enactment revive or restore any jurisdiction, office, custom, 
liability, right, title, privi lege, restriction, exemption, usage, practice, procedure or other matter or thing 
not now existing or in force.  
(2) Sub-section ( 1) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the 
General Clauses Act, 1897  (10 of 1897)  with regard to the effect of repe al of this Act.  
_____  
--------------------------The Uttaranchal (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006--------------------------
1 
 THE UTTARANCHAL (ALTERATION OF NAME) ACT , 2006  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______ __ 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Alteration of name of the State of Uttaranchal . 
4. Amendment of First Schedule to the Constitution . 
5. Amendment of Fourth Schedule to the Constitution.  
6. Power to adapt laws . 
7. Power to construe laws . 
8. Legal proceedings . 
 
 
  2 
 THE UTTARANCHAL (ALTERATION OF NAME) ACT , 2006  
ACT NO. 52 OF 2006  
[21st December, 2006.]  
An Act to alter the name of the State of Uttaranchal.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Uttaranchal (Alteration of 
Name) Act, 2006 . 
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a)  “appointed day ” means the date appointed under sub -section ( 2) of section 1 for the coming 
into forc e of this Act;  
(b) “appropriate Government ” means, as respects a law relating to a matter enumerated in List I 
in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, the Central Government, and as respects any other law, 
the State Government;  
(c) “law” includes any enactment, Ordinance, regulation, order, bye -law, rule, scheme, 
notification or other instrument having the force of law in the whole or any part of the State of 
Uttaranchal.  
3. Alteration of name of the State of Uttaranchal .—As from the appointed day, the  State of 
Uttaranchal shall be known as the State of Uttarakhand.  
4. Amendment of First Schedule to the Constitution .—In the First Schedule to the Constitution, 
under the heading “I. THE STATES ”, in entry 27, under the column “Name ”, for the word “Uttaranchal ”, 
the word “Uttarakhand ” shall be substituted.  
5. Amendment of Fourth Schedule to the Constitution .—In the Fourth Schedule to the 
Constitution, under the heading “TABLE ”, in entry 18, in the second column , for the word “Uttarachal ” 
the word “Uttarakhand ” shall be substituted.  
6. Power to adapt laws .—(1) For the purpose of giving effect to the alteration of the name of the 
State of Uttaranchal by section 3, the appropriate Government may, before the expiration of one year 
from the appointed day, by order, make such adaptations and modifications of any law made before the 
appointed day, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon 
every such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications  so made.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to prevent a competent Legislature or other competent 
authority from repealing or amending any law adapted or modified by the appropriate Government under 
the said sub -section.  
7. Power to construe l aws.—Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has been 
made under section 6 for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal or 
authority, required or empowered to enforce such law, may construe the law in s uch manner, without 
affecting the substance, as may be necessary or proper in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or 
authority.  
8. Legal proceedings .—Where immediately before the appointed day any legal proceedings are 
pending to which the Stat e of Uttaranchal is a party, the State of Uttarakhand shall be deemed to be 
substituted for the State of Ut taranchal in those proceedings.  
______________  
                                                           
1. 1st January, 2007, vide notification No. GSR 779(E), dated 29th December, 2006, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 
