--------------------------The Armed Forces Tribunal Act, 2007--------------------------
1 
 THE ARMED FORCES TRI BUNAL ACT , 2007  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTI ONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Applicability of the Act.  
3. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF TRIBUNAL AND BENCHES THEREOF  
4. Establishment of Armed Forces Tribunal.  
5. Composition of Tribunal and Benches thereof.  
6. Qualification s for appointment of Chairperson and other Members.  
7. Appointment of Chairperson and other Members.  
8. Term of office.  
9. Resignation and removal.  
9A. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and Member.  
10. Salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and other 
Members.  
11. Prohibition s as to holding of offices, etc., by Chairperson or Member on ceasing to be such 
Chairperson or Member.  
12. Financial and administrative powers of Chairperson.  
13. Staff of the Tribunal.  
 
CHAPTER III  
JURISDICTION, POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF THE  TRIBUNAL  
14. Jurisdiction , powers and authority in service matters.  
15. Jurisdiction, powers and authority in matters of appeal against court martial.  
16. Re-trial. 
17. Powers of the Tribunal on appeal under section 15.  
18. Cost.  
19. Power to punish for contempt.  
20. Distribution of business among the Ben ches.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE  
21. Application not to be admitted unless other remedies exhausted.  
22. Limitation.  
23. Procedure and powers of the Tribunal.  
24. Term of sentence and its effect on appeal.  
25. Right of applicant or of appellant to take assistance of a legal practitioner and of Government, 
etc., to appoint counsel.  
26. Condition as to making of interim order.  2 
 SECTIONS  
27. Power of Chairperson to transfer cases from one Bench to another.  
28. Decision to be by majority.  
29. Execution of order of Tribunal.  
CHAPTER V  
APPEAL  
30. Appeal to Supreme Court.  
31. Leave to appeal.  
32. Condonation.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
33. Exclusion of jurisdiction of civil courts.  
34. Transfer of pending cases.  
35. Provision for filing of certain appeals.  
36. Proceedings before Tribunal to be judicial proceedings.  
37. Members and staff of Tribunal to be public servants.  
38. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
39. Act to have overriding effect.  
40. Power to remove difficulties.  
41. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
42. Power to make rules retrospectively.  
43. Laying of rules.  
  3 
 THE ARMED  FORCES TRIBUNAL ACT , 2007  
ACT NO. 55 OF 2007  
[25th December, 2007 .] 
An Act to provide for the adjudication or trial by Armed Forces Tribunal of disputes and 
complaints with respect to commission, appointments, enrolment and conditions of service in 
respect of persons subject to the Army Act, 1950, the Navy Act, 1957 and the Air Force Act , 
1950 and also to provide for appeals arising out of orders, findings or sentences of court 
martial held under the said Acts and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -eighth Year of the R epublic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER 1  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Armed Forces Tribunal Act, 
2007.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint . 
2. Applicability of the Act .—(1) The provisions of this Act shall apply to all persons subject to the 
Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950) , the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957) and the A ir Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950).  
(2) This Act shall also apply to retired personnel sub ject to the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950) or the 
Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957) or the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950) , including their dependants, heirs 
and successors, in so far as it re lates to their service matters.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Administrative Member” means a member of  the Tribunal who is not a Judicial Member 
within the meaning of clause ( g); 
(b) “application” means an application made under sub -section ( 2) of section 14;  
(c) “appointed  day” means the date with effect  from which the Tribunal is established b y 
notification under section 4;  
(d) “Bench”  means a Bench of the Tribunal;  
(e) “Chairperson” means t he Chairperson of the Tribunal;  
(f) “court martial” means a court martial held unde r the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950) or the Navy 
Act, 1957 (62 of 1957) including the disciplinary courts constituted under the Act or the Air Force 
Act, 1950 (45 of 1950) ; 
(g) “Judicial Member” means a member of  the Tribunal appointed as such under this Act,  and 
includes the Chairperson, who possesses any of  the qualifications specified in sub -section ( 2) of 
section 6;  
(h) “Member” means a member (whether Judicial or Administrative) of the Tribuna l and includes 
the Chairperson;  
(i) “military custody” means th e arrest or confinement of a person according to the usages of the 
service and inclu des naval or air force custody;  
(j) “notification” means a notification pub lished in the Official Gazette;  
(k) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under thi s Act;  
(l) “President ” means the President of India;  
(m) “rules” means  the rules made under this Act;  
                                                           
1. 15th June, 2008, vide notification N o. S.O. 14(E), dated 13th June, 2008, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 4 
 (n) “service” means the s ervice within or outside India;  
(o) “service matters”, in relation to the persons subject to the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950) , the 
Navy Ac t, 1957 (62 of 1957) and the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950) , mean all matters relating to 
the conditions of t heir service and shall include — 
(i) remuneration (including allowances), pension  and other retirement benefits;  
(ii) tenure, including commission , appointment, enrolment, probation, confirmation, seniority, 
training, promotion, reversion, premature retirement, superannuation, termination o f service and 
penal deductions;  
(iii) summary disposal and trials where the puni shment of dismissal is awarded;  
(iv) any other matter, whatsoever,  
but shall n ot include matters relating to — 
(i) orders issued under section 18 of the Army  Act, 1950 (46 of 1950) , sub-section ( 1) of 
section 15 of the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957) and section  18 of the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 
1950) ; and  
(ii) transfers and postings including the change of place or unit on posting whether 
individually or as a part of unit, formation or ship  in relation to the persons subject to the Army 
Act, 1950 (46 of 1950) , the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957) and the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 
1950);  
(iii) leave of any kind;  
(iv) summary court martial except where the punishment is of dismissal or imprisonm ent for 
more than three months;  
(p) “summary disposals and trials” means  summary disposals and trials held under the Army Act, 
1950 (46 of 1950) , the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 195 7) and the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950);  
(q) “Tribunal ” means the Armed Forces  Tribunal established under section 4.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF TRIBUNAL AND BENCHES THEREOF  
4. Establishment of Armed Forces Tribunal .—The Central Government shall, by notification, 
establish a Tribunal to be known as  the Armed Forces Tribunal to exercise the jurisdiction, powers and 
authority confer red on it by or under this Act.  
5. Composition of Tribunal and Benches thereof .—(1) The Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson, 
and such number of Judicial and Administrative Members as the Central Government may deem fit and, 
subject to the other provisions of this Act,  the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Tribunal ma y be 
exercised by Benches thereof.  
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Bench shall consist of one Judicial Member  and one 
Administrative Member.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained  in sub -section ( 1), the Chairperson — 
(a) may, in addition to discharging the functions  of a Judicial Member of the Bench to which he 
is appointed, discharge the functions of an Administra tive Member of any other Bench;  
(b) may transfer a Member f rom one B ench to another Bench;  
(c) may, for the purpose of securing that any  case or cases, which having regard to the nature of 
the questions involved, requires or require, in his opinion, or under the rules made under this Act, to 
be decided by a Bench composed of more than two members, issue such general or spec ial orders, as 
he may deem fit:  5 
 Provided that every Bench constituted in pursuance of this clause shall include at least one 
Judicial Member  and one Administrative Member.  
(4) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Benches of the Tribunal shall ordinarily sit at Delhi 
(which shall be known as the Principal Bench), and at such other places as the Central Government  may, 
by notification, specify.  
6. Qualifications for appointment of Chairper son and other Members .—(1) A person shall not be 
qualified for appointment as the Chairperson unless he is a retired Judge of the Supreme Court or a retired  
Chief Justice of a High Court.  
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judicial Me mber unless he is or ha s been a 
Judge of a High Court.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a n Administrative Member unless — 
(a) he has held or has been holding the rank of Major General or above for a total period of at 
least three years in the Army or equivalent rank in  the Navy or the Air Force; and  
(b) he has served for not less than one year as Judge Advocate General in the Army or the Navy 
or the Air Force, and is not below the rank of Major General, Commodore and Air Commodore 
respectively.  
Explanation .—When a serving person is appointed as an Administrative Member, he shall have 
retired from service prior to assuming such  appoi ntment.  
7. Appointment of Chairperson and other Members .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, 
the Chairperson and other Members of the Tribunal shall  be appointed by the President:  
Provided that no appointment under this sub -section shall be made  except after consultation w ith the 
Chief Justice of India.  
(2) The President may appoint one or more Members of the Tribunal to be the Vice -Chairperson, or, 
as the case may be, the Vice -Chairpersons, thereof.  
8. Term of office .—The Chairperson or a Member shall hold office for a term of four years from the 
date on which he enters upon his office and shall be eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that no Chairperson shall hold office as such after he has attained, — 
(a) in case he has been a Judge of the Supreme Court , the age of seventy years; and  
(b) in case he has been the Chief Justice of a High Cour t, the age of sixty -five years:  
Provided further that no other Member shall hold office as such Member after he has attain ed the ag e 
of sixty -five years.  
9. Resignation and removal .—(1) The Chairperson or a Member may, by notice in writing under his 
hand addressed to th e President, resign his office:  
Provided that the Chairperson or a Member shall, unless he is permitted by the President to relinquish 
his office sooner, continue to hold office  until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such 
notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of his 
term of  office, whichever is the earliest.  
(2) The Chairperson or a Member shall not be removed from his office except by an order made by 
the President on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry made by a sitting Judge 
of the Supreme Court in whi ch such Chairperson or other Member had been informed of the charges 
against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being hea rd in respect of those charges.  
(3) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for the investigation of 
misbeh aviour or incapacity of the Chairperson or other Member referred to in sub -section ( 2). 6 
 1[9A. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and Member. —
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the qualifications,  appointment, term of office, salaries 
and allowances, resignation, removal and terms  and conditions of service of the Chairperson and other 
Members of the Appellate  Tribunal appointed after the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the 
Finance  Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall be governed by the provisions of section 184 of that Act:  
Provided that the Chairperson and Member appointed before the commencement  of Part XIV of 
Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017, shall continue to be governed by  the provisions of this Act, and the  
rules made thereunder as if the provisions of  section 184 of the Finance Act, 2017 had not come into 
force. ] 
10. Salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and other 
Members .—The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service 
(including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of, the Chairperson and other Members shall be 
such as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government:  
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor th e other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson and other Members shall be varied to their disadvantage after their appointment.  
11. Prohibitions as to holding of offices, etc., by Chairperson or Member on ceasing to  be such 
Chairperson or Membe r.—On ceasing to hold office — 
(a) the Chairperson shall be ineligible for further employment either  under the Government of 
India or u nder the Government of a State;  
(b) a Member other than the Chairperson shall,  subject to the provisions of this Act, be e ligible 
for appointment as a member of any other Tribunal but not for any other employment either under the 
Government of India or  under  the Government of a State; and  
(c) the Chairperson or other Members shall not appear, ac t or plead before the Tribunal.  
12. Financial and administrative powers of Chairperson .—The Chairperson shall exercise such 
financial and administrative powers over th e Benches as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Chairperson shall have the authority to delegate such of his financial  and 
administrative powers as he may think fit to any other Member or any officer of the Tribunal, subject to 
the conditions that such Member or  officer shall, while exercising such delegated powers, continue to act 
under the direction, control and supervi sion of the Chairperson.  
13. Staff of the Tribunal .—(1) The Central Government shall determine the nature and categories of 
the officers and other employees required to assist the Tribunal in the discharge of its functions and 
provide the Tribunal with suc h officers and other  employees as it may think fit.  
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of the 
officers and other employees of the Tribunal shal l be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) The officers and other  employees of the Tribunal shall discharge their functions under the general 
superintendence of the Chairperson.  
CHAPTER III  
JURISDICTION, POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF THE TRIBUNAL  
14. Jurisdiction, powers and authority in service matters .—(1) Save as otherwise  expressly 
provided in this Act, the Tribunal shall exercise, on and from the appointed day, all the jurisdiction, 
powers and authority, exercisable immediately before that day by all courts (except the Supreme Court or 
a High Court exercising jurisdiction  under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution) in relation to all 
service matters.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 181 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  7 
 (2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a person aggrieved by an order pertaining to any 
service matter may make an application to the Tribunal in such form and accompanied by such documents 
or other evidence and on payment of  such fee as may be prescribed.  
(3) On receipt of an application relating to service matters, the Tribunal shall, if satisfied after due 
inquiry, as it may deem necessary, that it is fit for adjudication by it, admit such application; but where 
the Tribunal is not so satisfied, it may dismiss the application after re cording its reasons in writing.  
(4) For the purpose of adjudicating an application, the Tribunal shall have the same powers as ar e 
vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Proc edure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , while trying a suit in respect 
of the following matters, namely — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of  any pe rson and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery  and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidenc e on affidavits;  
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of  the Indian Evidence Act,                               
1872 (1 of 1872) , requisitioning any public record or document or copy of suc h record or document 
from any office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examina tion of witnesses or documents;  
(f) reviewing its decisions;  
(g) dismissing an application for default or deciding it ex parte ; 
(h) setting  aside any order of dismissal of any application for default or any order passed by it      
ex parte ; and  
(i) any other matter which may be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
(5) The Tribunal shall decide both questions of  law and fact s that may be rais ed before it.  
15. Jurisdiction , powers and authority in matters of appeal against court martial .—(1) Save as 
otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the Tribunal shall exercise, on and from the appointed day, all 
the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable under this Act in relation to appeal against any order, 
decision, finding or sentence passed by a court martial or any matter connected t herewith or incidental 
thereto.  
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order, decision, finding or sentence passed by a court martial may 
prefer an appeal in such form, manner  and within such time as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Tribunal shall have power to grant bail to any person accused of an offence and in military 
custody, with or without any condition s which it con siders necessary:  
Provided that no accused person shall be so released if there appears reasonable ground for believing 
that he has been guilty of an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life.  
(4) The Tribunal shall allow an appeal against con viction by a court martial where — 
(a) the finding of the court martial is legally not sustainable d ue to any reason whatsoever; or  
(b) the finding involves wrong de cision on a question of law; or  
(c) there  was a material irregularity in the course of the trial resulting in miscarriage of  justice,  
but, in any other case, may dismiss the appeal where the Tribunal considers that no miscarriage of justice 
is likely to be caused or has actu ally resulted to the a ppellant:  
Provided that no order dismissing the appeal by the Tribunal shall be passed unless such order is 
made after recordi ng reasons therefor in writing.  
(5) The Tribunal may allow an appeal against conviction, and pass appropriate order thereon.  8 
 (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, the Tr ibunal shall 
have the power to — 
(a) substitute for the findings of the court martial, a finding of g uilty for any other offence for 
which the offender could have been lawf ully found guilty by the co urt martial and pass a sentence 
afresh for the offence specified or involved in such findings under the provisions of the Army Act, 
1950 (46 of 1950) or the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957) or the Air Force  Act, 1950 (45 of 1950) , as the 
case may be; or  
(b) if sentence is found to be excessive, illegal or unju st, the Tribunal may — 
(i) remit the whole or any part of the sentence, with or without conditions;  
(ii) mitigate the punishment awarded;  
(iii) commute  such punishment to any lesser punishment or punishments mentioned in the 
Army Act, 1950  (46 of 1950) , the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957) and the Air Force Act,                    
1950 ( 45 of 1950) , as the case may be;  
(c) enhance the sente nce awarded by a co urt martial:  
Provided that no such sentence shall be enhanced unless the appellant has been given an 
opportunity of being  heard;  
(d) release the appellant, if sentenced to imprisonment, on par ole with or without conditions;  
(e) susp end a sentence of impris onment;  
(f) pass any other ord er as it may think appropriate.  
(7) Notwithstanding any other provisions in this Act, for the purposes of this section, the Tribunal 
shall be deemed to be a criminal court for the purposes of sections 175, 178, 179, 180, 193, 195, 196 or 
228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and Chapter XXVI of the Co de of Criminal Procedure, 1973  
(2 of 1974).  
16. Re -trial.—(1) Except as provided by this Act, where the conviction of a person by court martial 
for an offence has been quashed, he shall not be liable to be tried again for that offence by a court  martial 
or by any other Court.  
(2) The Tribunal shall have the power of quashing a conviction, to make an order authorising the 
appellant to be retried by court martial, but shal l only exercise this power when the appeal against 
conviction is allowed by reasons only of evidence received or available to be received by the Tribunal 
under this Act and it appears to the Tribunal that the interests of justice require that an order und er this 
section should be made:  
Provided that an appellant shall not be retried under this section for an offence other th an— 
(a) the offence for which he was convicted by the original court martial and in respect of which 
his appeal is allowed;  
(b) any off ence for which he could have been convicted at the original court martial on a charge 
of the first -mentioned offence;  
(c) any offence charged in the alternative in respect of which the court martial recorded no 
finding in consequence of convicting him of the first -mentioned offence.  
(3) A person who is to be retried under this section for an offence shall, if the Tribunal or the 
Supreme Court so directs, whether or not such person is being tried or retried on one or more of the 
original charges, no fresh in vestigation or other action shall be taken under the relevant provision of the 
Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950) or the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957) or the Air Force Act, 1950 (45  of 1950) 
as the case may be, or r ules and regulations made there under, in relation to the said charge or charge s on 
which he is to be retried.  
17. Powers of the Tribunal on appeal under section 15 .—The Tribunal, while hearing and d eciding 
an appeal under se ction 15, shall have the power — 9 
 (a) to order production of documents or exhibits c onnected with the procee dings before the court 
martial;  
(b) to order t he attendance of the witnesses;  
(c) to receiv e evidence;  
(d) to obt ain reports from Court martial;  
(e) order referen ce of any question for enquiry;  
(f) appoint  a person with special expert knowl edge to act as an assessor; and  
(g) to determine any question which is necessary to be determined in order to do justice in the 
case.  
18. Cost .—While disposing of the application under section 14 or an appeal under section 15, the 
Tribunal shall have power to make such order a s to costs as it may deem just.  
19. Power to punish for contempt .—(1) Any person who is guilty of contempt of the Tribunal by 
using any insulting or threatening language, or by causing any inter ruption or disturbance in the 
proceedings of such Tribunal shall, on conviction, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years.  
(2) For the purposes of trying an offence under this section, the provisions of sections 14, 15, 1 7, 18 
and 20 of the Contempt of C ourts Act, 1971 (70 of 1971) shall mutatis mutandis  apply , as if a reference 
therein to — 
(a) Supreme Court or High Court we re a reference to the Tribunal;  
(b) Chief Justice were a reference to the Chairperson;  
(c) Judge were a reference to the Judicial or Adminis trative Member of the Tribunal;  
(d) Advocate -General were a r eference to the prosecutor; and  
(e) Court we re a reference to the Tribunal.  
20. Distribution of business among the Benches .—The Chairperson may make pro visions as to the 
distribution of the business of the Tribunal among its Benches.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE  
21. Application not to be admitted unless other remedies exhausted .—(1) The Tribunal shall not 
ordinarily admit an application unless it is satisfied that the applicant had availed of the remedies 
available to him under the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950) or the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957) or the Air 
Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950) , as the case may be, and respective rules a nd regulations made thereunder.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), a person shall be deemed to have availed of all the remedies 
available to him under the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950) or the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1 957) or the Air 
Force Act, 1950  (45 of 1950) , and re spective rules and regulations — 
(a) if a final order has been made by the Central Government or other authority or officer or other 
person competent to pass such order under the said Acts, rules and regulations, rejecting any petition 
preferred or repr esentation made by such  person;  
(b) where no final order has been made by the Central Government or other authority or officer or 
other person competent to pass such order with regard to the petition preferred or representation made 
by such person, if a period of six months from  the date on which such petition was preferred or 
repre sentation was made has expired.  
  10 
 22. Limitation .—The Tribunal shall not admit an application — 
(a) in a case where a final order such as is mentioned in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 21 
has been made unless the application is made within six months from the date on which such final 
order has b een made;  
(b) in a case where a petition or a representation such as is mentioned in clause ( b) of                   
sub-section ( 2) of section 21 has b een made and the period of six months has expired thereafter 
without suc h final order having been made;  
(c) in a case where the grievance in respect of which an application is made had arisen by reason 
of any order made at any time during the period of thr ee years immediately preceding the date on 
which jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Tribunal became exercisable under this Act, in respect 
of the matter to which such order relates and no proceedings for the redressal of such grievance had 
been comm enced before the s aid date before the High Court.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Tribunal may admit an application 
after the period of six months referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), as the case may be , 
or prior to the period of three years specified in clause ( c), if the Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant 
had sufficient cause for not making the application within such period.  
23. Procedure and powers of the Tribunal .—(1) The Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure 
laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) but shall be guided by the principles of 
natural justice and subject to the other provisions of this Act and any rules made thereunder, the Tribun al 
shall have the power to lay down and regulate its own procedure including the fixing of place and time of 
its inquiry and deciding whether to  sit in public or in camera . 
(2) The Tribunal shall decide every application made to it as expeditiously as poss ible after a perusal 
of documents, affidavits and written representations and after hearing such ora l arguments as may be 
advanced:  
Provided that where the Tribunal deems it necessary, for reasons to be recorded in writing, it may 
allow oral evidence to be  adduced.  
(3) No adjournment shall be granted by the Tribunal without recording the reasons justifying the grant 
of such adjournment and cost shall be awarded, if a party requests f or adjournment more than twice.  
24. Term of sentence and its effect on appe al.—(1) The term of any sentence passed by the 
Tribunal under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 6) of section 15 of this Act shall, unless the Tribunal otherwise 
directs, be reckoned to commence on the day on which it would have commenced under the Army Act, 
1950  (46 of 1950) , the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957) or the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950) , as the case 
may be, under which the court martial against which the appeal was filed, had  been held.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), any sentence pass ed on an appeal from the Tribunal to 
the Supreme Court in substitution for another sentence shall, unless the Supreme Court otherwise directs, 
be reckoned to commence on the day on which the original  sentence would have commenced.  
(3) Where a person who is  undergoing sentence is granted stay of the operation of the said sentence, 
either by suspension or otherwise, pending an appeal, the period during which he is so released due to the 
sentence having been so stayed, shall be excluded in computing the term f or which he is so sentenced by 
the Tribunal or the Sup reme Court, as the case may be.  
25. Right of applicant or of appellant to take assistance of a legal practitioner and of 
Government, etc., to appoint counsel .—(1) A person making an application or prefe rring an appeal to 
the Tribunal may either appear in person or take the assistance of a legal practitioner of his choice to 
present his case before the Tribunal.  
(2) The Central Government or the competent authority, as may be prescribed, may authorise one  or 
more legal practitioners or any of its law officers to act as counsel and every person so authorised by it 
may present its case with respect to any application or appeal, as the cas e may be, before the Tribunal.  
26. Condition as to making of interim order .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
provisions of this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, no interim order (whether by way of 11 
 injunction or stay or in any other manner) shall be made on an application or appeal, or in any proceed ing 
relating thereto, unless — 
(a) copies of such application or appeal, as the case may be, and all documents in support of the 
plea for such interim order are furnished to the party against whom such application or appeal, as the 
case may be, is m ade or proposed to be made; and  
(b) opportunity of being heard is given to  the other party in the matter:  
Provided that the Tribunal may dispense with the requirements of clauses ( a) and ( b) and make an 
interim order as an exceptional measure if it  is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded in writing, that it is 
necessary so to do for preventing any loss being caused to the applicant or to the  appellant, as the case 
may be.  
(2) Where any party against whom an interim order, whether by way of injuncti on or stay or in any 
other manner, is made on an application or appeal or in any proceeding relating thereto under               
sub-section ( 1), without — 
(a) furnishing to such party copies of such application or appeal, as the case may be, and all 
documents in support of the p lea for such interim order; and  
(b) giving such party an opportunity of being heard, and making an application to the Tribunal for 
the vacation of such order and furnishing a copy of such application or appeal, as the case may be, to 
the party in whose favour such order has been mad e or the counsel of such party,  
the Tribunal shall dispose of the application within a period of fourteen days from the date on which it is 
received or from the date on which the copy of such applicat ion is so furnished, whichever is later, or 
where the Tribunal is closed on the last day of that period, before the expiry of the next working day; and 
if the application is not so disposed of, the interim order shall, on the expiry of that period, or, as the case 
may be, the expiry of the said n ext working day, stand vacated.  
27. Power of Chairperson to transfer cases from one Bench to another .—On the application of 
any of the parties and after notice to the parties concerned, and after hearing such of the m as he may 
desire to be heard, or on his own motion without such notice, the Chairperson may transfer any case 
pending before one Bench for di sposal, to any other Bench.  
28. Decision to be by majority .—If the Members of a Bench differ in opinion on any po int, the point 
shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority, if there is a majority, but if the Members are 
equally divided, they shall state the point or points on which they differ and make a reference to the 
Chairperson who shall either hea r the point or points himself or refer the case for hearing on such point or 
points by one or more of the Members of the Tribunal and such point or points shall be decided according 
to the opinion of the majority of the Members of the Tribunal who have hea rd the case, incl uding those 
who first heard it.  
29. Execution of order of Tribunal .—Subject to the other provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder, the order of the Tribunal disposing of an application shall be final and shall not be called in 
question in any Court and such order  shall be executed accordingly.  
CHAPTER V  
APPEAL  
30. Appeal to Supreme Court .—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 31, an appeal shall  lie to the 
Supreme Court against the final decision or order of the Tribunal (other than an order passed under 
section 19):  
Provided that such appeal is preferred within a period of ninety days of the said decision or order:  
Provided further that there shall be no appeal against an inter locutory order of the Tribunal.  
(2) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court as of right from any order or decision of the Tribunal in 
the exercise of its jurisdi ction to punish for contempt:  12 
 Provided that an appeal under  this sub -section shall be filed in the Supreme Court within sixty days 
from the date  of the order appealed against.  
(3) Pending any appeal under sub -section ( 2), the Supreme Court may order that — 
(a) the execution of the punishment or the order ap pealed a gainst be suspended; or  
(b) if the appellant is in confi nement, he be released on bail:  
Provided that where an appellant satisfies the Tribunal that he intends to prefer an appeal, the 
Tribunal may also exercise any of the powers conferred under clause ( a) or clause ( b), as the case may be.  
31. Leave to appeal .—(1) An appeal to the Supreme Court shall lie with the leave of the Tribunal; 
and such leave shall not be granted unless it is certified by the Tribunal that a point of law of general 
public importance is involved in the decision, or it appears to the Supreme  Court that the point is one 
which ought to be considered by that Court.  
(2) An application to the Tribunal for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court shall be made within a 
period of thirty days beginning with the date of the decision of the Tribunal and an  application to the 
Supreme Court for leave shall be made within a period of thirty days beginning with the date on which 
the application for leave is refused by the Tribunal.  
(3) An appeal shall be treated as pending until any application for leave to app eal is disposed of and if 
leave to appeal is granted, until the appeal is disposed of; and an application for leave to appeal shall be 
treated as disposed of at  the expiration of the time within which it might have been made, but i t is not 
made within that  time.  
32. Condonation .—The Supreme Court may, upon an application made at any time by the appellant, 
extend the time within which an appeal may be preferred by him to that Court under section 30 or                
sub-section ( 2) of section 31.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
33. Exclusion of jurisdiction of civil courts .—On and from the date from which any jurisdiction, 
powers and authority becomes exercisable by the Tribunal in relation  to serv ice matters under this Act, no 
Civil Court shall have, or be entitled to exercise, such jurisdiction, power or authority in relati on to those 
service matters.  
34. Transfer of pending cases .—(1) Every suit, or other proceeding pending before any court 
including a High Court or other authority immediately before the date of establishment of the Tribunal 
under this Act, being a suit or proceeding the cause of action whereon it is based, is such th at it would 
have been within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, if it had arisen after such establishment within the 
jurisdiction of such Tribunal, stand transferred on that date to such Tribunal.  
(2) Where any suit, or other proceeding stands  transferred f rom any court including a High Court or 
other authority to the T ribunal under sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) the court or other authority shall, as soon as may be, after such transfer, forward the records of 
such suit, or ot her proceeding to the Tribunal;  
(b) the T ribunal may, on receipt of such records, proceed to deal with such suit, or other 
proceeding, so far as may be, in the same manner as in the case of an application made under sub -
section ( 2) of section 14, from the stage which was reached before such trans fer or from any earlier 
stage or de nov o as the Tribunal may deem fit.  
35. Provision for filing of certain appeals .—Where any decree or order has been made or passed by 
any court (other than a High Court) or  any other authority in any suit or proceeding before the 
establishment of the Tribunal, being a suit or proceeding the cause of action whereon it is based, is such 
that it would have been, if it had arisen after such establishment, within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, 
and no appeal has been preferred against such decree or order before such establishment or if preferred, 
the same is pending for disposal before any court including High Court and the time for preferring such 13 
 appeal under any law for the t ime being in force had not expired before such establishment, such appeal 
shall lie to the Tribunal, within ninety days from the date on which the Tribunal is established, or within 
ninety days from the date of receipt of the copy of such decre e or order, whichever is later.  
36. Proceedings before Tribunal to be judicial proceedings .—All proceedings before the Tribunal 
shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings  within the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228 of the Indian 
Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
37. Members and staff of Tribunal to be public servants .—The Chairperson, other Members and 
the officers and other employees provided under section 13 to the Tribunal shall be deemed to be public 
servants within the meaning of  section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
38. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or against the Chairperson or any other Member or any other person 
authorised by the Chairperson, for a nything which is done in good faith or intended to be done in 
pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder in the discharge of official duties.  
39. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent  therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.  
40. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisi ons of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedie nt for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no order  shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the da te of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid b efore each 
House of Parliament.  
41. Power of Central Gove rnment to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by  
notification, make rules for the purposes of  carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any 
of the fol lowing matters, namely: — 
(a) the case or cases which shall be decided by a Bench composed of more than two Members 
under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 3) of section 5;  
(b) the procedure under sub -section ( 3) of section 9 for the investigation of misbehaviour or 
incapacity of Chair person or other Member;  
(c) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson and other Members under section 10;  
(d) the financial and administrative powers which the Chairperson  may exercise over the Benches 
of the Tribunal under section 12;  
(e) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of the 
officers and other employees of the Tribunal under sub -section ( 2) of section 1 3; 
(f) the form in which an application may be made under sub -section ( 2) of section 14, the 
documents and other evidence by which such application shall be accompanied and the fee payable in 
respect of the filing of such application or for the service of ex ecution of proces ses; 
(g) the other matter which may be prescribed under clause ( i) of sub -section ( 4) of section 14;  
(h) the form and manner in which an appeal  may be filed, the fee payable thereon and the time 
within which such appeal may be filed under sub -section ( 2) of section 15;  
(i) the rules subject to which the Tribunal  shall have power to regulate its own procedure under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 23;  14 
 (j) competent authority who may authorise legal  practitioners or law officers to act as counsel 
under sub -section  (2) of section 25;  
(k) any other matter which may be prescribed or  in respect of which rules are required to be made 
by the Central Government.  
42. Power to make rules retrospectively .—The powers to make rules under section 41 shall include 
the power to m ake such rules or any  of them retrospectively from a date not earlier than the date on which 
this Act shall come into operation but no such retrospective effect shall be given to any such rule so as to 
prejudicially affect the interests of any person to wh om such rule may be applicable.  
43. Laying of rules .—Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty  days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule shou ld not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything p reviously done under 
that rule. 
--------------------------The Carriage by Road Act, 2007--------------------------
1 
 THE CARRIAGE BY ROAD ACT, 2007  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Persons not to engage in business of common carrier without registration . 
4. Application for grant or renewal of registration . 
5. Suspension or cancellation of registration . 
6. Appeal . 
7. Submission of annual return . 
8. Goods forwarding note . 
9. Goods receipt . 
10. Liability of common carrier . 
11. Rates of charge to be fixed by common carrier for carriage of consignment at a higher risk rat e. 
12. Conditions limiting exonerating the liability of the common carrier . 
13. Provision for carriage of goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life . 
14. Power of Central Government to prohibit carriage of certain class of goods . 
15. Right of common carrier in c ase of consignee ’s default . 
16. Notice for institution of a suit . 
17. General responsibility of common carrier . 
18. Punishment for contravention in relation to non -registration, carrying goods of dangerous or 
hazardous nature, or prohibited goods . 
19. Composition of offences . 
20. Power to make rules . 
21. Power to remove difficulties . 
22. Repeal and saving . 
 
  2 
 THE CARRIAGE BY ROAD ACT, 2007  
ACT NO. 41 OF 2007  
[29th September , 2007.]  
An Act to provide for the regulation of common carriers, limiting their liability and declaration 
of value of goods delivered to them to determine their liability for loss of, or damage to, such 
goods occasioned by the negligence or criminal acts of themselves, their servants or agents 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -eighth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short ti tle, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Carriage by Road Act, 
2007.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “common carrier ” means a person engaged in the business of collecting, storing, forwarding 
or distributing goods to be carried by goods carriages under a goods receipt or transporting for hire of 
goods from place to place by motorised transport on road, for all persons un discriminatingly and 
includes a goods booking company, contractor, agent, broker and courier agency engaged in the  
door-to-door transportation of documents, goods or articles utilising the services of a person, either 
directly or indirectly, to carry or a ccompany such documents, goods or articles, but does not  include 
the Government;  
(b) “consignee ” means the person named as consignee in the goods forwarding note;  
(c) “consignment ” means documents, goods or articles entrusted by the consignor to the common 
carrier for carriage, the description or details of which are given in the goods forwarding note;  
(d) “consignor ” means a person, named as consignor in the goods forwarding note, by whom or 
on whose behalf the documents, goods or articles covered by such forwarding note are entrusted to 
the common carrier for carriage thereof;  
(e) “goods” includes— 
(i) containers, pallets or similar articles of transport used to consolidate goods; and 
(ii) animals or livestock;  
(f) “goods forwarding note ” means the document executed under section 8;  
(g) “goods receipt ” means the receipt issued under section 9;  
(h) “person” includes any association or body of persons, whether incorporated or not, a road 
transport booking company, contractor and an agent or a broker carrying on the business of a 
common carrier;  
(i) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(j) “registering authority ” means a State Transport Authority or a  Regional Transport Authority 
constituted under section 68 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988  (59 of 1988) ; 
(k) “registration ” means the registration granted or renewed under sub -section ( 5) of section 4.  
                                                           
1. 20th July 2010 , vide notification No. S.O. 1738 (E), dated 1 5thAugust, 2010 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,  Part II,            
sec. 3  (ii). 
 3 
 3. Persons not to engage in business of common carrier without registration .—(1) No person 
shall engage in the business of a common carrier, after the commencement of this Act, unless he has been 
granted a certificate of registration.  
(2) Any person who is engaged, whether wholly or partly, in the business of a common carrier, 
immediately before the c ommencement of this Act, shall, — 
(a) apply for a registration within ninety days from the date of such commencement;  
(b) cease  to engage in such business on the expiry of one hundred and eighty days from the date 
of such commencement unless he has applied for registration and the certificate of registration has 
been granted by the registering authority.  
4. Application for grant o r renewal of registration .—(1) Any person, who is engaged or intends to 
engage in the business of a common carrier, shall apply for the grant or renewal of a certificate of 
registration for carrying on the business of common carrier to the registering authority.  
(2) An application under sub -section ( 1) shall be made, to the registering authority having jurisdiction 
in the area in which the applicant resides or has his principal place of business stating that the application 
is for the main office, in su ch form and manner and accompanied by such fees payable to the registering 
authority as may be prescribed.  
(3) An application for grant or renewal of certificate of registration for the main office shall contain 
the details of branch office, if any, to be operated outside the jurisdiction of the State or Union territory in 
which the main office is to be registered in such form and manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that an application for the purpose to open or close a branch office shall be made to the 
registering authority having jurisdiction over the main office.  
(4) A registering authority shall, before granting or renewing a certificate of registration, satisfy itself 
that the applicant fulfills such conditions as may be prescribed.  
(5) The registeri ng authority may, on receipt of an application under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) 
and after satisfying itself that the applicant fulfills the requirements of sub -section ( 4), grant the certificate 
of registration or renew it, as the case may be, for carrying on the business of a common carrier, in such 
form and subject to such c onditions as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no application for the grant or renewal of a certificate of registration shall be refused by 
the registering authority unless the applicant has been given an opportunity of being heard and the reasons 
for such refusal are given in writing by the registering authority within sixty days from the date of receipt 
of such application:  
Provided further that if such refusal has not been com municated within sixty days of the date of 
application, the registering authority shall grant or renew certificate of registration within a further period 
of thirty days.  
(6) A certificate of registration granted or renewed under sub -section ( 5) shall cont ain the details of 
branch offices to be operated in various States and Union territories, and shall be valid for a period of ten 
years from the date of such grant or renewal, as the case may be:  
Provided that in the case of registration in respect of branc h offices referred to in sub -section ( 3), the 
validity of such registration shall be restricted to the validity of the registration granted in respect of the 
main office.  
(7) The holder of a ce rtificate of registration shall — 
(a) maintain  a register in such form and manner as may be prescribed;  
(b) for shifting the main office mentioned in the certificate of registration submit an application to 
the registering authority which granted the certificate of registration:  
Provided that such reg istering authority shall grant or refuse permission for shifting the main 
office within thirty days from the date of receipt of such application and that no application for 4 
 shifting the main office shall be refused unless the applicant has been given an op portunity of being 
heard and reasons for such refusal are given in writing by the registering authority:  
Provided further that in case the registering authority has not either granted or refused the 
permission within thirty days it shall be deemed that the  permissio n for shifting has been granted;  
(c) submit to the registering authority under whose jurisdiction the main office is located and the 
Transport Research Wing of the Ministry or Department of the Central Government dealing with road 
transport and h ighways such information and return as may be prescribed within one hundred and 
twenty days after the thirty -first day of March every year;  
(d) display at a prominent place in its or its main office and each branch office, if any, a 
certificate of registra tion in original or certified copy thereof attested by the concerned registering 
authority, a notary or a Gazetted Officer of the Central or State Government.  
(8) A common carrier shall not load the motor vehicle beyond the gross vehicle weight mentioned in 
the registration certificate whose registration number is mentioned in the goods forwarding note or goods 
receipt, and the common carrier shall not allow such vehicle to be loaded beyond the gross vehicle 
weight.  
5. Suspension or cancellation of registr ation .—(1) If the registering authority is satisfied that the 
holder of certificate of registration has failed to comply with any of the provisions of sub -section ( 7) of 
section 4, it may give a notice by registered post or through electronic media or by a ny verifiable means 
to the holder of certificate of registration to rectify within a period of thirty days and in case such a holder 
fails to do so, it may revoke the certificate of registration on completion of enquiry.  
(2) If a complaint is received by the registering authority against a common carrier from a consignor 
in respect of, — 
(i) non -issuance of receipt of goods;  
(ii) non -disclosure of the whereabouts of the goods in transit when asked by the consignor or 
consigne e; or 
(iii) detention of goods for delivery without valid reasons; or  
(iv) demand for unreasonable additional charges at the time of delivery, which were neither 
disclosed nor agreed upon between the consignor and the consignee earlier; or  
(v) non -payment of charges agreed and payable to truck -owners,  
it may give a notice by registered post or through electronic media or by any other verifiable means to the 
holder of certificate of registration to rectify the same within a period of thirty days and in case such 
holder fails to do so, it may revoke certificate of registration for a period as may be prescribed under the 
rules on completion of that enquiry.  
(3) If the registering authority or any other authority so authorised under the Motor Vehicles Act, 
1988  (59 of 1988) has received proof of violation of provision of sub -section ( 8) of section 4, it shall be 
competent to impose the penalty prescribed under section 194 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 on the 
common carrier, notwithstanding the fact that such pe nalty have been already imposed on and realised 
from the driver or the owner of the goods vehicle or the consignor, as the case may be.  
(4) Any action for revocation of certificate of registration shall not be taken under sub -sections ( 1) 
and ( 2) unless th e holder of the certificate of registration is given an opportunity of being heard in the 
enquiry and reasons for such action are given in writing by the registering authority.  
(5) The registering authority in whose jurisdiction the main office of the comm on carrier is located 
shall be competent to take action under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) and any other registering authority who 
has noticed the violations or has received complaints under the said sub -sections, shall report such matter 
to the registering authority having jurisdiction over the main office.  
(6) When the certificate of registration is revoked, the holder of the certificate of registration shall 
surrender the certificate of registration to the registering authority within a period of thirty da ys and it 
would be incumbent on the holder of the certificate of registration to complete the delivery and 5 
 transactions in respect of the consignments already accepted by the common carrier from any consignor 
prior to the revocation of the certificate of r egistration.  
(7) The holder of a certificate of registration may, at any time, surrender the certificate to the 
registering authority which granted the registration and on such surrender the registering authority shall, 
after obtaining declaration from the  holder of the certificate of registration that no liability is outstanding 
against him and that he shall discharge such liability, if held liable, revoke the certificate of registration:  
Provided that if the surrender is in respect of a branch office, the  endorsement in respect of the branch 
office shall be deleted from the certificate of registration and such deletion shall be notified by the 
registering authority having jurisdiction over the main office to such other authorities as may be 
prescribed.  
6. Appeal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the registering authority refusing to grant or 
renew a certificate of registration or suspending or revoking a registration under this Act, may, within 
sixty days from the date of such order, appeal to the St ate Transport Appellate Tribunal constituted under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 89 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988  (59 of 1988) . 
(2) An appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be preferred in duplicate in the form of a memorandum 
setting forth the grounds of obje ction to the order of the registering authority and shall be accompanied by 
such fee as may be prescribed.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) 
and ( 2) of section 89 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988) , as in force immediately before the 
commencement of this Act, with regard to appeal, shall, as far as may, apply to every appeal as if the 
provisions aforesaid were enacted by this Act subject to the modification that any reference therein to the 
“permit” shall be construed as a reference to the “registration ”. 
7. Submission of annual return .—The State Transport Authority in respect of each State or Union 
territory shall submit annually to the Ministry or Department of the Central Government dealing with 
road transport and highways a consolidated annual return giving the details of the goods carried by the 
common carriers in that State or the Union territory, as the case may be, on the basis of the returns 
received from the holders of the registration as spe cified under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 7) of section 4.  
8. Goods forwarding note .—(1) Every consignor shall execute a goods forwarding note, in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed, which shall include a declaration about the value of the 
consignment  and goods of dangerous or hazardous nature.  
(2) The consignor shall be responsible for the correctness of the particulars furnished by him in the 
goods forwarding note.  
(3) The consignor shall indemnify the common carrier against any damage suffered by hi m by reason 
of incorrectness or incompleteness of the particulars on the goods forwarding note.  
9. Goods receipt .—(1) A common carrier shall, — 
(a) in case where the goods are to be loaded by the consignor, on the completion of such loading; 
or 
(b) in any other case, on the acceptance of the goods by him, issue a goods receipt in such form 
and manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The goods receipt shall be issued in triplicate and the original shall be given to the consignor.  
(3) The goods receipt shall be  prima facie  evidence of the weight or measure and other particulars of 
the goods and the number of packages stated therein.  
(4) The goods receipt shall include an undertaking by the common carrier about the liability under 
section 10 or section 11.  
10. Liability of common carrier .—(1) The liability of the common carrier for loss of, or damage to 
any consignment, shall be limited to such amount as may be prescribed having regard to the value, freight 
and nature of goods, documents or articles of the consign ment, unless the consignor or any person duly 6 
 authoris ed in that behalf have expressly undertaken to pay higher risk rate fixed by the common carrier 
under section 11.  
(2) The liability of the common carrier in case of any delay up to such period as may be  mutually 
agreed upon by and between the consignor and the common carrier and specifically provided in the goods 
forwarding note including the consequential loss or damage to such consignment shall be limited to the 
amount of freight charges where such los s, damage or delay took place while the consignment was under 
the charge of such carrier:  
Provided that beyond the period so agreed upon in the goods forwarding note, compensation shall be 
payable in accordance with sub -section ( 1) or section 11:  
Provided further that the common carrier shall not be liable if such carrier proves that such loss of, or 
damage to, the consignment or delay in delivery thereof, had not taken place due to his fault or neglect or 
that of his servants or agents thereof.  
11. Rates o f charge to be fixed by common carrier for carriage of consi gnment at a higher risk 
rate.—Every common carrier may require payment for the higher risk undertaken by him in carrying a 
particular consignment at such rate of charge as he may fix and correspon dingly, his liability would be in 
accordance with the terms as may be agreed upon with the consignor:  
Provided that to entitle such carrier to claim payment at a rate higher than his ordinary rate of charge, 
he should have exhibited a printed or written n otice, in English and the vernacular language of the State, 
of the higher rate of charge in the place or premises where he carries on the business of common carrier.  
12. Conditions limiting exonerating the lia bility of the common carrier .—(1) Every common 
carrier shall be liable to the consignor for the loss or damage to any consignment in accordance with the 
goods forwarding note, where such loss or damage has arisen on account of any criminal act of the 
common carrier, or  any of his servants or agents.  
(2) In any suit brought against the common carrier for the loss, damage or non -delivery of 
consignment, it shall not be necessary for the plaintiff to prove that such loss, damage or non -delivery 
was owing to the negligence or criminal act of the common carr ier, or  any of his servants or agents.  
(3) Where any consignment has been detained for examination or scrutiny by a competent authority 
and upon such examination or scrutiny it is found that certain prohibited goods or goods on which due tax 
was not paid o r insufficiently paid have been entrusted to the common carrier by the consignor which 
have not been described in the goods forwarding note, the cost of such examination or scrutiny shall be 
borne by the consignor and the common carrier shall not be liable  for any loss, damage or deterioration 
caused by such detention of the consignment for examination or scrutiny:  
Provided that the onus of proving that such incorrect description of goods in the goods forwarding 
note was received from the consignor shall be  on the common carrier.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “competent authority ” means any person or authority 
who is empowered to examine or scrutinise goods by or under any law for the time being in force to 
secure compliance of provisions of  that law.  
13. Provision for carriage of goods of dangerous or ha zardous nature to human life .—(1) No 
goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life shall be carried by a common carrier except in 
accordance with such procedure and after complying with such safeguards as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Central Government may, by rules made in this behalf, specify the goods of dangerous or 
hazardous nature to human life and the label or class of labels to be carried in, or displayed on, the motor 
vehicle or such goods i n the course of transportation.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, every common 
carrier shall scrutinise and ensure before starting transportation of any consignment containing goods of 
dange rous or hazardous nature to human life that the consignment is covered by, one or more insurance 
policies under a contract of insurance in respect of such goods providing relief in case of death or injury 
to a person or damage to any property or the consig nment, if an accident takes place.  7 
 14. Power of Central Government to prohibit carriage of certain c lass of goods .—The Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify, in public interest, the goods or class or 
classes of goods whic h shall not be carried by a common carrier.  
15. Right of common carrier in case of consignee ’s default .—(1) If the consignee fails to take 
delivery of any consignment of goods within a period of thirty days from the date of notice given by the 
common carrier, such consignment may be deemed as unclaimed:  
Provided that in case of perishable consignment, the period o f thirty days shall not apply and the 
consignment shall be deemed unclaimed after a period of twenty -four hours of service of notice or any 
lesser period as may be mutually agreed to by and between the common carrier and the consignor.  
(2) In the case of a n unclaimed consignment under sub -section (1), the common carrier may, — 
(a) if such consignment is perishable in nature, have the right to sell the consignment; or  
(b) if such consignment is not perishable in nature, cause a notice to be served upon the consignee 
or upon the consignor if the consignee is not available, requiring him to remove the goods within a 
period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the notice and in case of failure to comply with the 
notice, the common carrier shall have the right to sell such consignment without any further notice to 
the consignee or the consignor, as the case may be.  
(3) The common carrier shall, out of the sale proceeds received under sub -section ( 2), retain a sum 
equal to the freight, storage and other cha rges due including expenses incurred for the sale, and the 
surplus, if any, from such sale proceeds shall be returned to the consignee or the consignor, as the case 
may be.  
(4) Unless otherwise agreed upon between the common carrier and consignor, the comm on carrier 
shall be entitled to detain or dispose off the consignment in part or full to recover his dues in the event of 
the consignee failing to make payment of the freight and other charges payable to the common carrier at 
the time of taking delivery.  
16. Noti ce for institution of a suit .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall be instituted against a 
common carrier for any loss of, or damage to, the consignment, unless notice in writing of the loss or 
damage to the consignment has been served on the co mmon carrier before the institution of the suit or 
other legal proceeding and within one hundred and eighty days from the date of booking of the 
consignment by the consignor.  
17. General resp onsibility of common carrier .—Save as otherwise provided in this Act, a common 
carrier shall be responsible for the loss, destruction, damage or deterioration in transit or non -delivery of 
any consignment entrusted to him for carriage, arising from any caus e except the following, namely: — 
(a) act of God;  
(b) act of war or public enemy;  
(c) riots and civil commotion;  
(d) arrest, restraint or seizure under legal process;  
(e) order or restriction or prohibition imposed by the Central Government or a State Government 
or by an officer or authority subordinate to the C entral Government or a State Government authorised 
by it in this behalf:  
Provided that the common carrier shall not be relieved of its responsibility for the loss, destruction, 
damage, deterioration or non -delivery of the consignment if the common carrier could have avoided such 
loss, destruction, damage or deterioration or non -delivery had the common carrier exercised due 
deligence and care in the carriage of the consignment.  
18. Punishment for contravent ion in relation to non -registra tion, carrying goods of dangerous 
or hazardous  nature, or prohibited goods .—(1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 3, 
section 13 or a notification issued under section 14 shall be punishable for the first offence with fine 8 
 which may extend to five thousand rupees, a nd for the second or subsequent offence with fine which may  
extend to ten thousand rupees.  
(2) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, every person who, at the time 
the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible t o, the company for the conduct of the 
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be 
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section sha ll render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sectio n (1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be proceeded ag ainst and 
punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, — 
(a) “company” means any body  corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
19. Composition of offences .—(1) Any offence committed under section 18, may either before or 
after the institution of the prosecution, be compounded by such officers or authorities and for such 
amount as the State Government may, by notification in  the Official Gazette, specify.  
(2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub -section ( 1), the offender shall be disch arged 
and no further proceedings shall be taken against him in respect of such offence.  
20. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particu lar, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the form and manner of making an application for grant or renewal of a certificate of 
registration for main of fice or branch office and the fee thereof under sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) of 
section 4;  
(b) the other conditions of eligibility which are required to be fulfilled by an applicant under 
clause ( d) of sub -section ( 4) of section 4;  
(c) the  form in which and the conditions subject to which certificate of registration or renewal 
may be granted under sub -section ( 5) of section 4;  
(d) the form and manner of maintaining a register under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 7) of section 4;  
(e) the informa tion and return which may be furnished to the registering authority and the 
transport research wing under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 7) of section 4;  
(f) fee for submitting the memorandum of appeal unde r sub -section ( 2) of section 6;  
(g) the form and manne r in which a goods forwarding note shall be executed by the consignor 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 8;  
(h) the form and manner in which a common carrier shall issue goods receipt unde r                 
sub-section ( 1) of section 9;  
(i) liability of the c ommon carrier for loss of, or damage to any consignment under                      
sub-section ( 1) of section 10;  9 
 (j) the procedure and safeguards to be complied with for carrying goods of dangerous or 
hazardous nature under sub -section ( 1) of section 13;  
(k) the specification of the goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life and the label or 
class of labels to be carried or displayed in or on the motor vehicle or on such goods in the course of 
their transportation under sub -section ( 2) of section 13; and  
(l) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this section and every notification issued under section 14 shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House of Parliament,  while it is in session, for a 
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Ho uses agree in making any modification in the rule or the notification, or both Houses 
agree that the rule or the notification should not be made or issued, the rule or the notification shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no eff ect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule or notification.  
21. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving e ffect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or 
expedient for removing  the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the 
date of commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament.  
22. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Carriers Act, 1865(3 of 1865) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding the r epeal of the Carriers Act, 1865 (3 of 1865) anything done or any action 
taken under the said Act shall, in so far as such thing  or action is not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the provisions of this Act and shall continue in 
force accordingly until superseded by anything done or any action taken under this Act.  
(3) The ment ion of particular matters in this section shall not be held to prejudice or affect the general 
application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897  (10 of 1897) with regard to the effect of repeals . 
______  
--------------------------The Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006--------------------------
1 
 THE CENTRAL EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS  
 (RESERVATION IN ADMISSION) ACT, 2006  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Reservation of seats in Central Educational Institutions.  
4. Act not to apply in certain cases . 
5. Mandatory increase of seats . 
6. Reservation of seats in admissions to begin in calendar year, 2008.  
7. Laying of notifications before Parliament . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
  2 
 THE CENTRAL EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS  
 (RESERVATION IN ADMISSION) ACT, 2006  
ACT NO. 5 OF 2007  
[3rd January , 2007.]  
An Act to provide for the reservation in admission of the students belonging to the Scheduled 
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes of citizens, to certain Central 
Education al Institutions established, maintained or aided by th e Central Government, and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in 
Admission) Act, 2006.  
 2. Definition s.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
 (a) “academic session ” means the period in a calendar year, or a part thereof, during which a 
Central Educational Institution is open for teaching or instruction in any branch of study or faculty;  
(b) “annual permitted strength ” means the number of seats, in a course or programme for teaching 
or instruction in each branch of study or faculty authorised by an appropriate authority for admission 
of stu dents to a Central Educational Institution;  
(c) “appropriate authority ” means the University Grants Commission, the Bar Council of India, 
the Medical Council of India, the All India Council for Technical Education or any other authority or 
body established  by or under a Central Act for the determination, coordination or maintenance of the 
standards of higher education in any Central Educational Institution;  
(d) “Central Educational  Institution ” means— 
(i) a university established or incorporated by or under a Central Act;  
(ii) an institution of national importance set up by an Act of Parliament;  
(iii) an institution, declared as a deemed University under section 3 of the University Grants 
Commission Act, 195 6 (3 of 1956) , and maintained by or receiving aid from the Central 
Government;  
(iv) an institution maintained by or receiving aid from the Central Government, whether 
directly or indirectly, and affiliated to an institution referred to in clause ( i) or cla use ( ii), or a 
constituent unit of an institution referred to in clause ( iii); 
(v) an educational institution set up by the Central Government under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860 ); 
(e) “faculty ” means the faculty of a Central Educational Institution;  
(f) “Minority Educational Institution ” means an institution established and administered by the 
minorities under clause ( 1) of article 30 of the Constitution and so declared by an Act of Parliament 
or by the Central Government or declared as a Minority Educational Institution under the National 
Commission for Minority Educational Institutions Act, 2004  (2 of 2005 ); 
(g)“Other Backward Classes ” means the class or classes of citizens who are socially an d 
educationally backward, and are so determ ined by the Central Government;  
(h) “Scheduled Castes ” means the Scheduled Castes notified under article 341 of the 
Constitution;  
(i) “Scheduled Tribes ” means the Scheduled Tribes notified under article 342 of the  Constitution;  3 
 1[(ia) “specified north -eastern region ” means the area comprising of the States of Arunachal 
Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura and the tribal areas of Assam 
referred to in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution;   
(ib) “State seats ”, in relation to a Central Educational Institution, means such seats, if any, out of 
the annual permitted strength in each branch of study or faculty as are earmarked to be filled from 
amongst the eligible students of the State in which  such institution is situated;]  
(j) “teaching or instruction in any branch of study ” means teaching or instruction in a branch of 
study leading to three principal levels of qualifications at bachelor (undergraduate) masters 
(postgraduate) and doctoral leve ls . 
3. Reservation of seats in Central Educational Institutions .—The reservation of seats in admission 
and its extent in a Central Educational Institution shall be provided i n the following manner, namely: — 
 (i) out of the annual permitted strength in eac h branch of study or faculty, fifteen per cent. seats 
shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes;  
(ii) out of the annual permitted strength in each branch of study or faculty, seven and one -half per 
cent. seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes;  
(iii) out of the annual permitted strength in each branch of study or faculty, twenty -seven per cent. 
seats shall be reserved  for the Other Backward Classes:  
2[Provided that the State seats, if any, in a Central Educational Institution situated in the trib al areas 
referred to in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution shall be governed by such reservation policy for the 
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes, as may be specified, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, by the Government of the State where such institution is situated:  
 Provided further that if there are no State seats in a Central Educational Institution and the seats 
reserved for the Scheduled Castes exceed the percentage specified under clause ( i) or the seats reserved 
for the Scheduled Tribes exceed the percentage specified under clause ( ii) or the seats reserved for the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes taken toget her exceed the sum of percentages  specified under 
clauses ( i) and ( ii), but such se ats are— 
(a)less than fifty per cent. of the annual permitted strength on the date immediately preceding 
the date of commencement of this Act, the total percentage of the seats required to be reserved for 
the Other Backward Classes under clause ( iii) shall  be restricted to the extent such sum of 
percentages specified under clauses ( i) and ( ii) falls short of fift y per cent.of the annual permitted 
strength;  
(b) more than fifty per cent. of the annual permitted strength on the date of immediately 
preceding the  date of commencement of this Act, in that case no seats shall be reserved for the Other 
Backward Classes under clause ( iii) but the extent of the reservation of seats for the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall not be reduced in respect of Cen tral Education al Institutions in 
the specified north -eastern region. ]. 
4. Act not to apply  in certain cases .—The provisions of section 3 of this Act shall not apply to — 
3*   *   *   *  * 
(b) the  institutions of excellence, research institutions, institutions of national and strategic 
importance specifi ed in the Schedule to this Act:  
Provided that the Central Government may, as and when considered necessary, by notification in 
the Official Gazette , amend the Schedule;  
(c) a Minority Educational Inst itution as defined in this Act;  
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2012, s.2 (w.e.f. 19 -6-2012).  
2. Ins. by s.3 , ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -6-2012).  
3. Cl. (a) omitted by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -6-2012).  4 
 (d) a course or programme at high levels of specialisation, including at the post -doctoral level, 
within any branch of study or faculty, which the Central Government may,  in consultation with the 
appropriate authority, specify.  
5. Mandatory increase of seats .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( iii) of section 3 
and in any other law for the time being in force, every Central Educational Institution shall, wit h the prior 
approval of the appropriate authority, increase the number of seats in a branch of study or faculty over 
and above its annual permitted strength so that the number of seats, excluding those reserved for the 
persons belonging to the Scheduled Ca stes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes, is not 
less than the 1[number of such seats available or actually filled, whichever be less,] for the academic 
session immediately preceding the date of the coming into force of this Act.  
(2) Wher e, on a representation by any Central Educational Institution, the Central Government, in 
consultation with the appropriate authority, is satisfied that for reasons of financial, physical or academic 
limitations or in order to maintain the standards of edu cation, the annual permitted strength in any branch 
of study or faculty of such institution cannot be increased for the academic session following the 
commencement of this Act, it may permit by notification in the Official Gazette, such institution to 
increase the annual permitted str ength over a maximum period of 2[six years] beginning with the 
academic session following the commencement of this Act; and then, the extent of reservation for the 
Other Backward Classes as provided in clause ( iii) of section 3  shall be limited for that academic session 
in such manner that the number of seats available to the Other Backward Classes for each academic 
session are commensurate with the increase in the permitted strength for each year.  
6. Reservation of seats in adm issions to begin in calendar year, 3[2008 ].—The Central Educational 
Institutions shall take all necessary steps, which are required in giving effect to the provisions of sections 
3, 4 and 5 of this Act, for the purposes of reservation of seats in admissions to its academic sessions 
commencing on and  from the calendar year, 3[2008].  
7. Laying of notifications before Parliament .—Every notification made under this Act shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty d ays which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and 
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the notificati on or both Houses agree that the 
notification should not be made, the notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudi ce to the validity of anything previously done under that notification.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2012 , s. 5, for “number of such seats available” (w.e.f. 19 -6-2012).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “three years” (w.e.f. 19 -6-2012).  
3. Subs. by s.  6, ibid., for “2007” (w.e.f. 19 -6-2012).  5 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 4( b)] 
 
S. No.  Names of the Institutions of Excellence, etc.  
1. Homi   Bhabha National Institute, Mumbai and its constituent units, namely: — 
 (i) Bhabha A tomic Research Centre, Trombay;  
 (ii) Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam;  
 (iii) Raja Ramanna Centre for Advanced Technology, Indore;  
 (iv) Institute for Plasma Research, Gandhinagar;  
 (v) Variable Energy Cyclotron Centre, Kolkata;  
 (vi) Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, Kolkata;  
 (vii) Institute of Physics, Bhubaneshwar;  
 (viii) Institute of Mathematical Sciences, Chennai;  
 (ix) Harish -Chandra Research Institute, Allahabad;  
 (x) Tata Memorial Centre, Mumbai.  
2. Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai.  
3. North -Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health and Medical Science, 
Shillong . 
4. National Brain Research Centre, Manesar, Gurgaon.  
5. Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Bangalore.  
6. Physical Research Laboratory, Ahmedabad.  
7. Space Physics  Laboratory, Thiruvananthapuram.  
8. Indian Institute of Remote Sensing, Dehradun.  
 
_______  
--------------------------The English and Foreign Languages University Act, 2006--------------------------
1 
 THE ENGLISH AND FOREIGN LANGUAGES UNIVERSITY ACT, 2006  
__________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Establishment of the University.  
4. Dissolution of the Central  Institute  of English and Foreign Languages, Hyderabad Society and 
transfer of all the properties and effect of establishment of the University.  
5. Objects of the University.  
6. Powers of the University.  
7. Jurisdiction.  
8. University open to all classes, castes and creeds.  
9. Visitor. 
10. The Chief Rector.  
11. Officers of the University.  
12. The Chancellor.  
13. The Vice -Chancellor.  
14. The Pro -Vice-Chancellor.  
15. The Deans of Schools.  
16. The Registrar.  
17. The Finance Officer.  
18. The Controller of Examinations.  
19. The Librarian.  
20. Other officers.  
21. Authorities of the University.  
22. The Court.  
23. The Executive Council.  
24. The Academic Council.  
25. The Schools of Studies.  
26. The Finance Committee.  
27. Other authorities.  
28. Powers to make Statutes.  
29. Statutes how to be made.  
30. Power to make Ordinances.  
31. Regulations.  
32. Annual report.  
33. Annual accounts.  
34. Returns and information.  
35. Conditions of service of employees.  
36. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students.  
37. Right to appeal.  
38. Provident and pension funds.  
39. Disputes as to constitution of University authorities and bodies.  
40. Filling of casual vacancies.  2 
 SECTIONS  
41. Proceedings of University authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.  
42. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
43. Mode of proof of University record.  
44. Power to remove difficulties.  
45. Statutes , Ordinances and Regulation s to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before 
Parliament.  
46. Transitional provisions.  
THE SCHEDULE.  
 
 
 
  3 
 THE ENGLISH AND FOREIGN LANGUAGES UNIVERSITY  
ACT, 2006  
ACT NO. 7 OF 2007  
[10th January , 2007.]  
An Act to establish and incorporate a teaching University for promotion and development of 
English and other Foreign Languages and their Literature, and to provide for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to establish  and incorporate a teaching University at Hyderabad, to dissolve 
the "Central Institute of English and Foreign Languages, Hyderabad", a Society registered under the 
Hyderabad S ocieties Registration Act, 1350  (Act 1 of 1350 Fasli) and to transfer to and ves t in the said 
University all properties and rights of the said Society;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -seventh Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the English and Foreign Languages 
University  Act, 2006.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless the context otherwise 
requires,— 
(a) "Academic Council" means the Academic Council of the University;  
(b) "academic staff" means such categories of staff as are designated as academic staff by the 
Ordinances;  
(c) "Board of Studies" means the Board of Studies of the University;  
(d) "Chancellor", "Vice -Chancellor" and "Pro -Vice -Chancellor" mean, respectively, the 
Chancellor, Vice -Chancellor and Pro -Vice -Chancellor of the University;  
(e) "College" means a College maintained by the University;  
(f) "Court" means the Court of the Univ ersity;  
(g) "Department" means a Department of Studies and includes a Centre of Studies;  
(h) "distance education system" means the system of imparting education through any means of 
communication, such as broadcasting, telecasting, correspondence courses, seminars, contact 
programmes or the combination of any two or more such means;  
(i) "employee" means any person appointed by the University and includes teachers and other 
staff of the University;  
(j) "Executive Council" means the Executive Council of the University;  
(k) "Hall" means a unit of residence or of corporate life for the students of the University, or of a 
College or an Institution, maintained by the University;  
(l) "Institution" means an academic institution, not being a College, maintained by t he University;  
(m) "Principal" means the head of a College or an Institution and includes where there is no 
Principal, the person for the time being duly appointed to act as Principal, and, in the absence of the 
Principal or the acting Principal, a Vice -Principal duly appointed as such;  
(n) "recognised institution" means an institution of higher learning recognised by the University;  
                                                           
1. 3rd August 2007 , vide notification No. S.O. 1350(E), dated 1 st August, 2007 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,  Part II, s ec. 
3(ii). 
 4 
 (o) "recognised teachers" means persons working in any recognised institution and recognised by 
the University for the purpose of imparting instruction or conducting research or both;  
(p) "School" means a School of Studies of the University;  
(q) "Statutes", "Ordinances" and "Regulations" mean, respectively, the Statutes, Ordinances and 
Regulations of the University for the  time being in force;  
(r) "teachers of the University" means Professors, Readers, Lecturers and such other persons as 
may be appointed for imparting instruction or conducting research in the University or in any College 
or Institution maintained by the Uni versity and are designated as teachers by the Ordinances;  
(s) "University" means the Central Institute of English, Hyderabad Society founded by the 
Central Government at Hyderabad in 1958 as a Society registered under the Hyderabad  Society 
Registration Act , 1350 (Act 1 of 1350 Fasli) which was renamed as Central Institute of English and 
Foreign Languages, Hyderabad Society in 1972 and declared in 1973 as an Institution deemed to be a 
University under section 3 of the Universi ty Grants Commission Act, 1956 ( 3 of 1956) ; and which is 
incorporated as a university under this Act.  
3. Est ablishment of the University .—(1) There shall be established, in the State of Andhra Pradesh, 
a University by the name of "The English and  Foreign Languages University".  
(2) The headquarters of the University shall be at Hyderabad, campuses at Lucknow and Shillong; 
and it may establish campuses at such other places as it may deem fit.  
(3) The first Chancellor, the first Vice -Chancellor and the first members of the Court, the  Executive 
Council and the Academic Council, and all persons who may hereafter become such officers or members, 
so long as they continue to hold such office or membership, shall constitute the University.  
(4) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall sue and be sued by 
the said name.  
4. Dissolution of the Central Institute of English and Foreign Languages, Hyderabad Society 
and transfer of all the properties and effect of es tablishment of the University .—On and from  the 
comm encement of this Act, — 
(i) the Society known as the Central Institute of English and Foreign Languages, Hyderabad 
Society, shall be dissolved, and all properties, movable or immovable, and all rights, powers and 
privileges of the said Society shall be transferred to and vest in the University and shall be applied to 
the objects and purposes for which the University is established;  
(ii) all debts, liabilities and obligations of the said Society shall be transferred to the University 
and shall thereafter be discharged and satisfied by it;  
(iii) all references in any enactment to the said Society shall be construed as references to the 
University;  
(iv) any will, deed or other document, whether made or executed before or after the 
commencement of this Act, w hich contains any bequest, gift or trust in favour of the said Society 
shall be construed as if the University was therein named instead of the Society;  
(v) subject to the provisions of this Act, every person employed immediately before the 
commencement of  this Act in the Central Institute of English and Foreign Languages, Hyderabad, 
shall hold such employment in the University by the same tenure and on the same terms and 
conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension and gratuity as he wo uld have held 
under the Central Institute of English and Foreign Languages, Hyderabad, if this Act had not been 
passed.  
5. Objects of the University .—The objects of the University shall be to disseminate and advance 
knowledge by providing instructional, re search and extension facilities in the teaching of English and 
Foreign Languages and Literature in India; to train language teachers in methods and approaches 
appropriate to the Indian context; to provide expertise in language and teacher education to fore ign 
professionals; to evolve indigenous ways of testing of languages proficiency; to make provisions for 5 
 innovative teaching -learning materials in both print and electronic media; to take appropriate measures 
for inter -disciplinary studies and research in Literary and Cultural Studies; and to develop critical 
intercultural understanding of the civilizations.  
6. Powers of the University .—The University shall have the follow ing powers, namely: — 
(i) to provide for instructions in the relevant branches of learning and to make provision for the 
advancement and dissemination of knowledge for furtherance of its objects;  
(ii) to grant, subject to such conditions as the University may determine, diplomas or certificates 
to, and confer degrees or other academic d istinctions on the basis of examinations, evaluation or any 
other method of testing, on persons, and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or other 
academic distinctions for good and sufficient cause;  
(iii) to organise and to undertake extra mural studies, training and extension services;  
(iv) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner prescribed by the Statutes;  
(v) to provide facilities through the distance education system to such persons as it may 
determine;  
(vi) to ins titute Principalships, Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships and other teaching or 
academic positions, required by the University and to appoint persons to such Principalships, 
Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships or other teaching or academic p ositions;  
(vii) to recognise an institution of higher learning for such purposes as the University may 
determine and to withdraw such recognition;  
(viii) to appoint persons working in any other University or educational institution as teachers of 
the Unive rsity for a specified period;  
(ix) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make appointments thereto;  
(x) to co -operate or collaborate or associate with any other University or authority or institution of 
higher learning in such manner  and for such purposes as the University may determine;  
(xi) to establish, with the prior approval of the Central Government, such Campuses, Centres and 
specialised laboratories or other units for research and instruction, within or outside India, as are, in 
the opinion of the University necessary for the furtherance of its objects;  
(xii) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(xiii) to establish and maintain Colleges, Institutions and Halls;  
(xiv) to make provision for research and advisory services and for that purpose to enter into such 
arrangements with other institutions, industrial or other organisations, as the University may deem 
necessary;  
(xv) to organise and conduct refresher courses, workshops, s eminars and other programmes for 
teachers, evaluators and other academic staff;  
(xvi) to recognise, guide, supervise and control Halls not maintained by the University and other 
accommodation for students, and to withdraw any such recognition;  
(xvii) to ap point on contract or otherwise visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors, Consultants, 
Scholars and such other persons who may contribute to the advancement of the objects of the 
University;  
(xviii) to confer autonomous status on a College or an Institution  or a Department, as the case 
may be, in accordance with the Statutes;  
(xix) to determine standards of admission to the University, which may include examination, 
evaluation or any other method of testing;  
(xx) to demand and receive payment of fees and other charges;  6 
 (xxi) to supervise the residences of the students of the University and to make arrangements for 
promoting their health and general welfare;  
(xxii) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, including their code of 
conduct;  
(xxiii) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the employees, and to take such 
disciplinary measures in this regard as may be deemed by the University to be necessary;  
(xxiv) to make arrangements for promoting the health and genera l welfare of the employees;  
(xxv) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold and manage, and to dispose 
of, with the previous approval of the Central Government, any property, movable or immovable, 
including trust and endowment prope rties for the purposes of the University;  
(xxvi) to borrow, with the approval of the Central Government, on the security of the property of 
the University, money for the purposes of the University;  
(xxvii ) to do all such other acts and things as may be nec essary, incidental or conducive to the 
attainment of all or any of its objects.  
7. Jurisdiction .—The jurisdiction of the University shall extend to the whole of India.  
8. University open to all classes, caste s and creeds .—The University shall be open to persons of 
either sex and of whatever caste, creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt 
or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be 
appointed as a teacher of  the University or to hold any other office therein or be admitted as a student in 
the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University from mak ing special 
provisions for the employment or admission of women, persons with disabilities or of persons belonging 
to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.  
9. Visitor .—(1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University.  
(2) The Visitor may, from time to time, appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress 
of the University, including Colleges and Institutions maintained by it, and to submit a report thereon; and 
upon receipt of that report, the Visitor may, after obtaining the views of the Executive Council thereon 
through the Vice -Chancellor, take such action and issue such directions as he considers necessary in 
respect of any of the matters dealt with in the re port and the University shall be bound to comply with 
such directions.  
(3) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection, to be made by such person or persons as he 
may direct, of the University, its buildings, libraries, laboratories and equipme nt and of any College or 
Institution maintained by the University; and also of the examinations, teaching and other work conducted 
or done by the University and to cause an inquiry to be made in like manner in respect of any matter 
connected with the  admin istration or finances of the University, Colleges or Institutions.  
(4) The Visitor shall, in every matter referred to in sub -section ( 3), give notice to the University of his 
intention to cause an inspection or inquiry to be made, and the University shall have the right to make 
such representations to the Visitor, as it may consider  necessary.  
(5) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University, the Visitor may cause to be 
made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in sub -sectio n (3). 
(6) Where any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the University shall 
be entitled to appoint a representative, who shall have the right to be present and be heard at such 
inspection or inquiry.  
(7) The Visitor may addre ss the Vice -Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or 
inquiry together with such views and advice with regard to the action to be taken thereon, as the Visitor 
may be pleased to offer, and on receipt of address made by the Visitor, the Vice -Chancellor shall 7 
 communicate, to the Executive Council, the views of the Visitor with such advice as the Visitor may offer 
upon the action to be taken thereon.  
(8) The Executive Council shall communicate through the Vice -Chancellor to the Visitor such  action, 
if any, as it proposes to take or has been taken upon the result of such inspection or inquiry.  
(9) Where the Executive Council does not, within a reasonable time, take action to the satisfaction of 
the Visitor, the Visitor may, after considering any explanation furnished or representation made by the 
Executive Council, issue such directions as he may think fit and the Executive Council shall comply with 
such directions.  
(10) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Visito r may, by order in 
writing, annu al any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with the Act, the Statutes or 
the Ordinances:  
Provided that before making any such order, he shall call upon the Registrar to show cause why such 
an order should  not be made, and, if any cause is shown within a reasonable time, he shall consider the 
same.  
(11) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
10. The Chief Rector .—The Governor of the State of Andhra Pradesh shall be the Chief Rector of 
the University.  
11. Officers of the University .—The following shall be the officers of the University, — 
(1) the Chancellor;  
(2) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(3) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(4) the Deans of Schools;  
(5) the Registrar;  
(6) the Finance Officer;  
(7) the Controller of Examinations;  
(8) the Librarian; and  
(9) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be officers of the University.  
12. The Chancellor .—(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner  as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the head of the University and shall, if present, 
preside at the Convocations of the University held for conferring degrees and meetings of the Court.  
13. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such 
manner and on such terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of the  University and 
shall exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of the University and give effect to the 
decisions of all the authorities of the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may, if he is of opinion that immediate action is necessary  on any matter, 
exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under this Act and shall report to 
such authority at its next meeting the action taken by him on such matter:  
Provided that if the authority concerned is of opinion that such action ought not to have been taken, it 
may refer the matter to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final:  
Provided further that any person in the service of the University who is aggrieved by the action taken 
by the Vice -Chancellor under this  sub-section shall have the right to represent against such action to the 
Executive Council within three months from the date on which decision on such action is communicated 8 
 to him and thereupon the Executive  Council may confirm, modify or reverse the act ion taken by the Vice -
Chancellor.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that any decision of any authority of the University is 
beyond the powers of the authority conferred by the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances 
or that an y decision taken is not in the interest of the University, may ask the authority concerned to 
review its decision within sixty days of such decision and if the authority refuses to review the decision 
either in whole or in part or no decision is taken by i t within the said period of sixty days, the matter shall 
be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes or the Or dinances.  
14. The Pro -Vice-Chancellor .—The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed in such manner and on 
such terms and conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
15. The Deans of Schools .—Every Dean of School shall be appointed in such manner and shall 
exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
16. The Registrar .—(1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and 
condit ions of service as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreements, sign documents and authenticate 
records on behalf of the University and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
17. The Finance Officer .—The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms 
and conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed 
by the Statutes.  
18. T he Controller of Examinations .—The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed in such 
manner and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
19. The Librarian .—The Librarian shall be appointed in such manner an d on such terms and 
conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by 
the Statutes.  
20. Other officers .—The manner of appointment and powers and duties of other officers of the 
University shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
21. Authorities of the University .—The following shall be the  authorities of the University: — 
(1) the Court;  
(2) the Executive Council;  
(3) the Academic Council;  
(4) the Schools of Studies;  
(5) the Finance Committee; and  
(6) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the 
University.  
22. The Court .—(1) The constitution of the Court and the term of office of its members shall be 
prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that such number of members as may be prescribed by the Statutes shall be elected from 
among the teachers, employees and students of the University.   9 
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall have the followin g powers and functions, 
namely:— 
(a) to review, fr om time to time, the broad policies and programmes of the University and to 
suggest measures for the improvement and development of the University;  
(b) to consider and pass resolutions on the annual report and the annual accounts of the University 
and the audit report on such accounts;  
(c) to advise the Visitor in respect of any matter which may be referred to it for advice; and  
(d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
23. The Executive Council .—(1) The Executive Council shall be the principal executive body of the 
University.  
(2) The constitution of the Executive Council, the term of office of its members and its powers and 
functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that such number of members as may be presc ribed by the Statutes shall be from among the 
elected members of the Court.  
24. The Academic Council .—(1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the 
University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ord inances,  coordinate and 
exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University.  
(2) The constitution of the Academic Council, the term of office of its members and its powers and 
functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that such number of members as may be prescribed by the Statutes shall be from among the 
elected members of the Court who are teachers of the University.  
25. The Schools of Studies .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Schools of Studies shall 
be prescribed by the Statutes.  
26. The Finance Committee .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
27. Other authorities .—The constitution, powers and functions of other authorities, as may be 
declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the University, shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
28. Powers to make Statutes .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all 
or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the co nstitution, powers and functions of authorities and other bodies of the University, as 
may be constituted from time to time;  
(b) the appointment and continuance in office of the members of the said authorities and bodies, 
the filling up of vacancies of mem bers, and all other matters relating to those authorities and other 
bodies for which it may be necessary or desirable to provide;  
(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the University and their emoluments;  
(d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees of the University, their 
emoluments and conditions of service;  
(e) the recognition of persons as recognized teachers;  
(f) the appointment of teachers, academic staff working in any other University or organisation 
for a specific period for undertaking a joint project;  
(g) the conditions of service of employees including provision for pension, insurance and 
provident fund, the manner of termination of service and disciplinary action relating to employees  of 
the University;  
(h) the principles governing the seniority of service of the employees of the University;  10 
 (i) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or students and the 
University;  
(j) the procedure for appeal to the Execut ive Council by any employee or student against the 
action of any officer or authority of the University;  
(k) the conferment of autonomous status on a College or an Institution or a Department;  
(l) the establishment and abolition of Schools, Departments, Ce ntres, Halls, Colleges and 
Institutions;  
(m) the grant and withdrawal of recognition to Institutions;  
(n) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(o) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions;  
(p) the management of Colle ges and Institutions established by the University;  
(q) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the University;  
(r) the maintenance of discipline am ong the employees and students;  
(s) all other matters which by this Act are to be or may be provided for by the Statutes.  
29. Statutes how to be made .—(1) The first Statutes are those set out in the Schedule.  
(2) The Executive Council may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend or 
repeal the Statutes referred to  in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that the Executive Council shall not make, amend or repeal any Statutes affecting the status, 
powers or constitution of any authority of the University until such authority has been given an 
opportunity of expressing an opinio n in writing on the proposed changes, and any opinion so expressed 
shall be considered by the Executive Council.  
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require 
the assent of the Visitor who may assen t thereto or withhold assent or remit to the Executive Council for 
re-consideration.  
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless 
it has been assented to by the Visitor.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything  contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may make new or 
additional Statutes or amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1), during the period of three 
years immediately after the commencement of this Act:  
Provided that the Visitor may, on the expiry of the said period of three years, make, within one year 
from the date of such expiry, such detailed Statutes as he may consider necessary and such detailed 
Statutes shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament.  
(6) Notwithstan ding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may direct the 
University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by him and if the 
Executive Council is unable to implement such direction within sixty days o f its receipt, the Visitor may, 
after considering the reasons, if any, communicated by the Executive Council for its inability to comply 
with such direction, make or amend the Statutes suitably.  
30. Power to make Ordinances .—(1) Subject to the provisions o f this Act and the Statutes, the 
Ordinances may provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of the 
University;  
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;  11 
 (d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions, qualifications for 
the same and the means to be taken relating to the granting and obtaining of  the same;  
(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission to the 
examinations, degrees and diplomas of the University;  
(f) the conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(g) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and manner of appointment and the 
duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators;  
(h) the conditions of residence of the students of the University;  
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may  be made for the residence and teaching of women 
students and the prescribing of special courses of studies for them;  
(j) the manner of co -operation and collaboration with other Universities, institutions and other 
agencies not involving the carrying on of  any activity for profit including learned bodies or 
associations;  
(k) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is considered necessary for 
improving the academic life of the University;  
(l) the institution of fellowships, scholarshi ps, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(m) the setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances of employees; and  
(n) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes, are to be or may be, provided for by the 
Ordinances.  
(2) The first Ordinances shal l be made by the Vice -Chancellor with the previous approval of the 
Central Government and the Ordinances so made may be amended, repealed or added to at any time by 
the Executive Council in the manner prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that till such time as the first Ordinances are not so made by the Vice -Chancellor, in respect 
of the matters that are to be provided for by the Ordinances under this Act and Statutes, the relevant 
provisions of the rules and the bye -laws of the Central Institute of Engl ish and Foreign Languages, 
Hyderabad in force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall be applicable in so far as 
they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the Statutes.  
31. Regulations .—The authorities of the University may make Regulations, consistent with this Act, 
the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business and that of the Committees, if any, 
appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances, in the manner 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
32. Annual report .—(1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the directions of 
the Executive Council, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the University 
towards the fulfilment of its ob jects and shall be submitted to the Court on or after such date as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes and the Court shall consider the report in its annual meeting.  
(2) The Court shall submit the annual report to the Visitor along with its comments, if any.  
(3) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub -section ( 1), shall also be submitted to the 
Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of 
Parliament.  
33. Annual accounts .—(1) The annual accounts  and balance -sheet of the University shall be 
prepared under the directions of the Executive Council and shall, once at least every year and at  intervals 
of not more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or by such  
persons as he may authorise in this behalf.  
(2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report thereon shall be submitted to the 
Court and the Visitor along with the observations of the Executive Council.  12 
 (3) Any observations made by the Vis itor on the annual accounts shall be brought to the notice of the 
Court and the observations of the Court, if any, shall, after being considered by the Executive Council, be 
submitted to the Visitor.  
(4) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audi t report as submitted to the Visitor, shall also 
be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before 
both Houses of Parliament.  
(5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before both Houses o f Parliament shall be 
published in the Gazette of India.  
34. Returns and information .—The University shall furnish to the Central Government such returns 
or other information with respect to its property or activities as the Central Government may, from time to 
time, require.  
35. Condit ions of service of employees .—(1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed 
under a written contract, which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be furnished 
to the employee concerned.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any employee shall, at the 
request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by 
the Executive Council, one member nominated by the employ ee concerned and an umpire appointed by 
the Visitor.  
(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final, and no suit shall lie in any civil court in respect of the 
matters decided by the Tribunal:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall preclude the e mployee from availing of the judicial 
remedies available under articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution.  
(4) Every request made by the employee under sub -section ( 2), shall be deemed to be a submission to 
arbitration upon the terms of this section within th e meaning of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996  
(26 of 1996) . 
(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
36. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in discipl inary cases against students .—(1) Any student 
or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed from the rolls of the University by the 
orders or resolution of the Vice -Chancellor, Discipline Committee or Examination Committee, as the case 
may be, and who has been debarred from appea ring at the examinations of the University for more than 
one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt of such orders or copy of such resolution by him, 
appeal to the Executive Council and the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the de cision 
of the Vice -Chancellor or the Committee, as the case may be.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against a student shall, 
at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the pro visions of sub -sections 
(2), (3), (4) and ( 5) of section 35 shall, as far as may be, apply to a reference made under this sub -section.  
37. Right to appeal .—Every employee or student of the University or a College or an Institution 
maintained by the Univers ity shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, have a right to appeal 
within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes, to the Executive Council against the decision of 
any officer or authority of the University or of the Principal of any College or an Institution, as the case 
may be, and thereupon the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed 
against.  
38. Provident and pension funds .—(1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its 
employees such provident or pension fund or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit in such 
manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Where such provident fund or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central Government  may 
declare that the provisions o f the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925) shall apply to such fund, as if it 
were a Government provident fund.  13 
 39. Disputes as to constitution of Univ ersity authorities and bodies .—If any question arises as to 
whether any person has been duly elected or appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority 
or other body of the University, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be 
final.  
40. Filling of casual vacancies .—All casua l vacancies among the members (other than ex officio  
members) of any authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the 
person or body who appoints, elects or co -opts the member whose place has become vacant and person 
appointed, elected or co -opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority or body for the 
residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member.  
41. Proceedings of University authorities or bodies not in validated by vacancies .—No act or 
proceedings of any authority or other body of the University shall be invalid merely by reason of the 
existence of a vacancy or vacancies among its members.  
42. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any 
officer or other employee of the University for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
43. Mode of proof of Unive rsity record .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872  (1 of 1872)  or in any other law for the time being in force, a copy of any receipt, 
application, notice, order, proceeding or resolution of any authority or other body of the Unive rsity, or 
any other document in possession of the University, or any entry in any register duly maintained by the 
University, if certified by the Registrar, shall be received as prima facie  evidence of such receipt, 
application, notice, order, proceeding, resolution or document or the existence of entry in the register and 
shall be admitted as evidence of the matters and transactions therein where the original thereof would, if 
produced, have been admissible in evidence.  
44. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or ex pedient for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is mad e, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the suc cessive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the order or both Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, howe ver, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order.  
45. Statutes, Ordinances and Regula tions to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid 
before Parliament .—(1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be pub lished 
in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while  it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive  sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses a gree in 
making any modification in the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree that the Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation should not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of  no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that Statute, Ordinance or Regulation.  
(3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulatio ns shall include the power to give 
retrospective effect, from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the Statutes, 14 
 Ordinances or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any Statute, 
Ordinance or Re gulation so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation may be applicable.  
46. Transitional provisions .—Notwithstanding anything containe d in this Act and the Statutes, — 
(a) the first Chancellor and the first Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Central 
Government in such manner and on such conditions as may be deemed fit and each of the said 
officers shall hold office for such term, not exceeding five years, as may be specified by the Central 
Government;  
(b) the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Central Government 
and each of the said officers shall hold office for a term of three years;  
(c) the first Court and the first Executive Council shall consist of not  more than thirty members 
and eleven members, respectively, who shall be nominated by the Central Government and shall hold 
office for a term of three years;  
(d) the first Academic Council shall consist of not more than twenty -one members, who shall be 
nominated by the Central Government and they shall hold office for a term of three years:  
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or authorities, the same shall be filled by 
appointment or nomination, as the case may be, by the Central Govern ment, and the person so appointed 
or nominated shall hold office for so long as the officer or member in whose place he is appointed or 
nominated would have held office, if such vacancy had not occurred.   15 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 29)  
THE STATUTES  OF THE UNIVERSITY  
1. The  Chancellor .—(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less 
than three persons recommended by the Executive Council from amongst persons of eminence in the 
academic or public life of the country:  
Provided that  if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons so recommended, he may call for 
fresh recommendations from the Executive Council.  
(2) The Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years a nd shall not be eligible for  
re-appointment:  
Provided t hat notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office, the Chancellor shall continue to hold 
office until his successor enters upon his office.  
2. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of 
not less than t hree persons who shall be recommended by a Committee as constituted under clause ( 2): 
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons included in the panel, he may call 
for an extended or a fresh panel.  
(2) The Committee referred to in clause ( 1) shall consist of three persons, out of whom two shall be 
nominated by the Executive Council and one by the Visitor and the nominee of the Visitor shall be  the 
convener of the Committee:  
Provided that none of the members of the Committee shall be  an employee of the University or a 
College or an Institution maintained by the University or a member of a ny authority of the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters 
upon his office, or until he attains the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier, and he shall not be 
eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the said p eriod of five years, he shall continue in office 
until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office:  
Provided further that the Visitor may direct any Vice -Chancellor after his term has expired, to 
continue in office for such period, not exceeding a total period of one year, as may be specified by him or 
till his successor is appointed and enters upon his office, whichever is earlier.  
(5) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Vice -Chancellor shall be as follows: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancel lor shall be paid a monthly salary and allowances, other than house rent 
allowance, at the rates fixed by the Central Government from time to time and he shall be entitled, 
without payment of rent, to use a furnished residence throughout his term of office  and no charge 
shall fall on the Vice -Chancellor in respect of the maintenance of such residence;  
(ii) the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to such terminal benefits and allowances as may be fixed 
by the Central Government from time to time:  
Provided that  where an employee of the University, or a college or an institution maintained by, 
or admitted to the privileges of the University, or of any other University or any college or institution 
maintained by or admitted to the privileges of such other Universi ty, is appointed as the Vice -
Chancellor, he may be allowed to continue to contribute to any provident fund of which he is a 
member and the University shall contribute to the account of such person in that provident fund at the 
same rate at which the person  had been contributing immediately before his appointment as the Vice -
Chancellor:  
Provided further that where such employee had been member of any pension scheme, the 
University shall make the necessary contribution to such scheme;  16 
 (iii) the Vice -Chancello r shall be entitled to travelling allowance at such rates as may be fixed by 
the Executive Council;  
(iv) the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full pay at the rate of thirty days in a 
calendar year and the leave shall be credited to his account  in advance in two half -yearly instalments 
of fifteen days each on the first day of January and July every year:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor assumes or relinquishes charge of the office of the Vice -
Chancellor during the currency of a half year, th e leave shall be credited proportionately at the rate of 
two and -a-half days for each completed month of service;  
(v) in addition to the leave referred to in sub -clause ( iv), the Vice -Chancellor shall also be entitled 
to half -pay leave at the rate of twenty days for each completed year of service, and half -pay leave 
may also be availed of as commuted leave on f ull pay on medical certificate:  
Provided that when such commuted leave is availed of, twice the amount of half -pay leave shall 
be debited agains t half -pay leave due.  
(6) If the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or otherwise, or if he 
is unable to perform his duties due to ill -health or any other cause, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall perform 
the duties of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the Pro -Vice -Chancellor is not available, the senior most Professor shall perform the 
duties of the Vice -Chancellor until a new Vice -Chancellor assumes office or until the existing Vice -
Chancellor resumes the duties of his  office, as the case may be.  
3. Powers and d uties of the Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the ex officio  
Chairman of the Executive Council, the Academic Council and the Finance Committee and shall, in the 
absence of the Chancellor, preside  at the Convocations held for conferring degrees and at meetings of the 
Court.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and address, any meeting of any authority 
or other body of the University, but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he is a member of such 
authority or body.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice -Chancellor to see that this Act, the Statutes, the Ordinances and the 
Regulations are duly observed and he shall have all the powers necessary to ensure such observance.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall have all the powers necessary for the proper maintenance of discipline 
in the University and he may delegate any such powers to such person or persons as he deems fit.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall have the power to convene or  cause to be convened the meetings of the 
Executive Council, the Academic Counc il and the Finance Committee.  
4. The Pro -Vice-Chancellor .—(1) The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Executive 
Council on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that where the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor is not accepted by the Executive 
Council, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor who may either appoint the person recommended by 
the Vice -Chancellor or ask the Vice -Chancellor to recommend  another p erson to the Executive Council:  
Provided further that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor, 
appoint a Professor to discharge the duties of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor in addition to his own duties as a 
Professor.  
(2) The term of office of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be such as may be decided by the Executive 
Council but it shall not in any case exceed five years or until the expiration of the term of office of the 
Vice -Chancellor, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that a Pro-Vice -Chancellor whose term of office has expired shall be eligible for  
re-appointment:  
Provided further that, in any case, a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall retire on attaini ng the age of sixty -five 
years:  17 
 Provided also that a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall, whi le discharging the duties of the Vice -Chancellor 
under clause ( 6) of Statute 2, continue in office notwithstanding the expiration of his term of office as 
Pro-Vice -Chancellor, until the Vice -Chancellor resumes office or a new Vice -Chancellor assumes office , 
as the case may be.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be such 
as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall assist the Vice -Chancellor in respect of such matters as may  be 
specified by the Vice -Chancellor in this behalf, from time to time, and shall also exercise such powers 
and perform such duties as may be assigned or delegated to him by the Vice -Chancellor.  
5. Deans of Schools .—(1) Every Dean of School shall be appoin ted by the Vice -Chancellor from 
amongst the Professors in the School by rotation in the order of seniority for a period of three years:  
 Provided that in case there is only one Professor or no Professor in a School, the Dean shall be 
appointed, for the tim e being, from amongst the Professor, if any, and the Readers in the School by 
rotation in the order of seniority:  
Provided further that a Dean on attaining the age of sixty -two years shall cease to hold office as such.  
(2) When the office of the Dean is v acant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness, absence or any 
other cause, unable to perform duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by the 
senior -most Professor or Reader, as the case may be, in the School.  
(3) The Dean shall b e the Head of the School and shall be responsible for the conduct and 
maintenance of the standards of teaching and research in the School and shall have such other functions 
as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The Dean shall have the right to be pr esent and to speak at any meeting of the Boards of Studies 
or Committees of the School, as the case may be, but shall not have the right to vote thereat unless he is a 
member thereof.  
6. The Registrar .—(1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the 
recommendation of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and shall be a whole -time salaried 
officer of the University.  
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for re -appointment.  
(3) The emoluments  and other terms and conditions of service of the Registrar shall be such as may 
be prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time:  
Provided that the Registrar shall retire on attain ing the age of sixty -two years:  
Provided further that a Registrar shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty -two years, 
continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office or until the expiry of a period 
of one year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Registrar is vacan t or when the Registrar is, by reason of illness, absence or 
any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by 
such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) (a) The Registrar s hall have power to take disciplinary action against such of the employees, 
excluding teachers and other academic staff, as may be specified in the order of the Executive Council 
and to suspend them pending inquiry, to administer warnings to them or to impo se on them the penalty of 
censure or the withholding of increment:  
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him.  
(b) An ap peal shall lie to the Vice -Chancellor against any order of the Registrar imposing any of the 
penalties specified in sub -clause ( a). 18 
 (c) In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the power of the Registrar is called 
for, the Registrar s hall, upon the concluding of the inquiry, make a report to the Vice -Chancellor along 
with his recommendations:  
Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Executive Council against an order of the Vice -Chancellor 
imposing any penalty.  
(6) The Registrar shall be the ex officio  Secretary of the Executive Council and the Academic 
Council, but shall not be deemed to be a member of any of these authorities and he shall be the ex officio  
Member -Secretary of the Court.  
(7) It sha ll be the duty of the Registrar — 
(a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such other property of the University 
as the Executive Council shall commit to his charge;  
(b) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council and of any Committees appointed by those authorities;  
(c) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council and of any Committees appointed by those authorities;  
(d) to conduct the official correspondence of the Cou rt, the Executive Council and the Academic 
Council;  
(e) to supply to the Visitor copies of the agenda of the meetings of the authorities of the 
University as soon as they are issued and the minutes of such meetings;  
(f) to represent the University in suits  or proceedings by or against the University, sign powers of 
attorney and verify pleadings or depute his representative for the purpose; and  
(g) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances or the 
Regulations or as may b e required from time to time by the Executive Council or the Vice -
Chancellor.  
7. The Finance Officer .—(1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Executive Council on 
the recommendations of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time 
salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The Finance Officer shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligi ble for  
re-appointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Finance Officer sha ll be such as 
may be prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time : 
Provided that the Finance Officer shall retire on attain ing the age of sixty -two years:  
Provided further that the Finance Officer shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of si xty-two 
years, continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office or until the expiry of a 
period of one year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Finance Officer is vacant or when the Finance Officer is, by reason of 
illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall 
be performed by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) The Finance Officer shall be the ex officio  Secretary of the Finance Committee, but shall not be 
deemed to be a member of such Committee.  
(6) The Finance Officer shall — 
(a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the University and shall advise it as regards its 
financial policy; and  
(b) perform such other financial functions as may be assigned to him by the Executive Council or 
as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.  19 
 (7) Subject to the control of the Executive Cou ncil, the Finance Officer shall — 
(a) hold and manage the property and inv estments of the University including trust and endowed 
property;  
(b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Executive Council for recurring and non -recurring 
expenditure for a year are not exceeded and that all moneys are expended on the purpose for which 
they are granted or allotted;  
(c) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget of the University and for 
their presentation to the Executive Council;  
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank balances and on the state  of 
investments;  
(e) watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advise on the methods of collection 
employed;  
(f) ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture and equipment are maintained up -to-date 
and that stock -checking is conducted,  of equipment and other consumable materials in all offices, 
Departments, University, Institutes, Centres and Specialised Laboratories;  
(g) bring to the notice of the Vice -Chancellor unauthorised expenditure and other financial 
irregularities and suggest d isciplinary action against persons at fault; and  
(h) call for from any office, Department, Centre, Laboratory, College or Institution maintained by 
the University any information or returns that he may consider necessary for the performance of his 
duties.  
(8) Any receipt given by the Finance Officer or the person or persons duly authorised in this behalf by 
the Executive Council for any money payable to the University shall be sufficient discharge for payment 
of such money.  
8. Th e Controller of Examinations .—(1) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed by the 
Executive Council on the recommendations of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he 
shall be a whole -time sala ried officer of the University.  
(2) The Controller of Examinations  shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for 
re-appointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Controller of Examinations shall 
be such as may be prescribed by the Execu tive Council from time to time:  
Provided that the Controller of Examinations shall retire on attaining the age of sixty -two years:  
 Provided further that the Controller of Examinations shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of 
sixty -two years, continue in office until his suc cessor is appointed and enters upon his office or until the 
expiry of a period of one year, wh ichever is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Controller of Examinations is vacant or when the Controller of 
Examinations is, by reason of illness, absence or an y other cause, unable to perform the duties of his 
office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such person as the Vice -Chancell or may appoint for 
the purpose.  
(5) The Controller of Examinations shall arrange for and superintend the examinations of the 
University in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances.  
9. The Librarian .—(1) The Librarian shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the 
recommendations of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time 
salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to him by 
the Executive Council.  20 
 10. The Court .—(1) An annual meeting of the Court shall be held on a date to be fixed by the 
Executive Council unless some other date has been fixed by th e Court in respect of any year.  
(2) At the annual meeting of the Court, a report on the working of the University during the previous 
year, together with a statement of the receipts and expenditure, the ba lance sheet as audited, and the 
financial estimates for th e next year shall be presented.  
(3) A copy of the statement of receipts and expenditure, the balance sheet and the financial estimates 
referred to in clause ( 4) shall be sent to every member of the Court at least seven days before the date of 
the annual meeting.  
(4) Special meetings of the Court may be convened by the Executive Council or the Vice -Chancellor 
or if there is no Vice -Chancellor, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor or if there is no Pro -Vice-Chancel lor, by the 
Registrar.  
(5) Eleven members of the Court shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Court.  
11. The Executive Council .—Seven members of the Executive Council shall form a quorum for a 
meeting of the Executive Council.  
12. Powers and functi ons of  the Executive Council .—(1) The Executive Council shall have the 
power of management and administration of the revenues and property of the University and the conduct 
of all administrative affairs of the University not otherwise provided for.  
(2) Subject t o the provisions of the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Executive Council shall, 
in addition to all other powers vested in it, hav e the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to create teaching and other academic posts, to determine the number and emolum ents of such 
posts and to define the duties and conditions of service of Professors, Readers, Lect urers and other 
academic staff:  
Provided that no action shall be taken by the Executive Council in respect of the number and 
qualifications of teachers and ot her academic staff otherwise than after consideration of the 
recommendations of the Academic Cou ncil; 
(ii) to appoint such Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other academic staff, as may be necessary, 
and the Directors of University, Institutes and Heads of independent Centres on the recommendation 
of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and to fill up temporary vacancies therein;  
(iii) to recognise persons as University recognised teachers in the manner prescribed by the 
Ordinances;  
(iv) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts (including Chairs) and to make 
appointments thereto in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(v) to grant leave of absence to any salaried officer of the University other than the Vice -
Chance llor, and to make necessary arrangements for the discharge of the functions of such officer 
during h is absence;  
(vi) to regulate and enforce discipline among employees in accordance with the Statutes and the 
Ordinances;  
(vii) to manage and regulate the fin ances, accounts, investments, property, business and all other 
administrative affairs of the University and for that purpose to appoint such agents as it may think fit;  
(viii) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non -recurring expenditure for  a year on the 
recommendation of the Finance Committee;  
(ix) to invest any money belonging to the University, including any unapplied income, in such 
stocks, funds, share or securities, from time to time as it may think fit or in the purchase of 
immovable property in India, with the like powers of varying such investment from time to time;  
(x) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immovable property on behalf of the 
University;  21 
 (xi) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus and oth er means needed for carrying 
on the work of the University;  
(xii) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on behalf of the University;  
(xiii) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and if thought fit, to redress any grievances of the employees 
and stud ents of the University who may, for any reason, feel aggrieved;  
(xiv) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if necessary, to remove them, and to fix their fees, 
emoluments and travelling and other allowances, after consulting the Academic Council;  
(xv) to select a common seal for the University and provide for the custody and use of such seal;  
(xvi) to make such special arrangements as may be necessary for the residence of women 
students;  
(xvii) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medal s and prizes;  
(xviii) to provide for the appointment of Visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors, Consultants and 
Scholars and determine the terms and condi tions of such appointments; and  
(xix) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as  may be conferred or imposed 
on it by the Act or the Statutes.  
13. The Academic Council .—Nine members of the Academic Council shall form a quorum for a 
meeting of the Academic Council.  
14. Powers and func tions of the Academic Council .—Subject to the provisions of the Act, the 
Statutes and the Ordinances, the Academic Council shall, in addition to all other powers vested in it, have  
the following powers, namely: — 
(a) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University and to gi ve 
directions regarding methods of instruction, co -ordination of teaching among the Colleges and the 
Institutions, evaluation of research and improvement of academic standards;  
(b) to bring about and promote inter -School co -ordination and to establish or appoint such 
committees or boards as may be deemed necessary for the purpose;  
(c) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own initiative, or on a reference 
by a School or the Executive Council, and to take appropriate action thereon;  and 
(d) to frame such regulations and rules consistent with the Statutes and the Ordinances regarding 
the academic functioning of the University, discipline, residence, admissions, award of fellowships 
and studentships, fees, concessions, corporate life a nd attendance.  
15. Schoo ls of Studies and Departments .—(1) The University shall have such Schools of Studies as 
may be sp ecified in the Statutes.  
(2) Every School shall have a School Board and the members of the first School Board shall be 
nominated by the  Executive Counc il for a period of three years.  
(3) The composition, powers and functions of a School Board shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The conduct of the meetings of a School Board and the quorum required for such meetings shall 
be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(5) (a) Every School shall consist of such Departments as may be assigned to it by the Ordinances:  
 Provided that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic Council, 
establish Centres of Studies to which may be assigned such teachers of the University as the Executive 
Council may consider necessary.   22 
 (b) Each Department shall consi st of the following members, namely: — 
(i) Teachers of the Department;  
(ii) Persons conducting research in the Department;  
(iii) Dean of the School;  
(iv) Honorary Professors, if any, attached to the Department; and  
(v) Such other persons as may be members o f the Department in accordance with the provisions 
of the Ordinances.  
16. Boards of Studies .—(1) Each Department  shall have a Board of Studies.  
(2) The constitution of the Board of Studies and the term of office of its members shall be prescribed 
by the Ordinance s. 
(3) Subject to the overall control and supervision of the Academic Council, the functions of a Board 
of Studies shall be to approve subjects for research for various degrees and other requirements of research 
degrees and to recommend to the con cerned School Board in the manne r prescribed by the Ordinances — 
(a) courses of studies and appointment of examiners for courses, but excluding research degrees;  
(b) appointment of supervisors for research; and  
(c) measures for the improvement of the standa rd of teach ing and research:  
Provided that the above functions of a Board of Studies shall, during the period of three years 
immediately after the commencement of the Act, be performed by the Department.  
17. The Finance Committee .—(1) The Finance Committee  shall consist of  the following members, 
namely:— 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(ii) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(iii) one person to be nominated by the Court;  
(iv) three persons to be nominated by the Executive Council, out of whom at least one shall be a 
member of the Executive Council; and  
(v) three persons to be nominated by the Visitor.  
(2) Five members of the Finance Committee shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Finance 
Committee.  
(3) All the members of the Finance Committee, other than the ex officio  members, shall hold office 
for a term of three years.  
(4) A member of the Finance Committee shall have the right to record a minute of dissent if he does 
not agree with any decision of the Finance Committee.  
(5) The Finance Committee shall meet at least thri ce every year to examine the accounts and to 
scrutinise proposals for expenditure.  
(6) All proposals relating to creation of posts, and those items which have not been included in the 
Budget, shall be examined by the Finance Committee before they are consi dered by the Executive 
Council.  
(7) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University prepared by the Finance Officer 
shall be laid before the Finance Committee for consideration and comments and thereafter submitted to 
the Executive Counci l for approval.  
(8) The Finance Committee shall recommend limits for the total recurring expenditure and the total 
non-recurring expenditure for the year, based on the income and resources of the University (which, in the 
case of productive works, may include the proceeds of loans).  23 
 18. Selection Committees .—(1) There shall be Selection Committees for making recommendations 
to the Executive Council for appointment to the posts of Professor, Reader, Lecturer, Registrar, Finance 
Officer, Librarian and Pri ncipals of Colleges and Institution s maintained by the University.  
(2) The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts specified in Column 1 of the Table below 
shall consist of the Vice -Chancellor, a nominee of the Visitor and the persons specified in  the 
corresponding entry in column 2 of the said Table:  
TABLE  
1 2 
Professor  (i) The Dean of the School.  
 (ii) The Head of the Department.  
 (iii) Three persons not in the service of the 
University, nominated by the Executive Council, 
out of a panel of names recommended by the 
Academic Council for  their special knowledge of, 
or interest in, the subject with which the Professor 
will be concerned.  
Reader/Lecturer  (i) The Head of the Department.  
 (ii) One Professor nominated by the Vice -
Chancellor.  
 (iii) Two persons not in the service of the 
University, nominated by the Executive Council, 
out of a panel of names recommended by the 
Academic Council for their special knowledge of, 
or interest in, the subject with which the 
Reader/Lecturer will be concerned.  
Registrar/ Finance Officer/ Controller of 
Examinations  (i) Two members of the Executive Council  
nominated by  it. 
 (ii) One person not in the service of the University 
nominated by the Executive Council . 
Librarian  (i) Two persons not in the service of the University 
who have special knowledge of the subject of the 
Library Science/Library Administration nominated 
by the Executive Council.  
 (ii) One person not in the service of the University 
nominated by the Executive Council.  
Principal of College or Institution maintained by 
the University.  Three persons not in the service of the University. 
University of whom two shall be nominated by the 
Executive Council and one by the Academic 
Council for their special knowledge of, or interest 
in, a subject in which instruction is being provided 
by the College or Institution.  
Note  1. Where the appointment is being made for an inter -disciplinary project, t he head of the project 
shall be deemed to be the Head of the Department concerned.  
Note  2. The Professor to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor shall be a Professor concerned with the 
speciality for which the selection is being made and the Vice -Chancellor  shall consult the Head of the 
Department and the Dean of School before nominat ing the Professor.  24 
  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor, or in his absence the Pro -Vice -Chancellor, shall convene and preside at the 
meeting of the Selection Committee:  
Provided that the meeting of the Selection Committee shall be fixed after prior consultation with, and 
subject to the convenience of Visitor's nominee and the experts nom inated by the Executive Council : 
Provided further that the proceedings of the Selection Commi ttee shall not be valid unless ,— 
(a) where the number of Visitor's nominee and the persons nominated by the Executive Council is 
four in all, at least three of them attend the meeting; and  
(b) where the number of Visitor's nominee and the persons nominated by the Exe cutive Council is 
three in all, at least two of them attend the meeting.  
(4) The procedure to be followed by the Selection Committee shall be laid down in the Ordinances.  
(5) If the Executive Council is unable to accept the recommendations made by the Sele ction 
Committee, it shall record its reasons and submit the case to the Visi tor for final orders.  
(6) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made  in the manner indicated below — 
(i) If the temporary vacancy is for duration longer than one academic session , it shall be filled on 
the advice of the Selection Committee in accordance with the procedure indi cated in the foregoing 
clauses:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor is satisfied that in the interests of work it is necessary to fill 
the vacancy, the appointment may be made on a purely temporary basis on the advice of a local 
Selection Comm ittee referred to in sub -clause  (ii) for a p eriod not exceeding six months.  
(ii) If the temporary vacancy is for a period less than a year, an appointment to such va cancy shall 
be made on the recommendation of a local Selection Committee consisting of the Dean of the School 
concerned, the Head of the Department and a nominee of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and the  Head of the Department, 
the Selection Committee may contain two nominees of the  Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that in the case of sudden casual vacancies of teaching posts caused by death or 
any other reason, the Dean may, in consultation with the Hea d of the Department concerned, make a 
temporary appointment for a month and report to the Vice -Chancellor and the Re gistrar about such 
appointment.  
(iii) No teacher appointed temporarily shall, if he is not recommended by a regular Selection 
Committee for appointment under the Statutes, be continued in service on such temporary 
employment, unless he is subsequently selected by a local Selection Committee or a regular Selection 
Committee, for a temporary or permanent a ppointment, as the case may be.  
19. Spec ial mode of appointment .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 18, the 
Executive Council may invite a person of high academic distinction and professional attainments to 
accept a post of Professor or any other equivalent academic post in the Un iversity on such terms and 
conditions as it deems fit and on the person agreeing to  do so appoint him to the post.  
(2) The Executive Council may appoint a teacher or any other academic staff working in any other 
University or organisation for undertaking a  joint project in accordance with the mann er laid down in the 
Ordinances.  
20. A ppointment for a fixed tenure .—The Executive Council may appoint a person selected in 
accordance with the procedure laid down in Statute 18 for a fixed tenure on such terms and conditions as 
it deems fit.  
21. Recognised teachers .—(1) The qualifications of recognised teachers shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the Ordinances.  25 
 (2) All applications for the recognition of teachers shall be made in such manner as may be laid down 
by the Ordinances.  
(3) No teacher shall be recognized as a teacher except on the recommendation of a Selection 
Committee constituted for the purpose in the manner laid down in the Ordinances.  
(4) The period of recognition of a teacher shall be determined b y the Ordinances made in that behalf.  
(5) The Academic Council may, by a special resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -
thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw recognition from a teacher:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be p assed until notice in writing has been given to the person 
concerned calling upon him to show cause, within such time as may be specified in the notice, why such 
resolution should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may prod uce in 
support of them have been cons idered by the Academic Council.  
22. Committee s.—(1) Any authority of the University may appoint as many standing or special 
Committees as it may deem fit, and may appoint to such Committees persons who are not members o f 
such authority.  
(2) Any Committee appointed under clause ( 1) may deal with any subject delegated to it subject to 
subsequent confirmation by the authority appointing it.  
23. Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of the teachers, etc .—(1) All the 
teachers and other academic staff of the University shall, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, 
be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as are specified in the Statutes, 
the Ordinances and the Regulations.  
(2) The emoluments of members of the academic staff shall be such as may be prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(3) Every teacher and other member of the academic staff of the University shall be appointed on a 
written contract, the form of which shall be presc ribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) A copy of every contract referred to in clause ( 3) shall be deposited with the Registrar.  
24. Terms and conditions of service and code o f conduct of other employees .—(1) All the 
employees of the University, other than the teachers and other academic staff, shall, in the absence of any 
contract to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as are 
specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations.  
(2) The manner of appoint ment and emoluments of employees, other than the teachers and other 
academic staff, shall be such as may b e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
25. Seniority list .—(1) Whenever, in accordance with the Statutes, any person is to hold an office or 
be a member of a n authority of the University by rotation according to seniority, such seniority shall be 
determined according to the length of continuous service of such person in his grade and in accordance 
with such other principles as the Executive Council may, from t ime to time, prescribe.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain in respect of each class of persons to 
whom the provisions of these Statutes apply, a complete and up -to-date seniority list in accordance with 
the provisions of clau se (1). 
(3) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous service in a particular grade or the relative 
seniority of any person or persons is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar may, on his own motion and shall, 
at the request of any such person, su bmit the matter to the Executive Council whose decision thereon shall 
be final.  
26. Removal of  employees of the University .—(1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct 
against a teacher, a member of the academic staff or other employee of the University, the Vice -
Chancellor, in the case of the teacher or a member of the academic staff, and the authority competent to 
appoint (hereinafter referred to as the appointing authority) in the case of other employee may, by order in  
writing, place such t eacher, member of the academic staff or other employee, as the case may be, under 26 
 suspension and shall forthwith report to the Executive Council the circumstances in which the order was 
made:  
Provided that the Executive Council may, if it is of the opinio n, that the circumstances of the case do 
not warrant the suspension of the teacher or a member of the aca demic staff, revoke such order.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of the contract of appointment or of any other 
terms and conditions  of service of the employees, the Executive Council in respect of teachers and other 
academic staff, and the appointing authority in respect of other employees, shall have the power to 
remove a teacher or a member of the academic staff or other employee, a s the case ma y be, on grounds of 
misconduct.  
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Executive Council, or as the case may be, the appointing authority, shall not 
be entitled to remove any teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee except for a good 
cause and after giving three months' notice or on pay ment of three months' salary in lieu thereof.  
(4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall be removed under clause ( 2) or 
clause ( 3) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action propose d 
to be taken in regard to him.  
(5) The removal of a teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall take effect from 
the date on whic h the order of removal is made:  
Provided that where the teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee is  under suspension 
at the time of his removal, such removal shall take effect from the date on which he was placed under 
suspension.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Statute, a teacher, member 
of the academic staff or other employee may resign — 
(a) if he is a permanent employee, only after giving three months' notice in writing to the 
Executive Council or the appointing authority, as the case may be, or by paying three months' salary 
in lieu thereof;  
(b) if he is not  a permanent employee, only after giving one month's notice in writing to the 
Executive Council or, as the case may be, the appointing authority or by paying one month's salary in 
lieu thereof:  
Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the d ate on which the resignation is 
accepted by the Executive Council or the appointing authority as the case may be.  
27. Honorary degrees .—(1) The Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic 
Council and by a resolution passed by a majority of  not less than two -thirds of the members present and 
voting, make proposals to the Visitor for the conferment of honorary degrees:  
Provided that in case of emergency, the Executive Council may, on its o wn motion, make such 
proposals.  
(2) The Executive Coun cil may, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the 
members present and voting, withdraw, with the previous sanction of the Visitor, any honorary degree 
conferred by the University.  
28. Withdrawal of degrees, etc .—The Executive  Council may, by a special resolution passed by a 
majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw a degree or academic 
distinction conferred on, or any certificate or diploma granted to, any person by the University for goo d 
and sufficient cause:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been given to that person 
calling upon him to show cause within such time as may be specified  in the notice why such a resolution 
should not be passed an d until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in support of 
them, have been considered by the Executive Council.  27 
 29. Maintenance of discipline among st students of the University .—(1) All powers relating to the 
maintenance of discipline a nd disciplinary action in relation to the students of the University shall vest in 
the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) There shall be a Proctor of the University to assist the Vice -Chancellor in the exercise of the 
powers referred to in clause ( 1), who shall be appoi nted by the Executive Council from amongst the 
Professors and Readers in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may delegate all or any of the powers referred to in clause ( 1), as he deems 
proper, to the Proctor and to such other officers as he may specify in this behalf.  
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to the maintenance of discipline and 
taking such action, as may seem to him appropriate for the maintenance of discipline, the Vice -Chancellor 
may, in  exercise of such powers, by order, direct that any student or students be expelled or rusticated, for 
a specified period, or be not admitted to a course or courses of study in a College, Institution or 
Department or a School of the University for a stated  period, or be punished with fine for an amount to be 
specified in the order, or be debarred from taking an examination or examinations conducted by the 
University, College, Institution or Department or a School for one or more years, or that the results o f the 
student or students concerned in the examination or examinations in which he or they have appeared be 
cancelled.  
(5) The Principals of College, Institutions, Deans of Schools of Studies and Heads of teaching 
Departments in the University shall have t he authority to exercise all such disciplinary powers over the 
students in their respective Colleges, Institutions, Schools and teaching Departments in the University, as 
may be necessary for the proper conduct of such Colleges, Institutions, Schools and t eaching 
Departments.  
(6) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice -Chancellor and the Principal and other persons 
specified in clause ( 5), detailed rules of discipline and proper conduct shall be made by the University.  
(7) The Principals of College, Institutions, Deans of Schools of Studies and Heads of teaching 
Departments in the University may also make such supplementary rules as they deem necessary for the 
purposes stated therein.  
(8) At the time of admission, every student shall be required to si gn a declaration to the effect that he 
submits himself to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Vice -Chancellor and other authorities of the 
University.  
30. Convocations .—Convocations of the University for the conferring of degrees or for other 
purposes sha ll be held in such manner as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
31. Acting Chairman of meetings .—Where no provision is made for a President or Chairman to 
preside over a meeting of any authority of the University or any Committee of such authority or when the 
President or Chairman so provided for is absent, the members present shall elect one from among 
themselves to preside at such meeting.  
32. Resignation .—Any member, other than an ex officio member, of the Court, the Executive 
Council, the Academic Council or any other authority of the University or any Committee of such 
authority may resign by letter addressed to the Registrar and the resignation shall take effect as soon as 
such letter is received by the Registrar.  
33. Disqualification .—(1) A perso n shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a 
member of any of the authorities of the University — 
(i) if he is of unsound mind;  
(ii) if he is an undischarged insolvent;  
(iii) if he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving moral turpitude and 
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months.  28 
 (2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of the 
disqualifications mentioned in clause ( 1), the question shall be referred to the Visitor and his decision 
shall be final and no suit or other proceeding shall lie in any civil court against such decision.  
34. Residence condit ion for membership and office .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Statutes, a person who is not ordinarily resident in India shall not be eligible to be an officer of the 
University or a member of any authority of the University.  
35. Membership of authorities by virtue of membership  of other bodies .—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Statutes, a person who holds any post in the University or is a member of any 
authority or body of the University in his capacity as a member of a particular authority or body or as the 
holder of a particular appointment shall hold such office or membership only for so long as he continues 
to be a member of that particular authority or body or the holder of that particular appointment, as the 
case may be.  
36. Alumni Association .—(1) There shall be an Alumni Association for the University.  
(2) The subscription for membership of the Alumni Association shall be prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(3) No member of the Alumni Association shall be entitled to vote or stand for election unless he has 
been a memb er of the Association for at least one year prior to the date of election and is a degree holder 
of the University of at least five y ears standing:  
Provided that the condition relating to the completion of one year's membership shall not apply in the 
case of the first election.  
37. Students Council .—(1) There shall be constituted in the University, a Students' Council for every 
academic year, consisting of — 
(i) the Dean of Students' Welfare who shall be the Chairman of the Students' Council;  
(ii) twenty students to be nominated by the Academic Council on the basis of merit in studies, 
sports and extra curricular activities; and  
(iii) such number of elected representatives of students as may be pres cribed by the Academic 
Council:  
Provided that any  student of the University shall have the right to bring up any matter concerning the 
University before the Students' Council if so permitted by the Chairman, and he shall have the right to 
participate in the discussions at any meeting when the matter  is taken up for consideration.  
(2) The functions of the Students' Council shall be to make suggestions to the appropriate authorities 
of the University in regard to the programmes of studies, students' welfare and other matters of 
importance, in regard to the working of the University in general and such suggestions shall be made on 
the basis of consensus of opinion.  
(3) The Students' Council shall meet at least once in an academic year preferably in the beginning of 
that year.  
38. Ordinances how made .—(1) The first Ordinances made under sub -section ( 2) of section 30 may 
be amended, repealed or added to at any time by the Executive Council in the manner specified in the 
following sub -sections.  
(2) No Ordinance in respect of the matters enumerated in sub -section (1) of section 30 shall be made 
by the Executive Council unless a draft of such Ordinance has been proposed by the Academic Council.  
(3) The Executive Council shall not have power to amend any draft of any Ordinance proposed by the 
Academic Council under c lause ( 2), but may reject the proposal or return the draft to the Academic 
Council for re -consideration, either in whole or in part, together with any amendment which the 
Executive Council may suggest.  
(4) Where the Executive Council has rejected or return ed the draft of an Ordinance proposed by the 
Academic Council, the Academic Council may consider the question afresh and in case the original draft 29 
 is reaffirmed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting and more than 
half the total number of members of the Academic Council, the draft may be sent back to the Executive 
Council which shall either adopt it or refer it to the Visitor whose decision shall be final.  
(5) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall come int o effect immediately.  
(6) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall be submitted to the Visitor within two 
weeks from the date of its adoption.  
(7) The Visitor shall have the power to direct the University to suspend the operation of any 
Ordinanc e. 
(8) The Visitor shall inform the Executive Council about his suspending the Ordinance referred to in 
clause (7) and may, after receiving the comments of the University, either withdraw the order suspending 
the Ordinance or disallow the Ordinance, and hi s decision shall be final.  
39. Regulations .—(1) The authorities of the University may make Regulations consistent with the 
Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the following matters, namely: — 
(i) laying down the procedure to be observed at their meetings and the number of members 
required to form a quorum;  
(ii) providing for all matters which are required by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinance to be 
prescribed by Regulations;  
(iii) providing for all other matters solely concerning such authorit ies or committees appointed by 
them and not provided for by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the giving of notice to the 
members of such authority of the dates of meeting an d of the business to be considered at meetings and 
for the keeping of a record of the proceedings of meetings.  
(3) The Executive Council may direct the amendment in such manner as it may specify of any 
Regulation made under the Statutes or the annulment of  any such Regulation.  
40. Delegation of powers .—Subject to the provisions of the Act and the Statutes, any officer or 
authority of the University may delegate his or its powers to any other officer or authority or person under 
his or its respective control  and subject to the condition that overall responsibility for the exercise of the 
powers so delegated shall continue to vest in the officer or authority delegating such powers . 
--------------------------The Indira Gandhi National Tribal University Act, 2007--------------------------
1 
 THE INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL TRIBAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2007  
__________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Establishment of University.  
4. Objects of University.  
5. Powers of University.  
6. Jurisdiction.  
7. University open to all classes, castes and creed.  
8. Residence of students.  
9. Power to establish and maintain schools.  
10. The Visitor.  
11. Officers of University.  
12. The Chancellor.  
13. The Vice -Chancellor.  
14. The Pro -Vice -Chancellor.  
15. The Deans of Faculties.  
16. The Directors of Regional Centres.  
17. The Registrar.  
18. The Finance Officer.  
19. The Controller of Examinations.  
20. The Librarian.  
21. Other officers.  
22. Authorities of University.  
23. The Court.  
24. The Executive Council.  
25. The Academic Council.  
26. The College Development Council.  
27. The Boards  of Studies, Academic Boards and Management Boards.  
28. The Finance Committee.  
29. Other authorities of University.  
30. Power to make Statutes.  
31. Statutes, how to be made.   
32. Power to make Ordinances.  
33. Regulations.  
34. Annual r eport.  
35. Annual accounts.  
36. Fund of University.  
37. Returns and information.  
38. Conditions of service of employees.  
39. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students.  
40. Right to appeal.  
41. Provident and pension funds.  2 
 SECTIONS  
42. Disputes as to constitution of authorities and bodies.  
43. Constitution of Committees.  
44. Filling of casual vacancies.  
45. Proceedings of authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.  
46. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
47. Mode of proof of University record.  
48. Power to remove difficulties.  
49. Statutes, Ordinances and  Regulations to be publishe d in the Official Gazette and to be laid before 
Parliament.  
50. Transitional provis ions. 
THE SCHEDULE.  
  3 
 THE INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL TRIBAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2007  
ACT NO. 52 OF 2007  
[20th December , 2007.]  
An Act to establish and incorporate a teaching and affiliating University at Amarkantak in the 
State of Madhya Pradesh to facilitate and promote avenues of higher education and research 
facilities for the tribal population in India and to provide for matters connected therewith o r 
incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -eighth Year of th e Republic of India as follows :— 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Indira Gandhi National Tribal 
University Act, 2007.  
(2) It sha ll come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definition s.—In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless the context otherwise 
requires .— 
(a) "Academic Board" in relation to a regional centre or a recognised institution means the 
academic body charged with the academic matters of such centre or institution, as the case may be, 
and recogn ised as such by the University;  
(b) "Academic Council" means the Academic Council of the University;  
(c) "academic staff" means such categories of staff as are designated as academic staff by the 
Ordinances;  
(d) "Affiliated College" means a college admitted to the privileges of the University;  
(e) "Board of Studies" means the Board of Studies of the Univer sity; 
(f) "Campus" means the unit established or constituted for making arrangements for instruction, 
or research, or both, and includes off -campuses;  
(g) "Chancellor", "Vice -Chancellor" and "Pro -Vice -Chancellor" mean, respectively, the 
Chancellor, Vice -Chancellor and Pro -Vice -Chancellor of the University;  
(h) "College Development Council" means the College Development Council of the University;  
(i) "Court" means the Court of the University;  
(j) "Dean" means Head of a Faculty of the University;  
(k) "Departm ent" means a Department of Studies and includes a Centre of Studies;  
(l) "distance education system" means the system of imparting education through any means of 
communication, such as broadcasting, telecasting, webcasting correspondence courses, seminars,  
contact programmes or the combination of any two or more such means;  
(m) "Director" means Head of a Regional Centre;  
(n) "employee" means any person appointed by the University and includes teachers and other 
staff of the University;  
(o) "Executive Counci l" means the Executive Council of the University;  
(p) "Faculty" means a Faculty of the University;  
(q) "Finance Committee" means the Finance Committee of the University;  
                                                           
1. 8th July 2008, vide notification No. S.O. 1630(E), dated 7th July, 2008, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 4 
 (r) "Hall" means a unit of residence or of corporate life for the students of the University, or of a 
College or of an Institution, maintained or recognised by the University;  
(s) "Institution" means an academic institution, not being a College, maintained by, or admitted to 
the privileges of, the University;  
(t) "Management Board" in relation to a regional centre or a recognised institution means the 
governing body charged with the management of the affairs of such centre or institution, as the case 
may be, and recognised as such by the University;  
(u) "Principal" means the Head of a C ollege or an Institution maintained by the University and 
includes, where there is no Principal, the person for the time being duly appointed to act as Principal, 
and in the absence of the Principal, or the acting Principal, a Vice -Principal duly appointed  as such;  
(v) "recognised teachers" means such persons as may be recognised by the University for the 
purpose of imparting instructions in a College or an Institution admitted to the privileges of the 
University;  
(w) "Regional Centres" means off -campuses c onstituted by the University and functioning as part 
of the University, established in more tribal dominated areas, as prescribed in the Statutes;  
(x) "Regulations" means the Regulations made by any authority of the University under this Act 
for the time b eing in force;  
(y) "Scheduled Population" means and includes the Scheduled Tribes as well as Scheduled 
Castes, as defined in the Constitution of India;  
(z) "Statutes" and "Ordinances" mean, respectively, the Statutes and the Ordinances of the 
University, f or the time being in force;  
(za) "teachers of the University" means Professors, Readers, Lecturers and such other persons as 
may be appointed for imparting instructions or conducting research in the University or any College 
or Institution maintained by th e University and are designated as teachers by the Ordinances;  
(zb) "University" means the Indira Gandhi National Tribal University as incorporated under this 
Act. 
3. Establishment of University .—(1) There shall be established, in the State of Madhya Pradesh, a 
University by the name of "Indira Gandhi National Tribal University".  
(2) The headquarters of the University shall be at Amarkantak.  
(3) The University shall have such number of Regional Centres and Campuses in the tribal areas as 
the University  may deem fit.  
(4) The first Chancellor, the first Vice -Chancellor and the first members of the Court, the Executive 
Council and the Academic Council, and all such persons who may hereafter become such officers or 
members, so long as they continue to hold such office or membership, are hereby constituted a body 
corporate by the name of "Indira Gandhi National Tribal University".  
(5) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal, and shall sue and be sued by 
the said name.  
4. Objects of Un iversity .—The obje cts of the University shall be, — 
(i) to provide avenues of higher education and research facilities primarily for the tribal 
population of India;  
(ii) to disseminate and advance knowledge by providing instructional and research facilities  in 
tribal art, culture, tradition, language, medicinal systems, customs, forest based economic activities, 
flora, fauna and advancement in technologies relating to the natural resources of the tribal areas;  
(iii) to collaborate with national and international universities or organisations, specially for 
undertaking cultural studies and research on tribal populations;  5 
 (iv) to formulate tribal centric development models, publish reports and monographs; and to 
organise conferences, seminars on issues  relating to tribes; and to provide inputs to polic y matters in 
different spheres;  
(v) to take appropriate measures for promoting, the members of tribal communities capable of 
managing, administering and looking after their own needs by access to higher ed ucation through a 
University of their own;  
(vi) to disseminate and advance knowledge by providing instructional and research facilities in 
such other branches of learning as it may deem fit;  
(vii) to take appropriate measures for promoting innovations in t eaching -learning processes in 
inter-disciplinary studies and research; and to pay special  attention to the improvement of the social, 
educational and economic conditions and welfare of the Scheduled Tribes within the Union of India, 
their intellectual, aca demic and cultural development.  
5. Powers of University .—The University shall hav e the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to provide for instruction in such branches of learning as the University may, from time to 
time, determine and to make provisions for res earch and for the advancement and dissemination of 
knowledge;  
(ii) to grant, subject to such conditions as the University may determine, diplomas or certificates 
to, and confer degrees or other academic distinctions on the basis of examinations, evaluation  or any 
other method of testing on, persons, and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or other 
academic distinctions for good and sufficient cause;  
(iii) to organise and to undertake extra -mural studies, training and extension services;  
(iv) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner prescribed by the Statutes;  
(v) to provide facilities through the distance education system to such persons as it may 
determine;  
(vi) to institute Directorships, Principalships, Associateship s, Professorships, Readerships, 
Lecturerships and other teaching or academic positions, required by the University and to appoint 
persons to such Directorships, Principalships, Associateships, Professorships, Readerships, 
Lecturerships and other teaching o r academic positions;  
(vii) to recognise an institution of higher learning for such purposes as the University may 
determine and to withdraw such recognition;  
(viii) to recognise persons for imparting instructions in any College or Institution recognised o r 
maintained by the University;  
(ix) to appoint persons working in any other University or educational institution as teachers of 
the Uni versity for a specified period;  
(x) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make appointments ther eto; 
(xi) to co -operate or collaborate or associate with any other University or authority or Institution 
of higher learning in such manner and for such purposes a s the University may determine;  
(xii) to establish, with the prior approval of the Central Go vernment, such Campuses, special 
centres, specialised laboratories or other units for research and instruction as are, in the opinion of the 
University, necessary for the furtherance of its objects;  
(xiii) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(xiv) to establish and maintain Colleges, Institutions and Halls;  
(xv) to make provision for research and advisory services and for that purpose to enter into such 
arrangements with other institutions, industrial or other organisations, as the University may deem 
necessary;  6 
 (xvi) to organise and conduct refresher courses, workshops, seminars and other programmes for 
teachers, evaluators and other academic staff;  
(xvii) to make special arrangements in respect of the residenc e and teaching of women students as 
the University may deem necessary;  
(xviii) to appoint on contract or otherwise visiting professors, Emeritus Professors, Consultants, 
Scholars and such other persons who may contribute to the advancement of the objects o f the 
University;  
(xix) to confer autonomous status on a College or an Institution or a Department, as the case may 
be, in accordance with the Statutes;  
(xx) to admit to its privileges Colleges and Institutions located in India not maintained by the 
University; to withdraw all or any of those privileges in accordance with such conditions as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes; to recognise, guide, supervise, and control Halls not maintained by the 
University and other accommodation for students, and to  withdraw any such recognition;  
(xxi) to determine standards of admission to the University which may include examination, 
evaluation or any other method of testing;  
(xxii) to demand and receive payment of fees and other charges;  
(xxiii) to supervise the re sidences of the students of the University and to make arrangements for 
promoting their health and general welfare;  
(xxiv) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, including their code of 
conduct;  
(xxv) to regulate and enforce disc ipline among the students and the employees and to take such 
disciplinary measures in this regard as may be deemed by the University to be necessary;  
(xxvi) to make arrangements for promoting the health and general welfare of the employees;  
(xxvii ) to rece ive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of 
with the previous approval of the Central Government, any property, movable or immovable, 
including trust and endowment properties for the purposes of the University;  
(xxviii ) to borrow, with the prior approval of the Central Government, on the security of the 
property of the University, money for the purposes of the University;  
(xxix) to establish such number of Regional Centres in various tribal areas of the country as are, in 
the opinion of the University, necessary for the furtherance of its objects;  
(xxx) to make special provisions for the promotion of educational, economic interests and welfare 
of the members belonging to the Scheduled Tribes by providing adequate percent age of seats in the 
matters of admission, of posts in the matter of employment and other benefits;  
(xxxi) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the 
attainment of all or any of its objects.  
6. Jurisdiction .—The jurisdiction of the University shall extend to the whole of India.  
7. University open to a ll classes, castes and creed .—The University shall be open to persons of 
either sex and of whatever race, creed, caste or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt 
or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be 
appointed as a teacher of the University or to hold any other office therein or be admitted as a student in 
the University or t o graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University from making special 
provisions for the employment or admission of women, persons with  disabilities or of persons belonging 
to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.  7 
 8. Residence of students .—Every student of the University other than a student who pursues a 
course of study by distance education  system, shall reside in a Hall or hostel or under such conditions as 
may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
9. Power to es tablish and maintain schools .—The University shall, subject to Statutes, have power 
to establish at least one school in every Regional Centre, as a model school for the schools of the region.  
10. The Visitor .—(1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University.  
(2) The Visitor may, from time to time, appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress 
of the Universi ty, including Colleges and Institutions maintained by it, and to submit a report thereon; and 
upon receipt of that report, the Visitor may, after obtaining the views of the Executive Council thereon 
through the Vice -Chancellor, take such action and issue s uch directions as he considers necessary in 
respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report and the University shall be bound to comply with 
such directions.  
(3) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made by such person or pe rsons as he 
may direct, of the University, its buildings, libraries, laboratories and equipment, and of any College or 
Institution maintained by the University or admitted to its privileges; and also of the examinations, 
teaching and other work conducted o r done by the University and to cause an inquiry to be made in like 
manner in respect of any matter connected with the administration or finances of the Unive rsity, Colleges 
or Institutions.  
(4) The Visitor shall, in every matter referred to in sub -section  (3), give notice of his intention to 
cause an in spection or inquiry to be made, — 
(a) to the University, if such inspection or inquiry is to be made in respect of the University or 
any College or Institution maintained by it, or  
(b) to the management of the College or Institution, if the inspection or inquiry is to be made in 
respect of College or Institution admitted to the privileges of the University, and the University or the 
management, as the case may be, shall have the right to make such representa tions to the Visitor, as it 
may consider necessary.  
(5) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University or the management, as the 
case may be, the Visitor may cause to be made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in  
sub-section (3). 
(6) Where any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the University or the 
management shall be entitled to appoint a representative, who shall have the right to be present and be 
heard at such inspection or inquiry.  
(7) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of the University or any College or 
Institution maintained by it, address the Vice -Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or 
inquiry together with such views and advice with  regard to the action to be taken thereon, as the Visitor 
may be pleased to offer, and on receipt of address made by the Visitor, the Vice -Chancellor shall 
communicate, to the Executive Council, the views of the Visitor with such advice as the Visitor may offer 
upon the action to be taken thereon.  
(8) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of any College or Institution 
admitted to the privileges of the University, address the management concerned through the Vice -
Chancellor with re ference to the result of such inspection or inquiry, his views thereon and such advice as 
he may be pleased to offer upon the action to be taken thereon.  
(9) The Executive Council or the management, as the case may be, shall communicate, through the 
Vice -Chancellor to the Visitor such action, if any, as it proposes to take or has been taken upon the result 
of such inspection or inquiry.  
(10) Where, the Executive Council or the management, does not, within a reasonable time, take action 
to the satisfaction o f the Visitor, the Visitor may, after considering any explanation furnished or 
representation made by the Executive Council or the management, issue such directions as he may think 
fit and the Executive Council or the management, as the case may be, shall comply with such directions.  8 
 (11) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Visitor may, by order in 
writing, annu al any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with the Act, the Statutes or 
the Ordinances:  
Provided  that before making any such order, he shall call upon the Registrar to show cause why such 
an order should not be made, and, if any cause is shown within a reasonable time, he shall consider the 
same.  
(12) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
11. Officers of University .—The following shall be the officers of the University: — 
(1) the Chancellor;  
(2) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(3) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(4) the Director;  
(5) the Deans of Faculties;  
(6) the Registrar;  
(7) the Finance Officer;  
(8) the Controller of Examinations;  
(9) the Librarian; and  
(10) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be officers of the University.  
12. The Chancellor .—(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such  manner as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the head of the University and shall, if present, 
preside at the Convocations of the University held for conferring degrees and meetings of the Court.  
13. T he Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of the University and 
shall exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of the University and give effect to the 
decisions of all the authorities of the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may, if he is of the opinion that immediate action is necessary on any matter, 
exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under this Act and shall report to 
such authority at its next meeting the action taken by him on such matter:  
Provided that if the authority concerned is of the opinion that such action ought not to have b een 
taken, it may refer the matter to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final:  
Provided further that any person in the service of the University who is aggrieved by the action taken 
by the Vice -Chancellor under this sub -section shall have the right to represent against such action to the 
Executive Council within three months from the date on which decision on such action is communicated 
to him and thereupon the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the action taken by the Vice -
Chance llor. 
(4) The Vice -Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that any decision of any authority of the University is 
beyond the powers of the authority conferred by the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances 
or that any decision taken is not in t he interest of the University, may ask the authority concerned to 
review its decision within sixty days of such decision and if the authority refuses to review the decision 
either in whole or in part or no decision is taken by it within the said period of sixty days, the matter shall 
be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.  9 
 (5) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
14. The Pro -Vice-Chancellor .—The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed in such manner and on 
such terms and conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
15. The Deans of Faculties .—Every Dean of Faculty shall be appointed in such manner and shall 
exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
16. The D irectors of Regional Centres .—Every Director of Regional Centre shall be appointed in 
such manner and shall exe rcise such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the 
Statutes.  
17. The Registrar .—(1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and 
conditions of service, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreements, sign documents and authenticate 
records on behalf of the University and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
18. The Finance Officer .—The Finance Officer sh all be appointed in such manner and shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
19. Th e Controller of Examinations .—The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed in such 
manner and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
20. The Librarian .—The Librarian shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and 
conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescrib ed by 
the Statutes.  
21. Other officers .—The manner of appointment and powers and duties of other officers of the 
University shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
22. Authorities of Univers ity.—The following shall be the  authorities of the University: — 
(1) the Court;  
(2) the Executive Council;  
(3) the Academic Council;  
(4) the College Development Council;  
(5) the Board of Studies;  
(6) the Finance Committee; and  
(7) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the 
Univers ity. 
23. The Court .—(1) The constitution of the Court and the term of office of its members shall be 
prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that the Court shall have adequate number of members from amongst the Scheduled Tribes:  
Provided further that such number of members as may be prescribed by the Statutes shall be elected 
from among the teachers, employees and students of the University.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall have the followin g powers and functions, 
namely:— 
(a) to r eview, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of the University and to 
suggest measures for the improvement and development of the University;  
(b) to consider and pass resolutions on the annual report and the annual accounts of the University  
and the audit report on such accounts;  10 
 (c) to advise the Visitor in respect of any matter which may be referred to it for advice; and  
(d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
24. The Executive Council .—(1) The Executive Council shall be the principal executive body of the 
University.  
(2) The constitution of the Executive Council, the term of office of its members and its powers and 
functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that the Executive Council shall ha ve adequate number of members from amongst the 
Scheduled Tribes:  
Provided further that such number of members as may be prescribed by the Statutes shall be from 
amongst the elected members of the Court.  
25. The Academic Council .—(1) The Academic Council sh all be the principal academic body of the 
University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, co -ordinate 
and exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University.  
(2) The constitution of the A cademic Council, the term of office of its members and its powers and 
functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that the Academic Council shall have adequate number of members from amongst the 
Scheduled Tribes:  
Provided further that such numb er of members as may be prescribed by the Statutes shall be from 
amongst the elected members of the Court who are teachers of the University.  
26. The  College Development Council .—(1) The College Development Council shall be responsible 
for admitting Colleges to the privileges of the University.  
(2) The constitution of the College Development Council, the term of office of its members and its 
powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that the College Development Council shall h ave adequate number of members from 
amongst the Scheduled Tribes.  
27. The Boards of Studies, Academic Boards and Management Boards .—The constitution, 
powers and functions of the Boards of Studies, the Academic Boards and the Management Boards shall 
be pres cribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that the Boards of Studies, the Academic Boards and the Management Boards shall have 
adequate number of members from amongst the Scheduled Tribes.  
28. The Finance Committee .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Fin ance Committee 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that the Finance Committee shall have adequate number of members from amongst the 
Scheduled Tribes.  
29. Oth er authorities of University .—The constitution, powers and functions of other authorities, as 
may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the University, shall be prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that the other authorities of the University shall have adequate number of members from 
amongst the Scheduled Tribes.  
30. Power to make Statutes .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all 
or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of authorities and other bodies of the University, as 
may be constituted f rom time to time;  
(b) the appointment and continuance in office of the members of the said authorities and bodies, 
the filling up of vacancies of members, and all other matters relating to those authorities and other 
bodies for which it may be necessary or  desirable to provide;  11 
 (c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the University and their emoluments;  
(d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees of the University, their 
emoluments and conditions of service;  
(e) the recognition of persons as recognised teachers;  
(f) the appointment of teachers, academic staff working in any other University or organisation 
for a specific period for undertaking a joint project;  
(g) the conditions of service of employees including prov isions for pension, insurance, provident 
fund, the manner of termination of service and disciplinary action;  
(h) the principles governing the seniority of service of the employees of the University;  
(i) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute bet ween employees or students and the 
University;  
(j) the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council by any employee or student against the 
action of any officer or authority of the University;  
(k) the conferment of autonomous status on a College or an Ins titution or a Department;  
(l) the establishment and abolition of Faculties, Departments, Centres, Halls, Colleges and 
Institutions;  
(m) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(n) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinction s; 
(o) the conditions under which Colleges and Institutions may be admitted to the privileges of the 
University and the withdrawal of such privileges;  
(p) the management of Colleges and Institutions established by the University;  
(q) the delegation of powe rs vested in the authorities  or officers of the University;  
(r) the maintenance of discipline among the employees and students; and  
(s) all other matters which by this Act are to be or may be provided for by the Statutes.  
31. Statutes, how to be made .—(1) The first Statutes are those set out in the Schedule.  
(2) The Executive Council may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend or 
repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that the Executive Council shall not make, amend or repeal any Statutes affecting the status, 
powers or constitution of any authority of the University until such authority has been given an 
opportunity of expressing an opinion in writing on the proposed changes, and any opinion so expressed 
shall be considered by the Executive Council.  
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require 
the assent of the Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold assent or remit to the Executive Council for 
re-consideration.  
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless 
it has been assented to by the Visitor.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may make new or 
additional Statutes or amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1), during the period of three 
years immediately after the commencement of this Act:  
Provided that the Visitor may, on the expiry of the said period of three years, make, within o ne year 
from the date of such expiry, such detailed Statutes as he may consider necessary and such detailed 
Statutes shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament.  12 
 (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may direc t the 
University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by him and if the 
Executive Council is unable to implement such direction within sixty days of its receipt, the Visitor may, 
after considering the reasons, if any, commu nicated by the Executive Council for its inability to comply 
with such direction, make or amend the Statutes suitably.  
32.Power to make Ordinances .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the 
Ordinances may provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of the 
University;  
(c) the medium of instruction and examinati on; 
(d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions, the qualifications 
for the same and the means to be taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the same;  
(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the Unive rsity and for admission to the 
examinations, degrees and diplomas of the University;  
(f) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(g) the conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and priz es; 
(h) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and the manner of appointment and 
the duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators;  
(i) the conditions of residence of the stude nts of the University;  
(j) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence and teaching of women 
students and the prescribing of speci al courses of studies for them;  
(k) the appointments and emoluments of employees other than those for whom provision  has been 
made in the Statutes;  
(l) the setting up of a machinery for redres sal of grievances of employees;  
(m) the establishment and management of Regional Centres, Schools, Colleges, other Institutions, 
Centres of Studies, Boards of Studies, Special Centres, Specialised Laboratories and oth er 
Committees;  
(n) the manner of co -operation and collaboration with other Universities, institutions and other 
non-profiteering agencies including learned bodies or associations;  
(o) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is considered necessary for 
improving the academic life of the University;  
(p) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(q) the supervision of management of Colleges and Institutions admitted to the privileges of the 
Univ ersity; and  
(r) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes, are to be or may be, provided for by the 
Ordinances.  
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice -Chancellor with the previous approval of the 
Central Government and the Ordinances so made may be amended, repealed or added to at any time by 
the Executive Council in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.  
33. Regulations .—The authorities of the University may make Regulations, consistent with this Act, 
the Statutes and the Ordinances f or the conduct of their own business and that of the Committees, if any, 
appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances, in the manner 
prescribed by the Statutes.  13 
 34. Annual r eport .— (1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of 
the Executive Council, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the University 
towards the fulfilment of its objects and shall be submitted to the Court on or after such date as may be  
prescribed by the Statutes and the Court shall consider the report in its annual meeting.  
(2) The Court shall submit the annual report to the Visitor along with its comments, if any.  
(3) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub -section ( 1), shal l also be submitted to the 
Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of 
Parliament.  
35. Annual accounts .—(1) The annual accounts and balance -sheet of the University shall be 
prepared under the directio ns of the Executive Council and shall, once at least every year and at intervals 
of not more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or by such 
persons as he may authorise in this behalf.  
(2) A copy of the annual acc ounts together with the audit report thereon shall be submitted to the 
Court and the Visitor along with the observations of the Executive Council.  
(3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall be brought to the notice of the 
Court and the observations of the Court, if any, shall, after being considered by the Executive Council, be 
submitted to the Visitor.  
(4) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report as submitted to the Visitor, shall also 
be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before 
both Houses of Parliament.  
(5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before both Houses of Parliament shall be 
published in the Official Gazette.  
36. Fund of University .—(1) There shall be a Univ ersity Fund which shall include — 
(a) any contribution or grant made by the State Government;  
(b) any contribution or grant made by the University Grants Commission or the Central 
Government;  
(c) any contribution made by  Government, semi -Government or autonomous bodies;  
(d) any bequests, donations, endowments or other grants made by any private individual or 
institution;  
(e) income received by the University from fees and charges; and  
(f) amounts received from any other source.  
(2) The amount of the said Fund shall be kept in a Scheduled Bank as defined in the R eserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934) or in a corresponding new bank constituted under the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1 970 (5 of 1970) and the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980  (40 of 1980) or may be invested in such securities 
authorised by the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (2 of 1882) as may be decided by the Executive Council.  
(3) The said  Fund may be utilised for such purposes of the University and in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
37. Returns and information .—The University shall furnish to the Central Government such returns 
or other information with respect to its property or activit ies as the Central Government may, from time to 
time, require.  
38. Condit ions of service of employees .—(1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed 
under a written contract, which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be furnished 
to the employee concerned.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any employee shall, at the 
request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by 14 
 the Executive Council, one member nominated by the employee concerned and an umpire appointed by 
the Visitor.  
(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final, and no suit shall lie in any civil court in respect of the 
matters decided by the Tribunal:  
Provided that nothi ng in this sub -section shall preclude the employee from availing of the judicial 
remedies available under articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution.  
(4) Every request made by the employee under sub -section ( 2), shall be deemed to be a submission to 
arbitrati on upon the terms of this section within the meaning of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996  
(26 of 1996) . 
(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
39. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disci plinary cases against students .—(1) Any student 
or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed from the rolls of the University by the 
orders or resolution of the Vice -Chancellor, Discipline Committee or Examination Committee, as the case 
may be, and who has been debarred from appearing at the examinations of the University for more than 
one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt of such orders or copy of such resolution by him, 
appeal to the Executive Council and the Executive Counc il may confirm, modify or reverse the decision 
of the Vice -Chancellor or the Committee, as the case may be.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against a student shall, 
at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of sub -sections 
(2), (3), (4) and ( 5) of section 38 shall, as far as may be, apply to a reference made under this sub -section.  
40. Right to appeal .—Every employee or student of the University or of a College or Institution 
maintained by the University or admitted to its privileges shall, notwithstanding anything contained in 
this Act, have a right to appeal within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes, to the Executive 
Council against the decision of any officer or authority of the University or of the Principal or the 
management of any College or an Institution, as the case may be, and thereupon the Executive Council 
may confirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed against.  
41. Provident and pensi on funds .—(1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its 
employees such provident or pension fund or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit in such 
manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Where  such provident fund or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central Government may 
declare that the provisions of  the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925) shall apply to such fund, as if it 
were a Government provident fund.  
42. Disputes as to const itution of authorities and bodies .—If any question arises as to whether any 
person has been duly elected or appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority or other body 
of the University, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose dec ision thereon shall be final.  
43. Constitution  of Committees .—Where any authority of the University is given power by this Act 
or the Statutes to appoint Committees, such Committees shall, save as otherwise provided, consist of the 
members of the authority  concerned and of such other person, if any, as the authority in each case may 
think fit.  
44. Filling of casual vacancies .—All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio  
members) of any authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the 
person or body who appoints, elects or co -opts the member whose place has become vacant and person 
appointed, elected or co -opted to a casual vacancy shal l be a member of such authority or body for the 
residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member.  
45. Proceedings of authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies .—No act or proceedings of 
any authority or other b ody of the University shall be invalid merely by reason of the existence of a 
vacancy or vacancies among its members.  
46. Protection o f action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any 
officer or other employee of the Uni versity for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  15 
 47. Mode o f proof of University record .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872  (1 of 1872)  or in any other law for the time being in force, a copy of any receipt, 
application, notice, order, proceeding or resolution of any authority or other body of the University, or 
any other document in possession of the University, or a ny entry in any register duly maintained by the 
University, if certified by the Registrar, shall be received as prima facie  evidence of such receipt, 
application, notice, order, proceeding, resolution or document or the existence of entry in the register a nd 
shall be admitted as evidence of the matters and transactions therein where the original thereof would, if 
produced, have been admissible in evidence.  
48. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order s hall be made under this section after the expiry of three years fro m the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modifi cation 
in the order or both Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prej udice to the validity of anything previously done under that order.  
49. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid 
before Parliament .—(1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be p ublished 
in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the Statute, Ordinance or Regul ation or both Houses agree that the Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation should not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modific ation or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that Statute, Ordinance or Regulation.  
(3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shall include the power to give 
retrospective effect, from a da te not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to  whom such Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation may be applicable.  
50. Transitional provisions .—Notwithstanding anything containe d in this Act and the Statutes, — 
(a) the first Chancellor and first Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Central Government in  
such manner and on such conditions as may be deemed fit and each of the said officer shall hold 
office for such term, not exceeding five years, as may be specified by the Central Government;  
(b) the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer shall be a ppointed by the Central Government 
and each of the said officers shall hold office for a term of three years;  
(c) the first Court and the first Executive Council shall consist of not more than thirty -one 
members and eleven members, respectively, who shall be nominated by the Central Government and 
shall hold office for a term of three years;  
(d) the first College Development Council shall consist of not more than eleven members, who 
shall be nominated by the Central Government and they shall hold office for  a term of three years;  16 
 (e) the first Academic Council shall consist of not more than twenty -one members, who shall be 
nominated by the Central Government and they shall hold office for a term of three years:  
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the abov e offices or authorities, the same shall be filled by 
appointment or nomination, as the case may be, by the Central Government, and the person so 
appointed or nominated shall hold office for so long as the officer or member in whose place he is 
appointed o r nominated would have held office, if such vacancy had not occurred.   17 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 31)  
THE STATUTES OF THE UNIVERSITY  
1. The Chancellor .—(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less 
than three persons recommended by the Executive Council from amongst persons of eminence in the 
academic or public life of the country:  
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons so recommended, he may call for 
fresh recommendations from the Executiv e Council.  
(2) The Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years and shall be eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office, the Chancellor shall continue to hold 
office until his successor enters upon his office.  
2. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of 
not less than three persons who shall be recommended by a Committee as constituted under clause ( 2): 
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve  of any of the persons included in the panel, he may call 
for a fresh panel.  
(2) The Committee referred to in clause ( 1) shall consist of three persons, out of whom two shall be 
nominated by the Executive Council and one by the Visitor and the nominee of the Visitor shall be the 
convener of the Committee:  
Provided that none of whom shall be an employee of the University or a member of the Executive 
Council, Academic Council or member of any authority of the University or connected with an institution 
assoc iated with the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters 
upon his office, or until he attains the age of  sixty -five years, whichever is earlier, and he shall not be 
eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of five years, he shall continue in office 
until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office:  
Provided further that the Visitor may direct any Vice -Chancellor after his term has expired, to 
continue in office for such period, not exceeding a total period of one year, as may be specified by him.  
(5) The emoluments and other conditions of service of th e Vice -Chancellor shall be as follows: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor shall be paid a monthly salary of Rs. 25,000 (fixed) per month and 
allowances other than house rent allowance, at the rates fixed by the Central Government from time 
to time, and he shall be e ntitled, without payment of rent, to use a furnished residence throughout his 
term of office and no charge shall fall on the Vice -Chancellor in respect of the maintenance of such 
residence. He would be entitled to free use of University Car;  
(ii) the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to such terminal benefits and allowances as may be fixed 
by the Executive Council with the approval of the Visitor from time to time:  
Provided that where an employee of the University or a College or an Institution maintained b y it, 
or of any other University or any Institution maintained by or affiliated to such other University, is 
appointed as the Vice -Chancellor, he may be allowed to continue to contribute to any provident fund 
of which he is a member and the University shal l contribute to the account of such person in that 
provident fund at the same rate at which the person had been contributing immediately before his 
appointment as the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that where such employee had been a member of any pensi on scheme, the 
University shall make the necessary contribution to such scheme;  18 
 (iii) the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to traveling allowances at such rates as may be fixed by 
the Executive Council;  
(iv) the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full pay at the rate of thirty days in a 
calendar year and the leave shall be credited to his account in ad vance in two half -yearly instal ments 
of fifteen days each on the first day of January and first day of July every year:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor assumes or relinquishes charge of the office of the Vice -
Chancellor during the currency of a half year, the leave shall be credited proportionately at the rate of 
two and -a-half days for each completed month of service;  
(v) in addition to the le ave referred to in sub -clause ( iv), the Vice -Chancellor shall also be entitled 
to half pay leave at the rate of twenty days for each completed year of service and this half pay leave 
may also be availed of as commuted leave on full pay on medical certifica te: 
Provided that when commuted leave is availed of, twice the amount of half pay leave shall be 
debited against half pay leave due.  
(6) If the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or otherwise, or if he 
is unable to perform his duties due to ill health or any other cause, the senior -most Pro -Vice -Chancellor 
shall perform the duties of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the Pro -Vice -Chancellor is not available, the senior -most Professor shall perform the 
duties of t he Vice -Chancellor until a new Vice -Chancellor assumes office or until the existing Vice -
Chancellor resumes to the duties of his office, as the case may be.  
3. Powers a nd duties of Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be ex officio  Chairman of 
the Executive Council, the Academic Council, and the Finance Committee and shall, in the absence of the 
Chancellor, preside at the convocations held for conferring degrees, and at meetings of the Court.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitle d to be present at and address any meeting of any authority or 
other body of the University.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice -Chancellor to see that this Act, the Statutes, the Ordinances and the 
Regulations are duly observed and he shall have all the powers necessary to ensure such observance.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise control over the affairs of the University and shall give effect 
to the decisions of all the authorities of the University.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall have all the powers  necessary for the proper maintenance of discipline 
in the University and he may delegate any such powers to such person or persons as he deems fit.  
(6) The Vice -Chancellor shall have the power to convene or cause to be convened the meetings of the 
Executi ve Council, the Academic Council, the Planning Board and the Finance Committee.  
4. The Pro -Vice -Chancellor .—(1) Every Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Executive 
Council on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that where the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor is not accepted by the Executive 
Council, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor who may either appoint the  person recommended by 
the Vice -Chancellor or ask the Vice -Chancellor to recommend another person to the E xecutive Council:  
Provided further that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor, 
appoint a Professor to discharge the duties of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor in addition to  his own duties as a 
Professor.  
(2) The term of office of a Pro-Vice -Chancellor shall be such as may be decided by the Executive 
Council but it shall not in any case exceed five years or until the expiration of the term of office of the 
Vice -Chancellor, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that a Pro -Vice -Chancellor whos e term of office has expired shall be eligible for 
reappointment:  19 
 Provided further that, in any case, a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall retire on attaining the age of sixty -five 
years:  
Provided also that the Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall, while discharging the dutie s of the Vice -Chancellor 
under clause ( 6) of Statute 2, continue in office notwithstanding the expiration of his term of office as 
Pro-Vice -Chancellor, until a new Vice -Chancellor or the existing Vice -Chancellor, as the case may be, 
assumes office:  
Provide d also that when the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant and there is no Pro -Vice -
Chancellor to perform the functions of the Vice -Chancellor, the Executive Council may appoint a Pro -
Vice -Chancellor and the Pro -Vice -Chancellor so appointed, shall c ease to hold office as such as soon as 
the Vice -Chancellor is appointed and enters upon his office.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be such 
as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) A Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall assist the Vice -Chancellor in respect of such matters as may be 
specified by the Vice -Chancellor in this behalf, from time to time, and shall also exercise such powers 
and perform such duties as may be assigned or delegated to him by the Vi ce-Chancellor.  
5. Deans of Faculties .—(1) Every Dean of a Faculty shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor from 
amongst the Professors in the Faculty for a period of three years and he shall be eligible for 
reappointment:  
Provided that a Dean on attaining  the age of sixty -two years shall cease to hold office as such:  
Provided further that if at any time there is no Professor in a Faculty, the Vice -Chancellor, or a Dean 
authorised by the Vice -Chancellor in this behalf, shall exercise the p owers of the Dean of a Faculty.  
(2) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness, absence or any 
other cause, unable to perform duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such 
person as the Vice -Chancellor may app oint for the purpose.  
(3) The Dean shall be the Head of the Faculty and shall be responsible for the conduct and 
maintenance of the standards of teaching and research in the Faculty and shall have such other functions 
as may be prescribed by the Ordinances . 
(4) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at any meeting of the Committees of the 
Faculty, as the case may be, but shall not have the right to vote thereat unless he is a member thereof.  
6. The Registrar .—(1) The Registrar shall be app ointed by the Executive Council on the 
recommendation of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and shall be a whole -time salaried 
officer of the University.  
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for reappointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Registrar shall be such as may 
be prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that the Registrar shall retire on attaining the age of sixty -two years:  
Provided further that a Registrar shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty -two years, 
continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office or until the expiry of a period 
of one year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Registra r is vacant or when the Registrar is, by reason of illness, absence or 
any other cause unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by 
such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) (a) The Re gistrar shall have power to take disciplinary action against such of the employees, 
excluding teachers and academic staff, as may be specified in the order of the Executive Council and to 
suspend them pending inquiry, to administer warnings to them or to i mpose upon them the penalty of 
censure or the withholding of increment:  20 
 Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person concerned has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to  him. 
(b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice -Chancellor against any order of the Registrar imposing any of the 
penalties specified in sub -clause ( a). 
(c) In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the power of the Registrar is called 
for, the Registrar shall, upon the conclusion of the inquiry, make a report to the Vice -Chancellor along 
with his recommendations:  
Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Executive Council against an order of the Vice -Chancellor 
imposing any penalty.  
(6) The R egistrar shall be ex officio  Secretary of the Court, the Executive Council and the Academic 
Council, but shall not be deemed to be a member of any of these authorities.  
(7) It sha ll be the duty of the Registrar — 
(a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such other property of the University 
as the Executive Council shall commit to his charge;  
(b) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council and of any Committee appointed by those authori ties; 
(c) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council and of any Committee appointed by those authorities;  
(d) to conduct the official correspondence of the Court, the Executive Co uncil and the Academic  
Council;  
(e) to supply to the Visitor and the Chancellor copies of the agenda of the meetings of the 
authorities of the University as soon as they are issued and the minutes of such meetings;  
(f) to represent the University in suits or proceedings by or against the University, sign powers -of-
attorney and verify pleadings or depute his representative for the purpose; and  
(g) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances or the 
Regulations or as may be required from time t o time, by the Executive Council or assigned to by the 
Vice -Chancellor.  
7. The Finance Officer .—(1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Executive Council on 
the recommendations of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time 
salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The Finance Officer shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for 
reappointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Finance Officer shall be such as 
may be prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that a Finance Officer shall retire on attaining the age of sixty -two years:  
Provided further that the Finance Officer shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty -two 
years, continue in office unti l his successor is appointed and enters upon his office or until the expiry of a 
period of one year, whichever is earlier.  
 (4) When the office of the Finance Officer is vacant or when the Finance Officer is by reason of 
illness, absence or any other cause  unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall 
be performed by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) The Finance Officer shall be ex officio  Secretary of the Finance Committee but shall not be 
deem ed to be a member of such Committee.   21 
 (6) The Finance Officer shall — 
(a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the University and shall advise it as regards its 
financial policy; and  
(b) perform such other financial functions as may be assigned to  him by the Executive Council or 
as may be prescribed by the Statutes, the Ordinances or the Regulations.  
(7) Subject to the control of the Executive Council, the Finance Offic er shall— 
(a) hold and manage the property and investments of the University inc luding trust and endowed 
property;  
(b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Executive Council for recurring and non -recurring 
expenditure for a year are not exceeded and that all moneys are expended on the purpose for which 
they are granted or allotted;  
(c) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget of the University and for 
their presentation to the Executive Council;  
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and balances and on the state of investment;  
(e) watch the progr ess of the collection of revenue and advise on the methods of collection 
employed;  
(f) ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture and equipment are maintained up -to-date 
and that stock -checking are conducted, of equipment and other consumable materials in all Offices, 
Centres, Specialised Laboratories, Colleges and Institutions maintained by the University;  
(g) bring to the notice of the Vice -Chancellor unauthorised expenditure and other financial 
irregularities and suggest disciplinary action against persons at fault; and  
(h) call for from any Office, Centre, Laboratory, College or Institution maintained by the 
University any information that he may consider necessary on the performance of his duties.  
(8) Any receipt given by the Finance Officer or the person or person duly authorised in this behalf by 
the Executive Council for any money payable to the University shall be sufficient discharge for payment 
of such money.  
8. The Controller of Examinations .—(1) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed by the 
Executive Council on the recommendations of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he 
shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed for a term of fiv e years and shall be eligible for 
re-appointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Controller of Examinations shall 
be such as may be prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time:  
Provided that the Controller of Examinations shall retire on attaining the age of sixty -two years:  
Provided further that the Controller of Examinations shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of 
sixty -two years, continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his  office or until the 
expiry of a period of one year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Controller of Examinations is vacant or when the Controller of 
Examinations is, by reason of illness, absence or any other cause unable to perform the dut ies of his 
office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such person as the Vice -Chancell or may appoint for 
the purpose.  
(5) The Controller of Examinations shall arrange for and superintend the examinations of the 
University in the manner prescrib ed by the Ordinances.  22 
 9. The Librarian .—(1) The Librarian shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the 
recommendations of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time 
officer of the University.  
(2) The Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to him by 
the Executive Council.  
10. Meetings of Court .—(1) An annual meeting of the Court shall be held on a date to be fixed by 
the Executive Council unless some other date has been fi xed by the Court in respect of any year.  
(2) At an annual meeting of the Court, a report on the working of the University during the previous 
year, together with a statement of the receipt s and expenditure, the balance -sheet as audited, and the 
financial e stimates for the next year shall be presented.  
(3) A copy of the statement of receipts and expenditure, the balance -sheet and the financial estimates 
referred to in clause ( 2) shall be sent to every member of the Court at least seven days before the date of 
the annual meeting.  
(4) Special meetings of the Court may be convened by the Executive Council or the Vice -Chancellor 
or if there is no Vice -Chancellor, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor or if there is no Pro -Vice -Chancellor, by the 
Registrar.  
(5) Eleven members of the Court shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Court.  
11. Quorum for meeting of Executive Council .—Seven members of the Executive Council shall 
form a quorum for a meeting of the Executive Council.  
12. Powers and fu nctions of Executive Council .—(1) The Executive Council shall have the power 
of management and administration of the revenue and property of the University and the conduct of all 
administrative affairs of the University not otherwise provided for.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act,  the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Executive Council shall, 
in addition to all other powers, vested in it, hav e the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to create teaching and academic posts, to determine the number and emoluments of such posts 
and to define the duties and conditions of service of Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant 
Professors and other academic staff and Directors of Colleges and Institutions maintained by the 
University:  
Provided that no action shall be taken by the Executive Council  in respect of the number, 
qualifications and emoluments of teachers and academic staff otherwise than after consideration of 
the recommendations of the Academic Council;  
 (ii) to appoint such Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant Professors and othe r academic 
staff, as may be necessary, and the Directors of Colleges and Institutions maintained by the 
University on the recommendation of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and to fill -
up the temporary vacancies therein;  
(iii) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts and to make appointments 
thereto in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(iv) to grant leave of absence to any officer of the University other than the Chancellor and the 
Vice -Chancellor, and to mak e necessary arrangements for the discharge of the functions of such 
officer during his absence;  
(v) to regulate and enforce discipline among employees in accordance with the Statutes and the 
Ordinances;  
(vi) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, i nvestments, property, business and all other 
administrative affairs of the University, and for that purpose to appoint such agents as it may think fit;  
(vii) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non -recurring expenditure for a year on the 
recommendations of the Finance Committee;  23 
 (viii) to invest any money belonging to the University, including any unapplied income, in such 
stocks, funds, share or securities, from time to time, as it may think fit or in the purchase of 
immovable property in In dia, with the like powers of varying such investment from time to time;  
(ix) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immovable property on behalf of the 
University;  
(x) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus and other means needed for carrying 
on the work of the University;  
(xi) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on behalf of the University;  
(xii) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and if thought fit, to redress any grievances of the employees 
and students of the  University who may, for any reason, feel aggrieved;  
(xiii) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if necessary, to remove them, and to fix their fees, 
emoluments and travelling and other allowances, after consulting the Academic Council;  
(xiv) to select  a common seal for the University and provide for the custody and use of such seal;  
(xv) to make such special arrangements as may be necessary for the residence of women students;  
(xvi) to delegate any of its powers to the Vice -Chancellor, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor, the Directors, 
the Registrar or the Finance Officer or such other employee or authority of the University or to a 
committee appointed by it as it may deem fit;  
(xvii) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes; and to receive 
donations from the members of the general public and institutions, with due acknowledgement for 
establishing a Chair by contributing at least rupees one crore, in the name of the donor or in memory 
of any person desired; for creating foundations, n ot below rupees one crore in the name of the donor 
or in memory of any person desired; and for bearing the cost of any building or complex to the tune 
of not below rupees one crore in the name of the donor or in memory of any person desired;  
(xviii) to pro vide for the appointment of Visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors; Consultants 
and Scholars and determine the terms and conditions of such appointments; and  
(xix) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed  
on it by the Act or the Statutes.  
13. Quorum of  meeting of Academic Council .—Nine members of the Academic Council shall form 
a quorum for a meeting of the Academic Council.  
14. Powers and f unctions of Academic Council .—Subject to the provisions of the Act, the Statutes 
and the Ordinances, the Academic Council shall, in addition to all other powers vested in it, hav e the 
following powers, namely: — 
(a) to report on any matter referred or delegated to it by the Court or the Executive Council;  
(b) to make a rrangements through Ordinances for the instruction and examination of persons 
other than those enrolled in the University;  
(c) to promote research within the University and to require from time to time, reports on such 
research;  
(d) to consider proposals s ubmitted by the Faculties;  
(e) to appoint committees for admission to the University;  
(f) to recognise diplomas or degrees and other Universities and Institutions and to determine their 
equivalence in relation to the diplomas and degrees of the University;  
(g) to fix, subject to any conditions accepted by the Executive Council, the time mode and 
conditions of competition for fellowship, scholarships and other prizes, and to award the same;  24 
 (h) to make recommendations to the Executive Council in regard to the appointment of examiners 
and if necessary, their removal and the fixation of their fees, emoluments and travelling and other 
expenses;  
(i) to make arrangements for the conduct of examinations and to fix dates for holding them;  
(j) to declare result of the various examinations, or to appoint committees or officers to do so and 
to make recommendations regarding the conferment or grant of degrees, honours, diplomas, titles and 
marks of honour;  
(k) to award stipends, scholarships, medals and prizes and to m ake other awards in accordance 
with the Regulations and such other conditions as may be attached to the awards;  
(l) to publish lists of prescribed or recommended text books and to publish syllabus or the 
prescribed courses of study;  
(m) to prepare such for ms and registers as are, from time to time, prescribed by Regulations; and  
(n) to perform, in relation to academic matters, all such duties and to do all such acts as may be 
necessary, for proper carrying out of the provisions of this Act and the Regulatio ns. 
15. Faculties and Departments .—(1) The University shall have such Faculties as may be specified 
in the Statutes.  
(2) Every Faculty shall have a Faculty Board and the members of the first Faculty Board shall be 
nominated by the Executive Council for a p eriod of three years.  
(3) The composition, powers and functions of a Faculty Board shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The conduct of the meetings of a Faculty Board and the quorum required for such meetings shall 
be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(5) (a) Every Faculty shall consist of such Departments as may be assigned to it by the Ordinances:  
Provided that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic Council, establish 
Centres of Studies to which may be assigned such teachers of  the University as the Executive Council 
may consider necessary.  
(b) Each Department shall consist of  the following members, namely: — 
(i) Teachers of the Department;  
(ii) Persons conducting research in the Department;  
(iii) Dean of the School;  
(iv) Honorar y Professors, if any, attached to the Department; and  
(v) Such other persons as may be members of the Department in accordance with the provisions 
of the Ordinances.  
16. Board of Studies .—(1) Each Department shall have a Board of Studies.  
(2) The constitution of the Board of Studies and the term of office of its members shall be prescribed 
by the Ordinances.  
(3) Subject to the overall control and supervision of the Academic Council, the functions of a Board 
of Studies shall be to approve subjects f or research for various degrees and other requirements of research 
degrees and to recommend to the concerned School Board in the mann er prescribed by the Ordinances — 
(a) courses of studies and appointment of examiners for courses, but excluding research degrees;  
(b) appointment of supervisors for research; and  
(c) measures for the improvement of the standard of teaching and research:  
Provided that the above functions of a Board of Studies shall, during the period of three years 
immediately after the comme ncement of the Act, be performed by the Department.  25 
 17. The Finance Committee .—(1) The Finance Committee shall consist of  the following members, 
namely:— 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(ii) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(iii) one perso n to be nominated by the Court;  
(iv) three persons to be nominated by the Executive Council, out of whom at least one shall be a 
member of the Executive Council; and  
(v) three persons to be nominated by the Visitor.  
(2) Five members of the Finance Committee shall form the quorum for a me eting of the Finance 
Committee.  
(3) All the members of the Finance Committee, other than ex officio  members, shall hold office for a 
term of three years.  
(4) A member of the Finance Committee shall have the right to record a minute of dissent if he does 
not agree with any decision of the Finance Committee.  
(5) The Finance Committee shall meet at least thrice every year to examine the accounts and to 
scrutinise proposals for expenditure.  
(6) All proposals relating to creation of posts, and those items which have not been included in the 
Budget, shall be examined by the Finance Committee before they are considered by the Executive 
Council.  
(7) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University prepared by the Finance Officer 
shall be laid before  the Finance Committee for consideration and comments and thereafter submitted to 
the Executive Council for approval.  
(8) The Finance Committee shall recommend limits for the total recurring expenditure and the total 
non-recurring expenditure for the year,  based on the income and resources of the University (which, in the 
case of productive works, may include the proceeds of loans).  
18. The Selection Committee .—(1) There shall be Selection Committees for making 
recommendations to the Executive Council for appointment to the posts of Professor, Reader, Lecturer, 
Registrar, Finance Officer, Librarian and Principals of Colleges and Institutions maintained by the 
University.  
(2) The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts specified in column 1 of the T able below 
shall consist of the Vice -Chancellor, a nominee of the Visitor and the persons specified in the 
corresponding entry in column 2 of the said Table:  
TABLE  
1 2 
Professor  (i) The Dean of the Faculty . 
 (ii) The Head of the Department , if he is a Professor.  
 (iii) Three persons not in the service of the University, nominated by 
the Executive Council, out of a panel of names recommended by the 
Academic Council  for their special knowledge of, or interest in, the 
subject w ith which the Pr ofessor is concerned.  
Reader/Lecturer  (i) The Head of the Department.  
 (ii) One Professor nominated by the Vice -Chancellor.  
  26 
 1 2 
 (iii) Two persons not in the service of the University, nominated by 
the Executive Council, out of a panel of names recommended by the 
Academic Council for their special knowledge of, or interest in, the 
subject with wh ich the Reader/Lecturer is concerned.  
Registrar/ Finance Off icer (i) Two members of the Executive Council  nominated by  it. 
 (ii) One person not in the service of the University nominated by the 
Executive Council . 
Librarian  (i) Two persons not in the service of the University who have special 
knowledge of the subject of the Library Science/Library 
Administration , nominated by the Executive Council.  
 (ii) One person not in the service of the University , nominated by the 
Executive Council.  
Principal of College or 
Institution  Three persons not in the service of the University of whom two shall 
be nominated by the Executive Council and one by the Academic 
Council for their special knowledge of, or interest in, a subject in 
which instruction is being provided by the College or Institution.  
 
NOTE 1.—Where the appointment is being made for an inter -disciplinary project, the head of the 
project shall be deemed  to be the Head of the Department concerned.  
NOTE 2.—The Professor to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor shall be a Professor concerned with 
the speciality for which the selection is being made and the Vice -Chancellor shall consult the Head of the 
Departm ent and the Dean of School before nominat ing the Professor.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor, or in his absence the Pro -Vice -Chancellor, shall convene and preside at the 
meeting of the Selection Committee:  
Provided that the meeting of the Selection Committee shall  be fixed after prior consultation with, and 
subject to the convenience of Visitor's nominee and the experts nominated by the Executive Council:  
Provided further that the proceedings of the Selection Commi ttee shall not be valid unless, — 
(a) where the number of Visitor's nominee and the persons nominated by the Executive Council is 
four in all, at least three of them attend the meeting; and  
(b) where the number of Visitor's nominee and the persons nominated by the Executive Council is 
three in all, at l east two of them attend the meeting.  
(4) The procedure to be followed by the Selection Committee shall be laid down in the Ordinances.  
(5) If the Executive Council is unable to accept the recommendations made by the Selection 
Committee, it shall record its  reasons and submit the case to the Visitor for final orders.  
(6) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made  in the manner indicated below: — 
(i) if the temporary vacancy is for duration longer than one academic session, it shall be filled on 
the advice of the Selection Committee in accordance with the procedure indicated in the foregoing 
clauses:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor is satisfied that in the interests of work it is necessary to fill 
the vacancy, the appointment may be made on a purely tem porary basis on the advice of a local 
Selection Committee referred to in sub -clause ( ii) for a period not exceeding six months;  
(ii) if the temporary vacancy is for a period less than a year, an appointment to such vacancy shall 
be made on the recommendati on of a local Selection Committee consisting of the Dean of the Faculty 
concerned, the Head of the Department and a nominee of the Vice -Chancellor:  27 
 Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and the Head of the Department, 
the Selection  Committee may contain two nominees of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that in the case of sudden casual vacancies of teaching posts caused by death or 
any other reason, the Dean may, in consultation with the Head of the Department concerned, make a 
temporary appointment for a month and report to the Vice -Chancellor and the Registrar about such 
appointment;  
(iii) no teacher appointed temporarily shall, if he is not recommended by a regular Selection 
Committee for appointment under the Statutes, be con tinued in service  on such temporary 
employment, unless he is subsequently selected by a local Selection Committee or a regular Selection 
Committee, for a temporary or permanent appointment, as the case may be.  
19. Special mode of appointment .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 18, the 
Executive Council may invite a person of high academic distinction and professional attainments to 
accept a post of Professor or any other equivalent academic post in the University on such terms and 
conditions as it deems fit and on the person agreeing to do so appoint him to the post.  
(2) The Executive Council may appoint a teacher or any other academic staff working in any other 
University or organisation for undertaking a joint project in accordance with the manner laid down in the 
Ordinances.  
20. Appointment for fixed tenure .—The Executive Council may appoint a person selected in 
accordance with the procedure laid down in Statute 18 for a fixed tenure on such terms and conditions as 
it deems fit.  
21. Recognis ed teachers .—(1) The qualifications of recognised teachers shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(2) All applications for the recognition of teachers shall be made in such manner as may be laid down 
by the Ordinances.  
(3) No teacher shall be recognised as a teacher except on the recommendation of a Selection 
Committee constituted for the purpose in the manner laid down in the Ordinances.  
(4) The period of recognition of a teacher shall be determined by the Ordinances made in t hat behalf.  
(5) The Academic Council may, by a special resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -
thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw recognition from a teacher:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until notice in writing has been given to the person 
concerned calling upon him to show cause, within such time as may be specified in the notice, why such 
resolution should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in 
support of them  have been considered by the Academic Council.  
22. Committees .—(1) An authority of the University may appoint as many standing or special 
Committees as it may deem fit, and may appoint to such Committees persons who are not members of 
such authority.  
(2) A Committee appointed under clause ( 1) may deal with any subject delegated to it subject to 
subsequent confirmation by the authority appointing it.  
23. Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of teachers , etc.—(1) All the teachers 
and other academic staff of the University shall, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, be 
governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as are specified in the Statutes, the 
Ordinances and the Regulations.  
(2) The emoluments of memb ers of the academic staff shall be such as may be prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(3) Every teacher and member of the academic staff of the University shall be appointed on a written 
contract, the form of which shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) A co py of every contract referred to in clause ( 3) shall be deposited with the Registrar.  28 
 24. Terms and conditions of service and code o f conduct of other employees .—(1) All the 
employees of the University, other than the teachers and other academic staff shal l, in the absence of any 
contract to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as are 
specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations.  
(2) The manner of appointment and emoluments of employees, other  than the teachers and other 
academic staff, shall be such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
25. Seniority list .—(1) Whenever, in accordance with the Statutes, any person is to hold an office or 
be a member of an authority of the University by rotation according to seniority, such seniority shall be 
determined according to the length of continuous service of such person in his grade and in accordance 
with such other principles as the Executive Council may, from time to time, prescribe.  
(2) It sh all be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain in respect of each class of persons to 
whom the provisions of these Statutes apply, a complete and up -to-date seniority list in accordance with 
the provisions of clause ( 1). 
(3) If two or more person s have equal length of continuous service in a particular grade or the relative 
seniority of any person or persons is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar may, on his own motion and shall, 
at the request of any such person, submit the matter to the Executive Council whose decision thereon shall 
be final.  
26. Remova l of employees of University .—(1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct against a 
teacher, a member of the academic staff or other employee of the University, the Vice -Chancellor, in the 
case of  the teacher or a member of the academic staff, and the authority competent to appoint (hereinafter 
referred to as the appointing authority) in the case of other employee may, by order in writing, place such 
teacher, member of the academic staff or other e mployee, as the case may be, under suspension and shall 
forthwith report to the Executive Council the circumstances in which the order was made:  
Provided that the Executive Council may, if it is of the opinion, that the circumstances of the case do 
not war rant the suspension of the teacher or a member of the academic staff, revoke such order.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of the contract of appointment or of any other 
terms and conditions of service of the employees, the Executive Coun cil in respect of teachers and other 
academic staff, and the appointing authority in respect of other employees, shall have the power to 
remove a teacher or a member of the academic staff or other employee, as the case may be, on grounds of 
misconduct.  
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Executive Council, or as the case may be, the appointing authority, shall not 
be entitled to remove any teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee except for a good 
cause and after giving three months' notice or on paym ent of three months' salary in lieu thereof.  
(4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall be removed under clause ( 2) or 
clause ( 3) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed 
to be  taken in regard to him.  
(5) The removal of a teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall take effect from 
the date on which the order of removal is made:  
Provided that where the teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee is under suspension 
at the time of his removal, such removal shall take effect from the date on which he was placed under 
suspension.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Statute, a teacher, member 
of the academic staf f or other employee may resign, — 
(a) if he is a permanent employee, only after giving three months' notice in writing to the 
Executive Council or the appointing authority, as the case may be, or by paying three months' salary 
in lieu thereof;  29 
 (b) if he is not a permanent employee, only after giving one month's notice in writing to the 
Executive Council or, as the case may be, the appointing authority or by paying one month's salary in 
lieu thereof:  
Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on th e date on which the resignation is 
accepted by the Executive Council or the appointing authority, as the case may be.  
27. Honorary degrees .—(1) The Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic 
Council and by a resolution passed by a majorit y of not less than two -thirds of the members present and 
voting, make proposals to the Visitor for the conferment of honorary degrees:  
Provided that in case of emergency, the Executive Council may, on its own motion, make such 
proposals.  
(2) The Executive Council may, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the 
members present and voting, withdraw, with the previous sanction of the Visitor, any honorary degree 
conferred by the University.  
28. Withdrawal of degree s, etc .—The Executive Council may, by a special resolution passed by a 
majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw any degree or academic 
distinction conferred on, or any certificate or diploma granted to, any person by the Univers ity for good 
and sufficient cause:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been given to that person 
calling upon him to show cause within such time as may be specified in the notice why such a resolution 
should not b e passed and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in support of 
them, have been considered by the Executive Council.  
29. Maintenance of discipline among students of University .—(1) All powers relating to the 
maintenance of discipli ne and disciplinary action in relation to students of the University shall vest in the 
Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor may delegate all or any of his powers referred to in clause ( 1), as he deems 
proper, to a Pro -Vice -Chancellor and to such other officers as he may specify in this behalf.  
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to the maintenance of discipline and 
taking such action, as may seem to him appropriate for the maintenance of discipline, the Vice -Chancellor 
may, in  exercise of his powers, by order, direct that any student or students be expelled, or rusticated, for 
a specified period or be not admitted to a course or courses of study in a College, Institution or 
Department or a Faculty of the University for a stated  period, or be punished with fine for an amount to 
be specified in the order, or be debarred from taking an examination or examinations conducted by the 
University, College, Institution or Department or a Faculty for one or more years, or that the results of the 
student or students concerned in the examination or examinations in which he or they have appeared be 
cancelled.  
(4) The Principals of Colleges and Institutions, Deans of Faculties and Heads of teaching 
Departments in the University shall have the a uthority to exercise all such disciplinary powers over the 
students in their respective Colleges, Institutions, Faculties and teaching Departments in the University, 
as may be necessary for the proper conduct of such Colleges, Institutions, Faculties and t eaching 
Departments.  
(5) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice -Chancellor, the Principals and other persons specified 
in clause ( 4), detailed rules of discipline and proper conduct shall be made by the University. The 
Principals of Colleges, Institut ions, Deans of Faculties and Heads of teaching Departments in the 
University may also make the supplementary rules as they deem necessary to the aforesaid purpose.  
 (6) At the time of admission, every student shall be required to sign a declaration to the effect that he 
submits himself to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Vice -Chancellor and other authorities of the 
University.  
30. Maintenance of discipline amo ng students of Colleges, etc .—All powers relating to discipline 
and disciplinary action in relation to students of a College or an Institution not maintained by the 30 
 University, shall vest in the Principal of the College or Institution, as the case may be, in accordance with 
the procedu re prescribed by the Ordinances.  
31. Admission of Colleges, etc.,  to privileges of University .—(1) Colleges and other Institutions 
situated within the jurisdiction of the University may be admitted to such privileges of the University as 
the Executive Coun cil and the College Development Council may decide on th e following conditions, 
namely:— 
(i) every such College or Institution shall have a regularly constituted Governing Body, consisting 
of not more than fifteen persons approved by the Executive Council and including among others, two 
teachers of the University to be nominated by the Executive Council and three representatives of the 
teaching staff of whom the Principal of the College or Institution shall be one. The procedure for 
appointment of members o f the Governing Body and other matters affecting the management of a 
College or an Institution shall be prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that the said condition shall not apply in the case of Colleges and Institutions 
maintained by the Government which shall, however, have an Advisory Committee consisting of not 
more than fifteen persons which shall consist of among others, three teachers including the Principal 
of the College or Institution, and two teachers of the University nominated by the Exec utive Council;  
(ii) every such College or Institution shall satisfy the Executive Council and the College 
Development Council on  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the suitability and adequacy of its accommodation and equipment for teaching;  
(b) the qualifications and adequacy of its teaching staff and the conditions of their service;  
(c) the arrangements for the residence, welfare, discipline and supervision of students;  
(d) the adequacy of financial provision made for the continued maintenance of th e College or 
Institution; and  
(e) such other matters as are essential for the maintenance of the standards of University 
education;  
(iii) no College or Institution shall be admitted to any privileges of the University except on the 
recommendation of the Ac ademic Council made after considering the report of a Committee of 
Inspection appointed for the purpose by the Academic Council;  
(iv) Colleges and Institutions desirous of admission to any privileges of the University shall be 
required to intimate their in tention to do so in writing so as to reach the Registrar not later than the 
15th August, preceding the year from which permission applied for is to have effect;  
(v) a College or an Institution shall not, without the previous permission of the Executive 
Council, College Development Council and the Academic Council, suspend instruction in any subject 
or course of study which it is authorised to teach and teaches.  
(2) Appointment to the teaching staff and Principal of Colleges or Institutions admitted to the 
privileges of the University shall be made in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to Colleges and Institutions maintained by the 
Government.  
(3) The service conditions of the administrative and other non -academic staff of every College or 
Institution referred to in clause ( 2) shall be such as may be laid down in the Ordinances:  
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to Colleges and Institutions maintained by the 
Government.  
(4) Every College or Institution admitted to the privileges of the University shall be inspected at least 
once in every two academic years by a Committee appointed by the Academic Council, and the report of 
the Committee shall be submitted to the Academic Council, which shall forward the same to the College 
Development Council and Executive Council with such recommendations as it may deem fit to make.  31 
 (5) The College Development Council and the Executive Council, after considering the report and the 
recommendations, if any, of the Academic Council, shall forward a copy of the report to the Governing 
Body of the College or Institution with such remarks, if any, as they may deem fit for suitable action.  
(6) The Executive Council may, after consulting the College Development Counci l and Academic 
Council, withdraw any privileges granted to a College or an Institution, at any time it considers that the 
College or Institution does not satisfy any of the conditions on the fulfilment of which the College or 
Institution was admitted to su ch privileges:  
Provided that before any privileges are so withdrawn, the Governing Body of the College or 
Institution concerned shall be given an opportunity to represent to the Executive Council as to why such 
action should not be taken.  
(7) Subject to the conditions set forth in clause ( 1), the Ordinances may prescribe — 
(i) such other conditions as may be considered necessary; and  
(ii) the procedure for the admission of Colleges and Institutions to the privileges of the University 
and for the withdrawal  of those privileges.  
32. Convocations .—Convocations of the University for the conferring of degrees or for other 
purposes shall be held in such manner as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
33. Acting Chairman of meetings .—Where no provision is made for a President or Chairman to 
preside over a meeting of any authority of the University or any Committee of such authority or when the 
President or Chairman so provided for is absent, the members present shall elect one from among 
themselves to preside at suc h meeting.  
34. Resignation .—Any member, other than an ex officio  member, of the Court, the Executive 
Council, the Academic Council or any other authority of the University or any Committee of such 
authority may resign by letter addressed to the Registrar a nd the resignation shall take effect as soon as 
such letter is received by the Registrar.  
35. Disqualification .—(1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a 
member of any of the  authorities of the University, — 
(i) if he is of unsound mind; or  
(ii) if he is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(iii) if he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving moral turpitude and 
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of the 
disqualifications mentioned in clause ( 1), the question shall be referred to the Visitor and his decision 
shall be final and no other proceedings shall lie in any civ il court against such decisi on. 
36. Residence conditi on for membership and office .—notwithstanding  anything contained in the 
Statutes, a person who is not ordinarily resident in India shall not be eligible to be an officer of the 
University or a member of any authority of the Univers ity. 
37. Membership of authorities by virtue o f membership of other bodies .—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Statutes, a person who holds any post in the University or is a member of any 
authority or body of the University in his capacity as a member of a particular authority or body or as the 
holder of a particular appointment shall hold such office or membership only for so long as he continues 
to be a member of that particular authority or body or the holder of that particular appointment, as  the 
case may be.  
38. Students' Council .—(1) There shall be constituted in the University, a Students' Council for 
every academic year, consisting of — 
(i) the Dean of Students' Welfare who shall be the Chairman of the Students' Council;  32 
 (ii) twenty students to be nominated by the Academic Council on the basis of merit in studies, 
sports and extra -curricular activities; and  
(iii) such number of elected representatives of students as may be specified by the Academic 
Council:  
Provided that any student o f the University shall have the right to bring up any matter concerning 
the University before the Students' Council if so permitted by the Chairman, and he shall have the 
right to participate in the discussions at any meeting when the matter is taken up fo r consideration.  
(2) The functions of the Students' Council shall be to make suggestions to the appropriate authorities 
of the University in regard to the programmes of studies, students' welfare and other matters of 
importance, in regard to the working of  the University in general and such suggestions shall be made on 
the basis of consensus of opinion.  
(3) The Students' Council shall meet at least once in an academic year preferably in the beginning of 
that year.  
39. Ordinances how made .—(1) The first Ordi nances made under sub -section ( 2) of section 32 may 
be amended, repealed or added to at any time by the Executive Council in the manner specified below.  
(2) No Ordinance in respect of the matters enumerated in sub -section ( 1) of section 32 shall be made 
by the Executive Council unless a draft of such Ordinance has been proposed by the Academic Council.  
(3) The Executive Council shall not have power to amend any draft of any Ordinance proposed by the 
Academic Council under clause ( 2), but may reject the prop osal or return the draft to the Academic 
Council for re -consideration, either in whole or in part, together with any amendment which the 
Executive Council may suggest.  
(4) Where the Executive Council has rejected or returned the draft of an Ordinance proposed by the 
Academic Council, the Academic Council may consider the question afresh and in case the original draft 
is reaffirmed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting and more than 
half the total number of members of the Academic Council, the draft may be sent back to the Executive 
Council which shall either adopt it or refer it to the Visitor whose decision shall be final.  
(5) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall come into effect immediately.  
(6) Eve ry Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall be submitted to the Visitor within two 
weeks from the date of its adoption.  
(7) The Visitor shall have the power to direct the University within four weeks of the receipt of the 
Ordinance to suspend the oper ation of any such Ordinance and he shall, as soon as possible, inform the 
Executive Council about his objection to the proposed Ordinance.  
 (8) The Visitor may, after receiving the comments of the University, either withdraw the order 
suspending the Ordina nce or disallow the Ordinance, and his decision shall be final.  
40. Regulations .—(1) The authorities of the University may make Regulations consistent with the 
Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for  the following matters, namely: — 
(i) laying down the pro cedure to be observed at their meetings and the number of members 
required to form a quorum;  
(ii) providing for all matters which are required by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances to be 
prescribed by Regulations;  
(iii) providing for all other matters  solely concerning such authorities or committees appointed by 
them and not provided for by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the giving of notice to the 
members of such auth ority of the dates of meetings and of the business to be considered at meetings and 
for the keeping of a record of the proceedings of meetings.  33 
 (3) The Executive Council may direct the amendments in such manner as it may specify, of any 
Regulation made und er the Statutes or the annulment of any such Regulation.  
41. Delegation of powers .—Subject to the provisions of the Act and the Statutes, any officer or 
authority of the University may delegate his or its powers to any other officer or authority or person under 
his or its respective control and subject to the condition that overall responsibility for the exercise of the 
powers so delegated shall continue to vest in the officer or authority delegating such powers . 
--------------------------The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007--------------------------
1 
 THE MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF PARENTS AND SENIOR  
CITIZENS ACT, 2007  
__________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent,  application and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Act to have overriding effect.  
 
CHAPTER II  
MAINTENANCE OF PARENTS AND SENIOR CITIZENS  
4. Maintenance of parents and senior citizens.  
5. Application for maintenance.  
6. Jurisdiction and procedure.  
7. Constitution of Maintenance Tribunal.  
8. Summary procedure in case of inquiry.  
9. Order for maintenance.  
10. Alteration in allowance.  
11. Enforcement of order of maintenance.  
12. Option regarding maintenance in certain cases.  
13. Deposit of maintenance amount.  
14. Award of interest where any claim  is allowed.  
15. Constitution of Appellate Tribunal.  
16. Appeals.  
17. Right to legal representation.  
18. Maintenance Officer.  
 
CHAPTER III  
ESTABLISHMENT OF OLDAGE HOMES  
19. Establishment of oldage homes.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
PROVISIONS FOR MEDICAL CARE OF SENIOR CITIZEN  
20. Medical support for senior citizens.  
 
CHAPTER V  
PROTECTION OF LIFE AND PROPERTY OF SENIOR CITIZEN  
21. Measures for publicity, awareness, etc., for welfare of senior citizens.  
22. Authorities who may be specified for implementing the provisions of this Act.  
23. Transfer of pro perty to be void in certain circum stances.   2 
 CHAPTER VI  
OFFENCES AND PROCEDURE FOR TRIAL  
SECTIONS  
24. Exposure and abandonment of senior citizen.  
25. Cognizance of offences.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
26. Officers to be public servants.  
27. Jurisdiction of civil courts barred.  
28. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
29. Power to remove difficulties.  
30. Power of Central Government to give directions.  
31. Power of Central Government to review.  
32. Power of State Government to make rules.  
 
  3 
 THE MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF PARENTS AND SE NIOR  
CITIZENS ACT, 2007  
ACT NO. 56 OF 2007  
[29 December , 2007 .] 
An Act to provide for more effective provisions for the maintenance and welfare of parents and 
senior c itizens guaranteed and recognis ed under the Constitution and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -eighth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title , extent, application and commencement .—(1)This Act may  be called the 
Maintenance and W elfare of  Parents and Senior  Citizens Act, 2007 . 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir and it  applies also it 
citizens of India outside India . 
(3) It shall come into force in a State on such date as the State Government may,  by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint . 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “children” includes son, daughter, grandson and grand -daughter but does not include a minor;  
(b) “maintenance” includes provisions for f ood, clothing, residence and medical attendance and 
treatment;  
(c) “minor” means a person who, under the provis ions of the M ajority Act, 1875 (9 of 1875)  is 
deemed not to have attained the age of majority;  
(d) “parent” means father or mother whether biological, adoptive or step father or step mother, as 
the case may be, whether or not the father or the mother is a senior citizen;  
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the State Government under this Act;  
 (f) “property” means property of a ny kind, whether movable or immovable, ancestral or self 
acquired, tangible or intangible and includes rights or interests in such property;  
(g) “relative” means any legal heir of the childless senior citizen who is not a minor and is in 
possession of or would inherit his property after his death;  
(h) “senior citizen ” means any person being a citizen of India, who has attained the age of sixty 
years or above;  
(i) “State Government”, relation to a Union territory, means the administrator thereof appointed 
under article 239 of the Constitution;  
(j) “Tribunal” means the Maintenance Tribu nal constituted under section 7;  
(k) “welfare” means provision for food, health care, recreation centres and other amenities 
necessary for the senior citizens.  
3. Act to have o verriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act, or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act.  
  4 
 CHAPTER II 
MAINTAINANCE OF PARENTS AND SENIOT CITIZENS  
4. Maintenance of parents and senior citizens .—(1) A senior citizen including parent  who is unable  
to maintain  himself from  his own earning or out of the property owned by him, shall be entitled to make 
an application under section 5 in case of— 
(i) parent or grand -parent, against one or more of his children not being a minor;  
(ii) a childless  senior citizen, against such of hi s relative referred to in clause ( g) of section  2. 
(2) The obligation of the children or relative , as the case may be, to maintain a senior citizen extends 
to the needs of such citizen so that senior citizen may lead a normal life.  
(3) The obligation of the children to maintain his or her parent extends to the needs of such parent 
either father or mother or both, as the case may be, so that such parent may lead a normal life.  
(4) Any person being a relative of a senior citizen and having sufficient means shall maintain such 
senior citizen provided he is in possession of the property of such citizen or he would inherit the p roperty 
of such senior citizen:  
Provided that where more than one relatives are entitled to inherit the property of a senior citizen, t he 
maintenance shall be payable by such relative in the proportion in which they would inherit his property.  
5. Application for maintenance .—(1) An application for maintenance under section 4, may be 
made— 
(a) by a senior citizen or a parent, as the case m ay be; or  
(b) if he is incapable , by any other person or organis ation authoris ed by him; or  
(c) the Tribunal may take cognizance suo motu . 
Explanation .—For the p urposes of this section “organis ation” means any voluntary association 
registered under the So cieties Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) or any other law for the time being in 
force.  
(2) The Tribunal may, during the pendency of the proceeding regarding monthly allowance for the 
maintenance under this section, order such children or relative to mak e a monthly allowance for the 
interim maintenance of such senior citizen including parent and to pay the same to such senior citizen 
including parent as the Tribunal may from time to time direct.  
(3) On receipt of an application for maintenance under subsection ( 1), after giving  notice of the 
application to t he children or relative and after giving the parties an opportunity of being heard, hold an 
inquiry for determining the amount of maintenance.  
(4) An application filed under sub -section ( 2) for the  monthly allowance for the maintenance and 
expenses for proceeding shall be disposed of within ninety days from the date of the service of notice of  
the application to such person:  
Provided that the Tribunal may extend the said period, once for a maximum  period of thirty days in 
exceptional circumstances for reasons to be recorded in  writing.  
(5) An application for maintenance under sub -section ( 1) may be filled against one or more persons : 
 Provided that such children or relative may implead the other person liable to  maintain parent in the 
application for maintenance.  
(6) Where a maintenance order was made against more than one person, the death of one of them 
does not affect the liability of other s to continue paying maintenance.  
(7) Any such allowanc e for the maintenance and expenses for proceeding shall be payable from the 
date of the order, o r, if so ordered, from the date of the application for maintenance or expenses of 
proceeding, as the case may be.  
(8) If, children or relative so ordered fail, without sufficient cause to comply with  the order, any such 
Tribunal may, for every breach of the order, issue a warrant for levying the amount due in the manner 
provided for levying fines, and may sentence such perso n for the whole, or any part of each month’s 5 
 allowance  for the maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the case be, remaining unpaid after the 
execution of the wa rrant, to imprisonment for a ter m which may extend to one month or until payment if 
sooner made whichever is earlier:  
Provided tha t no warrant shall be issued for the recovery of any amount due under this section unless 
application be made to the Tribunal to levy such amount within  a period of three month s from the date on 
which it beca me due.  
6. Jurisdiction and procedure .—(1) The p roceedings under  section 5 may be taken against any 
child ren or relative in any district — 
(a) where he resides or last resided; or  
(b) where children or relative resides.  
(2) On receipt of the application under section 5, the Tribunal shall issues a  process for procuring the 
presence of children or relative against whom the application is filed.  
(3) For securing the attendance of children or relative the Tribunal shall have the power of a Judicial 
Magistrate of first class as provided under the Code o f Criminal Proce dure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(4) All evidence to such proceedings shall be taken in the presence of the children or relative against 
whom an order for payment of maintenance is proposed to be made, and shall be recorded in the manner 
prescribed for summons cases:  
Provided that if the Tribunal is satisfied that the children or relative against whom an order for 
payment of maintenance is proposed to be made is willfully avoiding service, or willfully neglecting to 
attend the Tribunal, the Tribunal may proceed to hear and determine the case ex parte . 
(5) Where the children or relative is residing out of India, the summons shall be served by the 
Tribunal through such authority, as the Central Government may by notification in the official Gazette, 
specify in this behalf.  
(6) The Tribunal before hearing an application under section 5 may, refer the same to a Conciliation 
Officer and such Conciliation Officer shall submit his findings within one month and if amicable 
settlement has been arrived at, the T ribunal shall pass an order to that effect.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section “Conciliation Officer” means any person  or 
representative of an organis ation referred to in Explanation  to sub -section ( 1) of section 5 or the 
Maintenance Officers designated by the State Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 18 or any 
other person nominated b y the Tribunal for this purpose . 
7. Constitution of Maintenance Tribunal .—(1)The State Government shall within a period of six 
months from the da te of the commencement of this Act, by notification in Official Gazette, constitute fo r 
each Sub -division one or more Tribunals as may be specified in the notificatio n for the purpose of 
adjudicati ng and deciding  upon the orde r for maintenance under sectio n 5. 
(2) The Tribunal shall be presided over by an officer not below the rank o f Sub - Divisional Officer of 
a State.  
(3) Where two or more Tribunals are constituted for any area, the State Government may, by general 
or special order, regulate the distribution of business among them.  
8. Summary procedure in case of inquiry .—(1)In holding any inquiry under section 5, the Tribunal 
may, subject to any  rules that may be prescribed by the State Government in this behalf, follow such 
summary procedure as it deems fit.  
(2) The Tribunal shall have all the powers of a Civil Court for the purpose of taking evidence on oath 
and of enforcing the attendance of witnesses and of compelling the discovery and production of 
documents and material objects and for such other purposes as may be prescribed; and the Tribunal shall 
be deemed to be a Civil Court for all the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the C ode of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(3) Subject to any rule that may be made in this behalf, the  Tribunal may, for  the pur pose of 
adjudicating and deciding  upon any claim for maintenance, choose one or more persons possessing 
special knowledge of any matter relevant to the inquiry to assist it in holding the inquiry.  6 
 9. Order for maintenance .—(1) If children or relatives, as the case may be, neglect or refuse to  
maintain a  senior citizen being unable to maintain himself, the Tribunal may, on being satisfied of such 
neglect or refusal, order such children or relatives to make a monthly allowance at suc h monthly rate for 
the maintenance of such senior citizen, as the Tribunal may deem fit and to pay the same to such senior 
citizen as the Tribunal may, from time to time, direct . 
(2) The maximum maintenance allowance which may be ordered by such  Tribunal shall be such as 
may be prescribed by the State Government which shall not exceed ten thousand rupees per month.  
10. Alteration in allowance .—(1) On proof of misrepresentation or mistake of fact or a change in the  
circumstances of any person, receiving a m onthly allowance under section  9, for the maintenance  ordered 
under that section to pay a monthly allowance for the maintenance, the Tribunal may make such 
alteration, as it thinks fit, in the allowance for the maintenance.  
(2) Where it appears to the Tribunal that, in consequence of any decision of a competent Civil Court, 
any order made under section 9 should be cancelled or varied, it shall cancel the order or, as the case may 
be, vary the same accordingly.  
11. Enforcement of order of maintenance .—(1) A copy of the order o f maintenance and including 
the order  regarding expenses of proceedings, as the case may be, shall be given without payment of any 
fee to the senior citizen or to parent, as the case may be, in whose favour it is made and such order may 
be enforced by any Tribunal in any place where the person against whom it is made, such Tribunal on 
being satisfied as to the identit y of the parties and the non -payment of the allowance, or as the case may 
be, expenses, due.  
(2) A maintenance order made under this Act shall have the same force and  effect as an order passed 
under Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  and shall be executed in the 
manner prescribed for the execution of such order by that Code.  
12. Option regardi ng maintenance in certain cases .—Notwithstanding anything contained in 
Chapter IX of the C ode of Criminal Procedure 1973 (2 of 1974) where a senior citizen or a parent is 
entitled for mai ntenance under the said Chapter and also entitled for maintenance und er this Act may, 
without prejudice to the provisions of Chapter IX of the said Code, claim such maintenance under either 
of those Acts but not under both.  
13. Deposit of maintenance amount .—When an order is made under this Chapter, the children or 
relative  who is required to pay any amount in terms of such order shall within thirty days of the date of 
announcing the order by the Tribunal, deposit the entire amount ordered in such manner as the Tribunal 
may direct.  
14. Award of interest where any claim is al lowed .—Where any Tribunal makes an order for 
maintenance made under this Act, such Tribunal may direct that in addition to the amount of 
maintenance, simple interest shall also be paid at such rate and from such date not earlier than the date of 
making the  application as may be determined by the Tribunal which shall not be less than five per cent . 
and not more than eighteen per cent.:  
Provided that where any application for maintenance under Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)  is pending before a Court at the commencement of this Act, then the Court 
shall allow the withdrawal of such application on the request of the parent and such parent  shall be 
entitled to file an application for maintenance before the Tribunal.  
15. Constitution of Appellate Tribunal .—(1)The State Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette,  constitute one Appellate Tribunal for each district to hear the appeal against the order of 
the Tribunal.  
(2) The Appellate Tribunal shall be preside d over by an officer not below the rank of District 
Magistrate.  
16. Appeals .—(1) Any senior citizen or a parent, as the case may be, aggrieved by an order of a  
Tribunal may, within sixty days from the date of the order, prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tr ibunal:  
Provided that on appeal, the children or relative who is required to pay any amount in terms of such 
maintenance order shall continue to pay to such parent the amount so ordered, in the manner directed by 
the Appellate Tribunal:  7 
 Provided further th at the Appellate Tribunal may, entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said 
period of sixty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring 
the appeal in time.  
(2) On receipt of an appeal, the Appellate Tr ibunal shall, cause a notice to be served upon the 
respondent.  
(3) The Appellate Tribunal may call for the record of proceedings from the Tribunal against whose 
order the appeal is preferred.  
(4) The Appellate Tribunal may, after examining the appeal and the records called for either allow or 
reject the appeal.  
(5) The Appellate Tribunal shall, adjudicate and decide upon the appeal filed against the order of the 
Tribunal and the order of the Appellate Tribunal shall be final:  
Provided that no appeal shall be rejected unless an opportunity has been given to both the parties of 
being heard in person or th rough a dully authoris ed representative.  
(6) The Appellate Tribunal shall make an endeavour to pronounce its order in writing within one 
month of the receipt  of an appeal.  
(7) A copy of every order made under sub -section ( 5) shall be sent to both the parties free of cost.  
17. Right to legal representation .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any law, no party to a 
proceeding before a Tribunal or Appel late Tr ibunal shall be represented by a legal practitioner.  
18. Maintenance Officer .—(1) The State Government shall  designate the District Social W elfare or 
an officer not below the rank of a District Social W elfare Offic er, by whatever name called as 
Maintenance  Officer . 
(2) The Maintenance Officer referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall represent a parent if he so desires, 
during the proceedings of the Tribunal, or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be.  
CHAPTER III  
ESTABLISHMENT OF OLD AGE HOMES  
19. Establishment of oldage homes .—(1) The State Government may establish and maintain such 
number of old age homes at accessible places, as it may deem necessary, in a phased manner, beginning 
with at least one in each district to accommodate in such homes  a minimum of one hundred fifty senior 
citizens who are indigent.  
(2)The State Government may, prescribe a scheme for management of old  age homes, including the 
standards and various types of services to be provided by them which are necessary for medical care and 
means of entertainment to the inhabitants of such homes.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “ indigent” means any senior citizen who is not having 
sufficient means, as determined by the State Government, from time to time, to maintain h imself.  
CHAPTER IV 
PROVISIONS FOR MEDICAL CARE OF SENIOR CITIZEN  
20. Medical support for senior citizens .—The Stat e Government shall ensure that, — 
(i) the Government hospitals or hospitals funded fully or partially by the Government shall 
provide beds for all senior citizens as far as possible;  
(ii) separate queues be arranged for senior citizens;  
(iii) facility  for treatment of chronic, terminal and degenerative diseases is expanded for senior  
citizens;  
(iv) research activities for chronic elderly diseases and ageing expanded;  
(v) there are earmarked facilities for geriatric patients in every district hospital dully headed by a 
medical officer with experience in geriatric care.  
  8 
 CHAPTER V  
PROTECTION OF LIFE AND PROPERTY OF SENIOR CITIZEN  
21. Measures for publicity, awareness, etc., for welfare of senior citizens .—The State 
Government shall, t ake all measures to ensure that — 
(i) the provisions of this Act are given wide publicity through public media including the 
television, radio and the print, at regular intervals;  
(ii) the Central Government and State Government Officers, including the police officers and the 
members of the judicial service, are given periodic sensitization and awareness training on the issues 
relating to this Act;  
(iii) effective co -ordination between the service s provided by the concerned Ministries or 
Department s dealing with law, home affairs, health and welfare, to address the issues relating to the 
welfare of the senior citizens and periodical review of the same is conducted.  
22. Authorities who may be specifie d for implementing the provisions of this Act .—(1) The State 
Government may, confer such powers and impose such duties on  a District Magistrate as may be 
necessary , to ensure that the provisions of this Act are properly carried out and the District Magistr ate 
may specify the officer, subordinate to him, who shall exercise all or any of the powers, and perform all 
or any of the duties, so conferred or imposed and the local limits within which such powers or duties shall 
be carried out by the officer as may b e prescribed.  
(2) The State Government shall prescribe a comprehensive action plan for providing  protection of life 
and property of senior citizens.  
23. Transfer of property to be void in certain circumstances .—(1) Where any senior citizen who, 
after the commencement of this Act, has  transferred by way of gift or otherwise, his property, subject to 
the condition that the transferee shall provide the basic amenities and basic physical needs to the 
transferor and such transferee refuses or fails to provide s uch amenities and physical needs, the said 
transfer of property shall be deemed to have been made by fraud or coercion or under  undue influence 
and shall at the option of the transferor be declared void by the Tribunal.  
(2) Where any senior citizen has a r ight to receive maintenance out of an estate and such estate or part 
thereof is transferred, the right to receive maintenance may be enforced against the transferee if the 
transferee has notice of the right, or if the transfer is gratuitous; but not agains t the transferee for 
consideration and without notice of right.  
(3) If, any senior citizen is incapable of enforcing the rights under sub -sections  (1) and ( 2), action 
may be taken on his behalf by any of the organis ation referred to in Explanation  to sub -section ( 1) of 
section 5.  
CHAPTER VI 
OFFENCES AND PROCEDURE FOR TRIAL  
24. Exposure and abandonment of senior citizen .—Who ever, having the care or protection of 
senior citizen leaves, such senior citizen in any place with the intention of wholly abandoning such senior 
citizen, shall be punishable with imprisonment of either description for a  term which may extend to three 
months or fine which may extend to five thousands rupees or with both.  
25. Cognizance of offences .—(1)Notwithstanding anything contained i n the Code of Criminal 
Procedure,  1973 (2 of 1974) , every offence under this Act shall be cognizable and bailable.  
(2) An offence under this Act shall be tried summarily by a Magistrate.  
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
26. Officers to be public servants .—Every officer or staff appointed to exercise functions under this 
Act shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of sect ion 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 
of 1860).   9 
 27. Jurisdiction of civil courts barred .—No Civil Court shall have jurisdiction i n respect of any  
matter to which any provision of this Act applies and no injunction shall be granted by any Civil Court in 
respect of anything which is done or intended to be done by or under this Act.  
28. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit , prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central  Government, the State Governments or the local authority or any officer of the 
Government in respect of anything which is done in good faith or intended to be done in pursuance of this 
Act and  any rules or orders made there under.  
29. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the State Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsiste nt with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedi ent for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided  that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two  years from the date of 
the commencement of this Act.  
30. Power of Central Government to give directions .—The Central Government may give 
directions to State Government s as to the carrying into execution of the provisions of this Act.  
31. Power of Central Government to review .—The Central Government may make periodic review 
and monitor the progress of th e implementation of the provisions of this Act by the State Governments.  
32. Power of State Government to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, make  rules for carrying out th e purposes of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality  of the foregoing power, such rules may  provide for — 
(a) the manner of holding inquiry under section 5 subject  to such rules as may be prescribed 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 8;  
(b) the power and procedure of the Tribunal for other purposes under sub -section ( 2) of section 8;  
(c) the maximum maintenance allowance which may be ordered by the Tribunal under sub -
section ( 2) of section 9;  
(d) the scheme for management of old age homes, including the standards and various types of 
services to be provided by them which are necessary for medical care and means of entertainment to 
the inhabitants of such homes under sub -section ( 2) of section 19;  
(e) the powers and duties of the authorities for implementing the provisions of this Act, under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 22;  
(f) a comprehensive action plan for providing protection of life and property of senior citizens 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 22;  
(g) any other matter which is to be, or may be , prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of State Legislature, where it consists of two Houses or where such legislature consists of  one 
House, before that House.  
--------------------------The National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act, 2007--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI LAWS (SPECIAL  
PROVISIONS) ACT , 2007  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and duration . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Enforcement to be kept in abeyance . 
4. Provisions of this Act not to apply in certain cases . 
5. Power of Central Government to give directions . 
6. Repeal and savings . 
 
  2 
 THE NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI LAWS (SPECIAL  
PROVISIONS) ACT , 2007  
ACT NO. 43 OF 2007  
[5th December , 2007 .] 
An Act to make special provisions for the National Capital Territory of Delhi for a further period 
up to 31st December, 2008 and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  there had been phenomenal increase in the population of the National Capital Territory of 
Delhi owing to migration and other factors resulting in tremendous pressure on land and infrastructure 
leading to encroachment or unauthorised developments which are  not in consonance with the concept of 
planned development as provided in the Master Plan of Delhi, 2001 and the relevant Acts and bui lding 
bye-laws made thereunder;  
AND WHEREAS  the Master Plan of Delhi, 2001 has been extensively modified and notified by t he 
Central Government on 7th February, 2007 with the perspective for the year 2021 keeping in view the 
emerging new dimensions in urban development  vis-a-vis the social, financial and other ground realities;  
 AND WHEREAS the Master Plan of Delhi with the p erspective for the year 2021 specifically provides 
for strategies for housing for urban poor as well as to deal with the informal sector;  
AND WHEREAS  a revised policy for relocation and rehabilitation of slum dwellers in the National 
Capital Territory of D elhi is also under considera tion of the Central Government;  
AND WHEREAS  a strategy and a scheme has been prepared by the local authorities in the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi for regulation of urban street vendors in accordance with the National Pol icy 
for Urban Street Vendors and the Master Plan for Delhi, 2021;  
AND WHEREAS  some time is required for making orderly arrangements in accordance with the revised 
policy for relocation and rehabilitation of slum dwellers of Delhi as well as for putting in place the 
scheme for regulation of urban street vendors in terms of the Master Plan of Delhi, 2021 and also the 
national policy in this regard;  
AND WHEREAS  the Central Government has considered and finalised a policy regarding regularisation 
of unauthorise d colonies, village abadi area and its extension, as existed on the 31st day of March, 2002 
for which the guidelines are being framed;  
AND WHEREAS  the Central Government require time to take a considered view on the policy 
regarding existing farm houses in volving construction beyond permissible building limits and regarding 
schools, dispensaries, religious institutions and cultural institutions, storages, warehouses and godowns 
used for agricultural inputs or produce (including dairy and poultry) in rural a reas built on agricultural 
land, inter alia , in the light of recommendations of the Expert Committees constituted by the Centr al 
Government in the year 2006;  
AND WHEREAS  the National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Ordinance, 2007  
(Ord . 6 of 2007) for making special provisions for the areas of the National Capital Territory of Delhi for 
a further period of one year promulgated on 4th July, 2007 will cease to operate from the 21st day of 
September, 2007;  
AND WHEREAS  the National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Bill, 2007 
introduced in Parliament to replace the National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) 
Ordinance, 2007  (Ord. 6 of 2007)  could not be taken up for consideration and  passing since Parliament 
adjourned sine die ; 
AND WHEREAS  it is expedient to have a law in terms of the Master Plan of Delhi, 2021, in 
continuation of the said Act for a period up to 31st December, 2008 to provide temporary relief and to 
minimise avoidable  hardships and irreparable loss to the people of the National Capital Territory of Delhi 
against any action by the concerned agency in respect of persons covered by the policies referred to above 
which are expected to be finalised within the period so exte nded;   3 
 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -eighth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, exten t, commencement and duration .—(1) This Act may be called the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act, 2007.  
(2) It extends to the National Capital Territory of Delhi.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 19th day of May, 2007.  
(4) It shall cease to have effect on the 31st day of December, 2008 except as respects things done or 
omitted to be done be fore such cesser, and upon such cesser section 6 o f the General Clauses Act, 1897 
(10 of 1897)  shall apply as if this Act had then been repealed by a Central Act.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “building bye-laws” means bye -laws made under section 481 of the Delhi Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1957 (61 of 1957) or the bye -laws made under section 188, sub -section  (3) of 
section 189 and sub -section ( 1) of section 190 of  the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911  (Punjab Act 3 of 
1911)  as in force in New Delhi or the regulations made under sub -section ( 1) of section 57 of the 
Delhi Development Ac t, 1957 (61 of 1957) relating to buildings;  
(b) “Delhi” means the entire area of the National Capital Territory of Delhi  except the Delhi 
Cantonment as defined in clause ( 11) of section 2 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957  
(66 of 1957) ; 
(c) “encroachment ” means unauthorised occupation of Government land or public land by way of 
putting temporary, semi -permanent or  permanent structure for residential use or commercial use or 
any other use;  
(d) “local authority ” means the Delhi Municipal Corporation established under the Delhi 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 (66 of 1957) or the New Delhi Municipal Council established  under 
the New De lhi Municipal Council Act, 1994 (44 of 1994) or the Delhi Development Authority 
established under the Delhi Development Act, 1957 (61 of 1957) legally entitled to exercise control in 
respect of the areas under their respective jurisdiction ; 
(e) “Master Plan ” means the Master Plan for Delhi with the perspective for the year 2021 
notified, vide the notification number S.O.141(E), dated 7th February, 2007 under the Delhi 
Development Act, 1957  (61 of 1957) ; 
(f) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(g) “punitive action ” means action taken by a local authority under the relevant law against 
unauthorised development and shall include demolition, sealing of premises and displacement of 
persons or their business establishment from their existing location, whether in pursuance of court 
orders or otherwise;  
(h) “relevan t law” means in case of — 
(i) the Delhi Development Authority, the Delhi Development Act, 1957  (61 of 1957) ; 
(ii) the Municipal Corpora tion of Delhi, the Delhi Munic ipal Corporation Act, 1957  
(66 of 1957) ; and  
(iii) the New Delhi Municipal Council, the New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994  
(44 of 1994) ; 
(i) “unauthorised development ” means use of land or use of building or construction of building 
or development of colonies, village abadi  area and its extension, carried out in contravention of the 
sanctioned plans or without obtaining the sanction of plans, or in contravention of the land use as 
permitted under the Master Plan or Zonal Plan or layout plan, as the case may be,  and includes any 
encroachment.  4 
 (2) The words and expressions used but not defined herein shall have the meanings respectively 
assigned to them in t he Delhi Develo pment Act, 1957 (61 of 1957) the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act,  
1957 (66 of 1957)  and the New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994  (44 of 1994) . 
3. Enfor cement to be kept in abeyance .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any relevant 
law or any rules, regulations or bye -laws made thereunder, the Central Government shall before the 
expiry of this Act, take all possible measures to finalise norms, policy guidelines and feasible strateg ies to 
deal with the problem of encroachment or unauthorised development in the form of encroachment by 
slum dwellers and Jhuggi -Jhompri  clusters, hawkers and urban street vendors, unauthorised colonies, 
village abadi  area and its extension, existing farm houses involving construction beyond permissible 
building limits and schools, dispensaries, religious institutions, cultural institutions, storages, warehouses 
and godowns used for agricultural inputs or produce (including dairy and poultry) in rural areas  built on 
agricultural land, as mentioned below: — 
(a) policy for relocation and rehabilitation of slum dwellers and Jhuggi -Jhompri  clusters in 
accordance with provisions of the Master Plan of Delhi, 2021 to ensure development of Delhi in a 
sustaina ble, pla nned and humane manner;  
(b) strategy for regulation of urban street vendors in consonance with the national policy for 
urban street vendors and hawkers as provided in the Master Plan of Delhi, 2021;  
(c) scheme containing guidelines for regularisation of un authorised colonies, village abadi area 
and its extension, as existed on the 31st day of March, 2002, and where construction took place even 
beyond that date and up to the 8th day of February, 2007;  
(d) policy regarding existing farm houses involving const ruction beyond permissible building 
limits; and  
(e) policy regarding schools, dispensaries, religious institutions, cultural institutions, storages, 
warehouses and godowns used for agricultural inputs or produce (including dairy and poultry) in rural 
areas  built on agricultural land.  
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1) and notwithstanding any judgment, decree 
or order of any court, status quo — 
(i) as on the 1st day of January, 2006 in respect of encroachment or unauthorised  development; 
and  
(ii) in respect of unauthorised colonies, village abadi  area and its extension, which existed on the 
31st day of March, 2002 and where construction took place even beyond that date and up to the 8th 
day of February, 2007, mentioned in su b-section ( 1), 
shall be maintained.  
(3) All notices issued by any local authority for initiating action against encroachment or 
unauthorised development referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall be deemed to have been suspended and no 
punitive action shall be taken till the 31st day of December, 2008.  
(4) Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this Act, the Central Government may, at any 
time before the 31st day of December, 2008, withdraw the exemption by notification in respect of 
encroachment or un authorised development mentioned in sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), as the case 
may be.  
4. Provisions of this Act n ot to apply in certain cases .—During the period of operation of this Act, 
no relief shall be available under the provisions of section 3 in respect of the following encroachment or 
unauthorised development, namely: — 
(a) encroachment on public land except in those cases which are covered under clauses ( a), (b) 
and ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3;  
(b) removal of slums and Jhuggi -Jhompri  dwellers, hawkers and urban street vendors, 
unauthorised colonies or part thereof, village abadi area and its extension, in accordance with the 5 
 relevant policies approved by the Central Government for clearance of land required for specific 
public project s. 
5. Power of Central G overnment to give directions .—The Central Government may, from time to 
time, issue such directions to the local authorities as it may deem fit, for giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act and it shall be the duty of the local au thorities to comply with such directions.  
6. Repeal and savings .—(1) The National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) 
Second Ordinance, 2007  (Ord.7 of 2007)  is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under th e National Capital 
Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Second Ordinance, 2007 (Ord. 7 of 2007) shall be deemed to 
have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
 
--------------------------The National Institutes of Technology, Science Education and Research Act, 2007--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLOGY, SCIENCE    EDUCATION AND 
RESEARCH  ACT, 2007  
____________ ______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________ _______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration of certain Institutions as Institutions  of national importance.  
3. Definition s. 
 
CHAPTER II  
THE INSTITUTES  
4. Incorporation of Institutes.  
5. Effect of incorporation of Institutes.  
5A. Effect of incorporation of Bengal Engineering and Science University,  Shibpur.  
6. Power s of Institutes.  
7. Institutes to  be open to all races, creeds and  classes.  
8. Teaching at Institutes . 
9. Visitor.  
10. Authorities of Institutes.  
11. Board of Governors.  
11A.  Board  of Institute s of Second Schedule and Third Schedule . 
12. Term of office of, vacancies among, and allowance s payable  to, members of Board.  
13. Powers and functions of Board.  
14. Senate.  
15. Functions of Senate.  
16. Chairperson of Board.  
17. Director and Deputy Director.  
18. Registrar.  
19. Other authorities and officers.  
20. Grants by Central Government.  
21. Fund of Institute.  
22. Accounts and audit.  
23. Pension and provident fun d. 
24. Appointments.  
25. Statutes.  
26. Statutes how made.  
27. Ordinances.  
28. Ordinances how made.  
29. Tribunal of Arbitration.  
CHAPTER III  
THE COUNCIL  
30. Establishment of Council.  
30A.  [Omitted .] 
31. Term of office of, vacancies among, and allowances payable  to member s of Council.  
32. Func tions of Council.  
33. Chairman of Council.  2 
 SECTIONS  
34. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Chapter.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
35. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc.  
36. Power to remove difficulties.  
37. Transitional provisions.  
THE F IRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.   3 
 THE 2[NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLOGY , SCIENCE  EDUCATION AND 
RESEARCH ] ACT, 2007  
ACT NO. 29 OF 2007  
 [5th May, 2007 .]  
An Act to declare 1[certain institutions of technology, science education and  research]  to be 
Institutions of national importance and to provide for instructions and research in branches of 
engineering, technology, management, education, sciences and arts and for the advancement 
of learning and dissemination of knowledge in such br anches and for certain other matters 
connected with such institutions.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -eighth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the  2[National Institutes of 
Technology,  Science Education and Research] Act, 2007.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provision s of this Act.  
2. Declaration  of certain Institutions as Instit utions of national importance .—Whereas  the 
object s of the institution  mentioned  in 4[the First Schedule, t he Second Schedule  and the Third Schedule]  
are such as to make them Institutions of nat ional importance, it is hereby declared that each such institut e 
is an Institution of national  importance.  
3. Definition s.—In this Act, unless the context othe rwise requires ,— 
(a) “Board ”, in relation to any Institute, means the Board of Governors thereof;   
(b) “Chairperson ”, means  the Chairperson of the Board;  
(c) “Corresponding Institute ”, in relation to a society mentioned in column ( 2) of 4[the First 
Schedule, the Second Schedule and the Third Schedule] means the Institute as specified in column ( 3) 
of 4[the First Schedule, the Second Schedule and the Third Schedule];  
(d) “Council ”,   means the Council established under sub -section ( 1) of section 30 5[ 6*** as the 
case may be ]; 
(e)  “Deputy Director ”, in relation to any Institute, means the Deputy Direct or thereof;  
(f)  “Director ”, in relation to any Institute, means the Director thereof;  
(g)  “Institute ” means any of the Institutions mentioned in column ( 3) of 4[the First Schedule,  the 
Second Schedule and the Third Schedule];  
(h) “Notification ” means a n otification published in the Official Gazette;  
(i)  “Prescr ibed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(j) “Registrar ” in relation to any Institute, means the Registrar thereof;  
                                                   
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2012, s.  2, for “certain institutions of technology ” (w.e.f. 7 -6-2012).  
2.  Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “Nationa l Institut es of Technology ” (w.e. f. 7-6-2012).  
3. 15th August, 2007, vide notification N o. S.O.  1384(E),  dated 9th August, 2007, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part  
II, sec. 3( ii). 
4.  Subs. by Act 9 of 2014, s. 2, for  “ the First Schedu le and the Second Sch edule ” (w.e .f. 4-3-2014).  
5.  Ins. by Act 28 of 2012, s. 5 (w.e.f. 7 -6-2012).  
6. The words, brackets, figures and letter “or sub -section ( 1) of section 30A ” omitted by Act 9 of 2014, s. 3                           
(w.e.f. 4 -3-2014).  4 
 (k)  “Schedule ” means 1[the First Schedule, the Second Schedule and t he Third Schedule] ; 
(l)   “Senate ” in relation to any Institute, means the Senate thereof;  
(m) “Society ” means any of the societies registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860     
(21 of 1860) and mentioned in column ( 2) of the 1[the First Schedul e, the Second Schedule and the 
Third Schedule] ; 
(n) “Statutes and  Ordinances ”, in relation to any Institute, means the Statutes and Ordinances of 
that Institute made under this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
THE INSTITUTES  
4. Incorporation of Institutes .—(1) Each of the Institutes mentioned in column ( 3) of  2[the First 
Schedule, the Second Schedule and the Third Schedule]  shall be a body corporate having perpetual 
succession and a common seal and shal l, by its name, sue and be sued. 
 3[(1A) The Bengal Engineering and Sci ence University, Shibpur shall be deemed to have been 
incorporated under this Act, and on such incorporation, be called the Indian Institute of Engineering 
Science and Technology, Shibpur.]  
(2) The body corporate constituting each of the said Institutes s hall consist of a Chairperson, a 
Director and other members of the Board for the time being of the institute.  
5. Effect of incorporation of Institutes .—On and from the commencement of this Act ,— 
(a) Any reference to a society i n any law, other than this Ac t, or in any contract or other 
instrument shall be deemed as a reference to the corresponding Institute;  
(b) All property, movable and immovable, of or belonging to a society shall vest in the 
corresponding Institute;  
(c) All the rights and liabilities of  a society shall be transferred to, and be the rights and liabilities 
of the corresponding Institute; and  
(d) every person employed by a society, immediately before such commencement shall hold his 
office or service in the corresponding Institute for the same tenure, at the same remuneration and 
upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension, leave, 
gratuity, provident fund and other matters as he would have held if this Act had not been passed, and 
shall continue to do so unless and until his employment is terminated or until such tenure, 
remuneration and terms and conditions are duly altered by the Statutes:  
 Provided that if the alteration so made is not acc eptable to such employee, his employment may 
be terminat ed by the Institute in accordance with the terms of contract with the employee or, if no 
provision is made therein in this behalf, on payment to him by the Institute, of compensation 
equivalent to three months ’ remuneration in the case of permanent  employe e and one month ’s 
remuneration in the case of other employee.  
4[5A. Effect of incorporation of Bengal Engineering and  Science University, Shibpur. —On and 
from the commencement of the National Institutes of Technology, Science Education and  Research 
(Amendm ent) Act, 2014  (9 of 2014) —  
(a) any reference to the Bengal Engineering and Science University, Shibpu r in any law, contract 
or other instrument shall be deemed as a reference to the Indian Institute of Engineering Science and 
Technology, Shibpur;  
                                                   
1. Subs. by Act 9 of 20 14, s.3, for “the First Schedule and the Second Schedule ” (w.e.f. 4 -3-2014).  
2. Subs. by s.4, i bid., for “the First Schedule and the Second Schedule ” (w.e.f. 4 -3-2014).  
3. Ins. by s.  4, ibid. (w.e.f.  4 -3-2014).  
4. Ins. by s.  5, ibid. (w.e.f. 4 -3-2014). 5 
 (b) all property, mova ble an d immovable, of or belonging to the Bengal Engineering and Science 
University, Shibpur, shall vest in the Indian Institute of Engineering Science and Technology, 
Shibpur;  
(c) all the rights and liabilities of the Bengal Engineering and  Science University, Shibpur shall 
be the rights and liabilities of the Indian Institute of Engineering Science and Technology, Shibpur;   
(d) every person (including Director, officers and other employees) who is employed in the 
Bengal Engineering and Scie nce University, Shibpur, immediately before the date of commencement 
of the National Institutes of Technology, Science Education and Research (Amendment) Act, 2014                  
(9 of 2014) , shall, on and after such commencement, become an employee of th e Indian Institute of 
Engineering Science and Technology, Shibpur and shall hold his office or service by the same tenure, 
at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and condition s and with the same rights and 
privileges as to pension, leave, gratuit y, provident fund and other matters as he would have held the 
same on the date of the commencement of the National Institutes of Technology, Science Education 
and Research (Amendment) Act, 2014, as if the said Act had not been brought into force and shall 
continue  to do so until his employment is terminated or until such tenure, remuneration , terms and 
conditions are alter ed by the Statutes or Ordinance s: 
Provided that the tenure, remuneration, terms and conditions of service of such person shall not 
be alt ered to his disadvantage without the previous approval of the Central Government:  
Provide d further that any reference to the Chancellor and the Vice -Chancellor of the Bengal 
Engineering and Science University, Shibpur in any law, instrument or other docume nt made before 
the commencement of the said Act, shall be construed as a reference to the Visitor and the Director, 
respectively, of the Indian Institute of Engineering Science and Technology, Shibpur;  
(e) Vice -Chancellor of the Bengal Engineering and Scie nce University, Shibpur shall be the 
Director of the Indian Institute of Engineering Science and Technology, Shibpur till such date the 
Central Government appoints new Director for the Indian Institute of Engineering Science and 
Technology, Shibpur;  
(f) any examination conducted by the Bengal Engineering and Science University, Shibpur 
immediately before the commencement of the National Institutes of Technology, Science Education 
and Research (Amendment) Act, 2014 (9 of 2014) for admission or award of degr ees shall be valid 
examination and shall be deemed to have been conducted by the Indian Institute of Engineering 
Science and Technology, Shibpu r.] 
6. Powers of Institutes .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every Institute shall exercise the 
follow ing powers and perform the following duties, namely: — 
(a) to provide for instruction and research in such branches of engineering and technology, 
management, education, sciences and arts, as the Institute may think fit, and for the advancement of 
learning and dissemination of knowledge in such branches;  
(b) to hold examinations and grant degrees, diplomas and other a cademic distinctions or titles;  
(c) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions;  
(d) to fix, demand and receive fees and other charges;  
(e) to establish, maintain and manage halls and hostels for the resid ence of students;  
(f) to supervise and control the residence and regulate the discipline of students of the Institute 
and to make arrangements for promoting their health, general welfare and cultural and corporate life;  
(g) to provide for the maintenance of units of the National Cadet Corps for  the students of the 
Institute;  6 
 (h) to institute academic and other posts with the prior approval of the Central Government, and 
to make appointment s there to excluding the Director 1***; 
(i) to frame Statutes and Ordinances and to alter, modify or rescind the same;  
(j) to deal with any property belonging to or vested in the institute in such manner as the Institute 
may deem fit for advancin g the objec ts of the Institute;  
(k) to receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from the Government and to receive 
bequests, donations and transfers of movable or immovable properties from testators, donors or 
transferors, as the case may be;  
 (l) to co-opera te with educational or other institutions in any part of the world having objects 
wholly or partly similar to those of the Institute by exchange of teachers and scholars and generally in 
such manner as may be conducive to their common objects;  
(m) to inst itute and award fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, prizes and medals;  
(n) to undertake consultancy in the areas or disciplines  relating to the Institute; and  
(o) to do all such things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment of a ll or 
any of the objects of the Institute.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section  (1), an Institute shall not dispose of in  any 
manner  any immovable property without the prior ap proval of the Central Government . 
7. Institutes to be open to all races, creeds and classes .—(1) Every Institute shall be open to 
persons of either sex and of whatever race, creed, caste or class, and no test or condition shall be imposed 
as to religious belief or profession in admitting or appointing members, studen ts, teachers or workers or in 
any oth er connection whatsoever.  
(2) No bequest, donation or transfer of any property shall be accepted by any Institute, which in the 
opinion of the Council involves conditions or obligations opposed to the spirit and object of this section.  
8. Teaching at Institutes. —All teaching at each of the Institutes shall be conducted by or in the name 
of the Institute in accordance with the Statutes and Ordinances made in this behalf.  
9.  Visitor .—(1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of every Institute.  
(2) The Visitor may appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress of any Institute and 
to hold inquiries into the affairs thereof and to report thereon in such manner as the Visitor may direct.  
 (3) Upon receipt of any such report, the Visitor may take such action and issue such directions as he 
considers necessary in respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report and the Institute shall be 
bound to comply with such directions within reasonable time.  
10. A uthorities of Institutes .—The following shall be the autho rities of an Institute, namely :— 
(a) a Board of Governors;  
(b) a Senate; and  
(c) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the 
Institute . 
11. Board of Gover nors. —The Board of every 2[Institute mentioned in the First Schedule] shall 
consist of  the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Chairperson to be nominated by the Visitor;  
 
                                                   
1. The words “and the Depu ty Director ” omitted by Act 28 of 2012, s. 7 (w.e  f.  7-6-2012).  
2. Subs. by  s.8, ibid., for “Institute ” (w.e. f. 7-6-2012) . 
 7 
 (b) the Director, ex officio ; 
(c) two persons not below the rank of the Joint Secret ary to the Government of India to be 
nominated by the Central Government from amongst persons dealing with technical education and 
finance;  
(d) two persons to be nominated by the Government of the State in which the 1[Institute 
mentioned in the First Sched ule] is situat ed, from amongst persons, who, i n the opinion of that 
Government, are technologists or industrialists of repute;  
(e) two persons, at least one of whom shall be a woman, having special knowledge or practical 
experience in respect of education,  engineering or science to be nominated by the Council; 2*** 
(f) one professor and one assistant professor or a lecturer of the 1[Institute mentioned in the First 
Schedule] to be nominated by the Senate;  
3[(g) the Director of the Indian Institute of Techno logy in whose zone the Institute is located, or 
his nominee, not below the rank of a Professor ]. 
4[11A. Boards of Institute of 5[Second Schedule  and Third Schedule] .—The Board of every 
Institute mentioned in 6[the Second Schedule and the Third Schedule] shall consist of  the following 
members, namely: — 
(a) the Chairperson  to be nominated by the Visitor;  
(b) Secretary, Department of Higher Education, Government of India, or his nominee not below 
the rank of the Joint Secretary to the Government of India, ex officio ;  
(c) Directo r of the Institute, ex officio ; 
(d) Director of Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, ex officio ; 
(e) Director of one of the Indian Institutes of Technology, to be nominated by the Central 
Government;  
(f) two Secretaries to the Govern ment of India, to be nominated by the Central Government 
representing its Scientific or Industrial Ministries;  
(g) Chief Secretary of the State in which the Institute is located, or his nominee not below the 
rank of the Joint Secretary to the Government of  India, ex officio ; 
(h) two professors of the Institute to be nominated by the Senate;  
(i) two eminent scientists, to be nominated by the Council, having special knowledge o r practical 
experience in respect of education , engineering or science, one of whom  shall be a woman; and  
(j) Financial Advisor, Ministry of Human Resource Development, ex officio  .] 
12. Term  of office of, vacancies among , and allowances payable to , members of Board .—Save  as 
otherwise provided in this section, — 
 (a) the term of office of  the Chairperson or other members of the Board shall be three years f rom 
the date of his nomination;  
(b) the term of office of an ex officio  member shall continue so long as he holds the office by 
virtue of which he is a member;  
                                                   
1. Subs by Act 28 of 2012, s.8, for “Institute ”(w.e.f. 7 -6-2012).  
2. The word “and” omitted by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 7 -6-2012).  
3. Ins. by s.8, ibid. (w.e.f. 7 -6-2012 ). 
4. Ins. by s.9, ibid. (w.e.f. 7 -6-2012 ). 
5. Subs. by Act 9 of 2014, s.  6, for “Second Schedule ” (w.e.f. 4 -3-2014).  
6. Subs. by s.6, ibid., for “the Second Schedule ” (w.e.f. 4 -3-2014).  
 8 
 (c) the term of office of a  member nominated under clause ( f) of section 11 1[and clause ( h) of 
section 11A] shall be two years from the date of his nomination;  
(d) a casual vacancy shall be filled up in accordance with the provisions of section 11 1[or section 
11A, as the case may be;] 
(e) the term of office of a member nominated to fill a casual vacancy shall continue for the 
remainder of the term of the member in who se place  he has been nominated;  
(f) the member of the Board shall be entitled to such allowances, if any, from the I nstitute as may 
be provided for in the Statutes b ut no member other than the members referred to in clauses ( b) and 
(f) of section 11 1[and clauses ( c) and ( h) of section 11A] shall be entitled to any salary by reason of 
this clause.  
13. Powers and functio ns of Board .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board of every 
Institute shall be responsible for the general superintendence, direction and control of the affairs of the 
Institute and shall exercise all the powers of the Institute not otherwis e provided for by this Act, the 
Statutes and the Ordinances, and shall have the power to  review the acts of the Senate.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Board of every Institute shall, — 
(a) take decisions on questions of poli cy relating to the administration and working of the 
Institute;  
(b) institute courses of study at the Institute;  
(c) make Statutes;  
(d) institute and appoint persons to academic as well as other posts in the Institute;  
(e) consider a nd modify or cancel Ord inances;  
(f) consider and pass resolutions on the annual report, the annual accounts and the budget 
estimates of the Institute for the next financial year as it thinks fit and submit them to the Council 
together with a stat ement of its development plans;  
(g) exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed 
upon it by this Act or the Statutes.  
(3) The Board shall have the power to appoint such committees, as it considers necessary for the 
exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties under this Act.  
14. Senate .—The Senate of every Institute shall consist of  the following persons, namely: — 
(a) the Director, ex officio , who shall  be the Chairman of the Senate;  
(b) the Deputy Director, ex officio ; 
(c) the Profess ors appointed or recognis ed as such by the Institute for the purpose of imparting  
instructions in the Institute;  
(d) three persons, one of whom shall be a woman, not being employees of the Institute, to be 
nominated by the Chairperson in consultation with the Director, from amongst educationists of 
repute, one each from the field of science,  engineering and humanities ; and 
(e) such other members of the staff as may be laid down in the Statutes.  
15. Functions of Senate. —Subject to the provisions of this Act,  the Statutes and the Ordinances, the 
Senate of an Institute shall have the control and general regulation, and be responsible for the 
maintenance of standards of instruction, education and examination in the Institute and shall exercise such 
other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed upon it by the Statutes . 
16. Chairperson of Board .—(1) The Chairperson shall ordinarily preside at the meetings of the 
Board and at the Convocations of the Institute.  
                                                   
1. Ins. by Act 28 of 2012, s. 10 (w.e.f. 7 -6-2012).  9 
 (2) It shall be the duty of  the Chairperson to ensure that the decisions taken by the Board are 
implemented.  
(3) The Chairperson shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be  
assigned to him by this Act or  the Statutes.  
17. Director and Deputy Director .—(1) The Director  1*** of an Institute shall be appointed by the 
Visitor, on such terms and conditions of service and on the recommendations of a Selection Committee 
constituted by him in such manner, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Director s hall be the principal academic and executive officer of the Institute and shall be 
responsible for the proper administration of the Institute and for the imparting of instruction and 
maintenance of discipline therein.  
(3) The Director shall submit annual r eports and accounts to the Board.  
(4) The Director shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be assigned to 
him by this Act or the Statutes or Ordinances.  
2[(5) The Deputy Director of every Institute shall be appointed in such m anner and on such terms and 
conditions as may be laid down by the Statutes and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as 
may be assigned to him by  this Act or the Statutes or by the Director. ] 
18. Registrar .—(1) The Registrar of every Institute  shall be appointed on such terms and conditions 
as may be laid down by the Statutes and shall be the custodian of records, the common seal, the funds of 
the Institute and such other property of the Institute as the Bo ard shall commit to his charge.  
(2) The Registrar shall act as the Secretary of the Board, Senate and such committees as may be 
prescribed by the Statute s. 
(3) The Registrar shall be responsible to the Director for the pro per discharge of his functions.  
(4) The Registrar shall exercise such ot her powers and perform such other duties as may be assigned 
to him by this Act or the Statutes or by the Director.  
19. Other authorities and officers .—The powers and duties of authorities and officers other than 
those mentioned above shall be determined by  the Statutes.  
20. Grants by Central Government. —For the purpose of enabling the Institutes to discharge their 
functions efficiently under this Act, the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to every Institute in each financial year such sums of money and in 
such manner as it may think fit.  
21. Fund  of Institute. —(1) Every Institute shall maintain a Fund to which shall be credited ,— 
(a) all moneys provided by the Central Government;  
(b) all fees and o ther charges received by the Institute;  
(c) all moneys received by the Institute by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests 
or transfers; and  
(d) all moneys received by the Institute in any other manner or from any other source.  
(2) All mo neys credited to the Fund of every Institute shall be deposited in such banks or invested in 
such manner as the Institute may, with the approval of the Central Government, decide.  
(3) The Fund of every Institute shall be applied towards meeting the expense s of the Institute 
including expenses incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its duties under this Act.  
                                                   
1. The words “and Deputy Director ” omitted by Act 28 of 2012, s. 11 (w. e. f 7 -6-2012).  
2. Subs. by s. 11, i bid., for sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f 7 -6-2012).  
 10 
 22. Accounts and audit. —(1) Every I nstitute shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement o f accounts including the balance sheet in such form as may be 
specified by notification, by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptrolle r and                 
Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of every Institute shall be audited by th e Comptroller and Auditor - General of India 
and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Institute to the 
Comptrolle r and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person  appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of any Institute shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India has in connection with the 
audit of the Gover nment accounts, and, in particular shall have the rights to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the offices of the 
Institute.  
(4) The accounts of every institute as certified by the Com ptroller and Auditor -General of India or 
any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament in accordance with such procedure as may be laid down by the Central Government.  
23. Pension an d provident Fund. —Every Institute shall constitute for the benefit of its employees 
such provident or pension fund or provide such insurance scheme as  it may deem fit in such manner and 
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
24. Appointments. —All appointments of the staff of every Institute, except that of the Director 1***, 
shall be made in accordance with the procedure laid d own in the Statutes, by — 
 (a) the Board, if the appointment is made on the academic staff in the post of Lecturer or above 
or if the appointment is made on the non -academic staff in any cadre the maximum of the pay scale 
for which exceeds rupees ten thousa nd five hundred;  
 (b) the Director, in any other case.  
25. Statutes .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of  the 
following matters, namely: — 
(a) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(b) the formation of departments  of teaching;  
(c) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the Institute and for admission to the 
examinations of degrees and diplomas of the Institute;  
(d) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes ; 
(e) the term of office and the method of appointment of officers of the institute;  
(f) the qualifications of teachers of the Institute;  
(g) the classification, the method of appointment and the determination of the terms and 
conditions of service of teachers and other sta ff of the Institute;  
(h) the constitution of pension, insurance and provident funds for the benefit of the officers, 
teachers and other staff of the I nstitute ; 
(i) the constitution, powers and duties of the authorities of the Institute;  
(j) the establishme nt and maintenance of halls and hostels;  
                                                   
1. The words “and Deputy Director ” omitted by Act of 28 of 2012 , s.12 (w. e. f . 7-6-2012).  
 
 11 
 (k) the conditions of residence of students of the Institute and the levying of fees for residence in 
the halls and hostels and of other charges ; 
(l) the allowances to be paid to the Chairperson and members of the B oard;  
(m) the authentication of the orders and decisions of the Board; and  
(n) the meetings of the Board, the Senate, or any Committee, the quorum at such meetings and the 
procedure to be followed in  the conduct of their business.  
26. Statutes how made. —(1) The first Statutes of each Institute shall be framed by the Central 
Government with the prior approval of the Visitor and a copy of the same shall be laid as soon as may be 
before each House of Parliament.  
(2) The Board may, from time to time, make new o r additional Statutes or may amend or repeal the 
Statutes in the manner provided in this section.  
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of Statutes shall require 
the previous approval of the Visitor who may grant asse nt or withhold assent or remit it to the Board for 
consideration.  
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless 
it has b een assented to by the Visitor.  
27. Ordinances .—Subject to the provisions of th is Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances of every 
Institute may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the admission of the students to the Institute;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees and diplomas of the Instit ute; 
(c) the conditions under which students shall be admitted to the degree or diploma courses and to 
the examinations of the Institute, and shall be eligible for degrees and diplomas ; 
(d) the conditions of award of the fellowships, scholarships, exhibiti ons, medals and prizes;  
(e) the conditions and mode of appointment and duties of examining bodies, examiners and 
moderators;  
(f) the conduct of examinations;  
(g) the maintenance of discipline among the students of the Institute; and  
(h) any other matter wh ich by this Act or the Statutes is to be or may be provided for by the 
Ordinances.  
28. Ordinances how made .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, Ordinanc es shall be 
made by the Senate.  
(2) All Ordinances made by the Senate shall have effect from  such date as it may direct, but  every 
Ordinance so made shall b e submitted, as soon as may be, to the Board and shall be considered by the 
Board at its next meeting.  
(3) The Board shall have power by resolution to modify or cancel any such Ord inance and such 
Ordinance shall from the date of such resolution stand modified accordingly or cancelled, as the case may 
be. 
29. Tribunal of Arbitration. —(1) Any dispute arising out of a contract between an Institute and any 
of its employees shall, at the request of  the employee concerned or at the instance of the Institute, be 
referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by the Institute, one member 
nominated by the employee, and an umpire appointed by the Visitor.  
(2) The decision of the  Tribunal shall be final and shall not be questioned in any court.  
(3) No suit or proceeding shall lie in any court in respect of any matter, which is required by                   
sub-section ( 1) to be referred to the Tribunal of Arbitration.  
(4) The Trib unal of Arbitration shall have power  to regulate its own procedure.  12 
 (5) Nothing in any law for the time being in force relating to arbitration shall apply to arbitrations 
under this section.  
CHAPTER III  
THE COUNCIL  
 
30. Establishment of Council  .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification, specify in this behalf, there shall be established for all the Institutes specified in column ( 3) 
of the 1[First Schedule],  2[the Second Schedule and the Third Schedule] a central  body t o be called the 
Council.  
(2) The Council shall consist of  the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Minister in charge of the Ministry or Department of the Central Government having 
administrative control of the technical education, ex officio , as Chairman;  
(b) the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry or Department of the 
Central Government having administrative control of the technical education, ex officio , as                  
Vice-Chairman;  
(c) the Chairperson of every Board, ex officio ; 
(d) the Director of every Institute, ex officio ; 
(e) the Chairman, University Grants Commission, ex officio ; 
(f) the Director General, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, ex officio ; 
(g) four Secretaries to the Government of India, to r epresent the Ministries or Departments of the 
Central Government dealing with  biotechnology, atomic energy, i nformation technology and space, 
ex officio ; 
(h) the Chairman, All India Council for Technical Education, ex officio ; 
(i) not less than three, but not more than five persons to be nominated by the Visitor, at least one 
of whom shall be a woman, having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of education, 
industry, science or technology;  
(j) three members of Parliament, of whom two shall be chosen by the House of the People and 
one by the Council of States:  
Provided that the office of member of the Council shall not disqualify its holder for being chosen 
as or for being, a member of either House of Parliament ; 
(k) two Secretaries to the S tate Government, from amongst the Ministries or Departments of that 
Government dealing with technical education where the Institutes are located, ex officio ; 
(l) Financial Advisor, dealing with the Human Resource Development Ministry or Department of 
the C entral Government, ex officio ; 
(m) one officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry 
or Department of Central Government having administrative control of the Technical Education, ex 
officio , as Member -Secretary.  
 [30A. Establishment of Council for the Institutes of Second Schedule. ] Ins. by the National 
Institutes of Technology (Amendment)  Act, 2012  (28 of 2012 ), s. 9 (w.e.f. 7-6-2012) and omitted by the 
National Institutes of Technology, Science Education and Rese arch (Amendment) Act, 2014  (9 of 2014 ), 
s. 8 (w.e.f.  4-3-2014).  
31. Term of office of , vacancies among , and al lowances payable to members of                 
Council .—(1) The terms of office of a member shall be three years from the date of notification:  
                                                   
1. Subs. by Act of 28 of 2012, s. 13 for “Schedule ” (w. e. f 7 -6-  2012).  
2. Ins. by Act 9  of 2014, s.7  (w.e.f. 4 -3-2014).  13 
  Provided that the term of office of an ex officio  member shall continue so long as he holds office by 
virtue of which he is such a member.  
(2) The term of office of a member elected under clause ( j) of sub -section ( 2) of section 30 1*** shall 
expire as soon  as he ceases to be member of the House, which elected him.   
(3) The term of office of a member nomi nated or elected to fill a casua l vacancy shall continue for the 
remainder of the term of the member in whose place he has been appointed.  
(4) Notwithstandi ng anything contained in this section an outgoing member shall, unless the Central 
Government otherwise directs, continue in office until another person is appointed as a member in his 
place.  
(5) The members of the Council other than ex officio  member shal l be paid such trave lling and other 
allowances as may be prescribed.  
32. Functions of C ouncil. —(1) It shall be the general duty of the Council to co -ordinate the activitie s 
of all the Institutes.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Council shall perform t he following 
functions, namely: — 
(a) to advise on matters relating to the duration of the courses, the degrees and other academic 
distinctions to be conferred by the Institutes, admission standa rds and other academic matters;  
(b) to lay down policy regarding cadres, methods of recruitment and conditions of service of 
employees, insti tution of scholarships and free ships, levying of fees and othe r matters of common 
interest;  
(c) to examine the development plans of each Institute and  to approve such of them as are 
considered necessary and also to indicate broadly the financial impli cations of such approved plans;  
(d) to advise the Visitor, if so required, in respect of any function to be perfo rmed by him under 
this Act; and  
(e) to per form such other functions as are assigned to it by or under this Act.  
33. Chairman of Council .—(1) The Chairman of the Council shall ordinarily preside at the meetings 
of the Council:  
 Provided that, in his absence, the Vice -Chairman of the Council shall p reside at the meetings of the 
Council.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Chairman of the Council to ensure that the decisions taken by the 
Council are implemented.  
(3) The Chairman shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as a re assigne d to 
him by this Act.  
(4) The Council shall meet once in every year and follow such procedure in its meetings as may be 
prescribed.  
34. Power to make rules in re spect of matters in this Chapter .—(1) The Central Government may, 
by notification, make rules t o carry ou t the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the travelling and other allowances payable to members of the Council under sub -section ( 5) 
of section 31; and  
                                                   
1. The words, brackets, letters and figures “and clause ( j) of sub -section ( 2) of section 30A ” omitted b y Act of 9 of 2014, s.9 
(w.e.f. 4 -3-2014).  14 
 (b) the procedure to be f ollowed in the meetings of the C ouncil under sub -section ( 4) of                 
sectio n 33.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Chapter shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately fo llowing the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, a s the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annul ment shall be without prejudice  to the valid ity of anything previously done  
under that rule . 
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
35. Acts and proceedings not to b e invalidated by vacancies, etc. —No ac t of the Council, or any 
Institute or Board or Senate or any other body set up under this Act or the Statutes, shall  be invalid merely 
by reason of — 
 (a) any vacancy or defect in the constitution thereof, or  
 (b) any defect in the election, nomination or a ppointment of a person  acting as a member thereof, 
or 
(c) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the case.  
36. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the pro visions of 
this Act the Central  Gove rnment may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the  expiry of a period of two years from the date on 
which this Act receives the assent of the Pr esident.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
37. Transitional Provisions. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act — 
(a) the Board of Governors of every Institute 1[mentioned in the First Schedule] functioning as 
such immediately before the commencement of this Act shall continue to so function until a new 
Board is constitu ted for that Institute under this Act, but on the constitution of a new Board under this 
Act, the member of the Board holding office before such constitut ion shall cease to hold office;  
(b) every Senate constituted in relation to every Institute before the  commencement of this Act 
shall be deemed to be the Senate constituted under this Act until a Senate is constituted under this Act 
for that Institute but on the constitution of new Senate under this Act, the members of the Senate 
holding office before such  constitu tion shall cease to hold office;  
1[(c) recruitment process and disciplinary proceedings, which had commenced before the 
commencement of the National Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act, 2012  (28 of 20 12), shall 
be completed, mutatis mutandis , in accordance with the relevant provisions in force immediately 
before such commence ment.  
Explanation. —Recruitment process for a post may be taken to have commenced from the date of 
publication of the advertisement inviting application for the post, and d isciplinary proceedings against 
an employee of the Institute may be taken to have commenced on the date of  issue of  charge sheet for 
major penalty o r show cause notice for minor penalty to such employee;  
                                                   
1. Ins. by Act 28 of 2012, s.16 (w.e.f. 7 -6-2012).  15 
 (d) all matters, which are meant to be provided thro ugh Statutes and Ordinances under               
sections 25 and 27, respectively, shall, till such Statutes and Ordinances are made, be governed, 
mutatis mutandis , by the corresponding provisions in force immediately befor e the commencement of 
this Act.]  
1[(e) the court, the Academic Council and the Executive Council of the Bengal Engineering and 
Science University, Shibpur performing functions as such immediately befor e the commencement of 
the National Institutes of Technology, Science Education and Resear ch (Amendment Act, 2014                  
(9 of 2 014), shall continue to function until a Board is constituted for the Indian Institute of 
Engineering Science and Technology, Shibpur under this Act, but on and after the constitution of a 
Board under this Act , the members of the Court, the Academic Council and the Executive Coun cil, 
shall cease to hold office;  
(f) the authorities of the Bengal Engineering and Science University, Shibpur, by whatever names 
so called, performing functions as such immediately bef ore the commencement of the National 
Institutes of Technology, Science Education an d Research (Amendment) Act, 2014  (9 of 2014)  shall 
continue to function until a new Authority is appointed or constituted for performing the same 
functions under the said Ac t, but on and after such appointment or constitution, the authorities 
performing the functions under the Bengal Engineering and Science Uni versity, Shi bpur Act, 20 04 
(13 of 2004) or any Statutes or Ordinances made thereunder shall cease to hold office;  
(g) every Senate or any other authorities in the names so called constituted in relation to every 
Institute before the commencement of the National Institutes of Technology, Science Education and 
Resear ch (Amendment) Act, 2014  (9 of 2014)  shall be deemed to b e the Senate constituted under the 
said Act until a new Senate is constituted under this Act for that Institute, but on the constitution of a 
new Senate under this Act, the members of the Senate holding office before such constitution shall 
cease to hold o ffice;  
(h) until the first Statutes and the Ordinances are made and brought in force under the National 
Institutes of Technology, Science Education an d Research (Amendment) Act, 2014  (9 of 2014)   the 
Statutes, Ordinances and rules made for the Bengal Engin eering and Science University, Shibpur 
immediately before the commencement of the said Act shall continue to apply to the Indian Institute 
of Engineering Science and Technology, Shibpur in so far as they are not inconsistent with the 
provisions of the said  Act.] 
 
                                                   
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 2014, s.10 (w.e.f. 4 -3-2014).  16 
 1[THE FIRST  SCHEDULE ] 
[See sections 3 ( g), (m) and 4( 1)] 
LIST OF  CENTRAL  INSTITUTIONS  INCORPORATED INTO THE ACT 
 
SI. NO.  Society  Corresponding Institute  
1 2 3 
1. Motilal  Nehre National Institute  of Technology, 
Allahabad Society  Motilal Nehru National Institute of 
Technology, Allahabad . 
2. Maulana Azad National Institute of Technology,  
Bhopal Society  Maulana Azad National Institute of 
Technology, Bhopal  
3. National Institute of Technology, Calicut 
Society  National Institute of Technology, 
Calic ut. 
4. National Institute of Technology, Durgapur 
Society  National Institute of Technology, 
Durgapur . 
5. National Institute of Technology, Hamirpur 
Society  National Institute of Technology, 
Hamirpur.  
6. Malaviya National Institute of Technology, 
Jaipur  Society  Malaviya  National  Institute of 
Technology, Jaipur . 
7. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar National Institute of 
Technology, Jalandhar Society  Dr. B .R. Ambedkar National Institute 
of Technology, Jalandhar.  
8. National Institute of Technology, Jamshedpur 
Society  National Institute of Technology, 
Jamshedpur . 
9. National Institute of Technology, Kurukshetra 
Society  National Institute of Technology, 
Kurukshetra.  
10. Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology, 
Nagpur Society  Visvesvaraya  National Institute of 
Techn ology, Nagpur . 
11. National Institute of Technology, Patna Society  National Institute of Technology, 
Patna.  
12. National Institute of Technology, Rourkela 
Society . National  Institute of Technology, 
Rourkela.  
13. National Institute of Technology, Silchar  
Society . National Institute of Technology, 
Silchar . 
14. National Institute of Technology, Srinagar 
Society  National Institute of Technology, 
Srinagar.  
15. Sardar Vallabhbhai National Institute of 
Technology, Surat Society  Sardar Vallabhbhai National Ins titute 
of Technology, Surat . 
16. National Institute of Technology, Karnataka, 
Surathkal Society . National  Institute  of Technology  
Karnataka,  Surathkal.  
17. National Institute of Technology, 
Tiruchirappalli Society . National Institute of Technology, 
Tiruc hirappalli.  
                                                   
1. The existing Schedule numbered as the First Schedule by Act 28 of 2012, s.19 (w.e.f.7 -6-2012).  17 
  
1 2 3 
18. National Institute of Technology, Warangal 
Society  National Institute of Technology, 
Warangal.  
19. National Institute of Technology, Raipur 
Society  National Institute of Technology, 
Raipur . 
20. National Institute of Technology, Agartala 
Society  National Institute of Technology, 
Agartala . 
1[21. National Institute of Technology, Goa,  Society  National Institute of Technology , Goa.  
22. Natio nal Institute of Technology, Po ducherry 
Society  Natio nal Institute of Technology, 
Poducherry . 
23. National Institute of Technology, Delhi Society  National Institute of Technology, 
Delhi.  
24. National Institute of Technology,  Sumari  
(Srinagar), Uttar akhand Society  National Institute of Technology, 
Uttar akhand.  
25. National Institute of Technolo gy, Sohra 
(Meghalaya) Society  National Institute of Technology, 
Meghalaya.  
26. National Institute of Technology, Mizoram 
Society  National Institute of Technology, 
Mizoram . 
27. National Institute of Technology, Manipur 
Society  National Institute of Techno logy, 
Manipur . 
28. National Institute of Technology, Nagaland 
Society  National Institute of Technology, 
Nagaland.  
29. National Institute of Technology, Arunachal 
Pradesh Society  National I nstitute of Technology, 
Arunachal Pradesh . 
30. National Institute  of Technology, Sikkim  National Institute of Technology, 
Sikkim .] 
2[31. National Institute of Technology, Andhra 
Pradesh  National Institute of Technology, 
Andhra Pradesh.]  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
1. Ins. by Act  28 of 2012, s. 19 (w.e.f. 7 -6-2012).  
2. Ins. by Act 42 of 2016, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20 -8-2015). 18 
 1[THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See section 3( g), (m), 4(1) and 11A]  
 
LIST OF INDIAN  INSTITUTES  OF SCIENCE  EDUCATION  RESEARCH  
 
SI. Sl. No.  
 Society  Corresponding Institute  
1 2 3 
 1. Indian Institute of Science Education and 
Research, Kolkata Society  Indian Institute of Science Education and 
Research, Kolkata.  
2. Indian Institute of Scie nce Education and 
Research, Pune Society  Indian Institute of Science Education and 
Research, Pune.  
3. Indian Institute of Science Educati on and 
Research, Mohali Society  Indian Institute of Science Education and 
Research, Mohali . 
4. Indian Institute of Sc ience Education and 
Research, Bhopal Society  Indian Institute of Science Education and 
Research,  Bhopal.  
5. 
 
2[6. 
 
7 Indian Institute of Science Education and 
Research,Thiruvanathapuram Society . 
Indian Institute of Science Education and 
Research, Tirupati  Society  
Indian Institute of Science Education and 
Research, Berhampur Society  Indian Institute of Science Education and 
Research, Thiruvanathapuram .] 
Indian Institute of Science Education and 
Research, Tirupati.  
Indian Institute of Science Education and  
Research, Berhampur.].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
1. Ins. by Act 28 of 2012, s. 19 (w.e.f. 7 -6-2012) . 
        2. Ins. by Act 19 of 2017, s. 2 (date to be notified) . 
 19 
 1[THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
[See sections 3( g), (k), (m), 4(1) and 11A]  
LIST OF INDIAN INSTITUTES OF ENGINEERING SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY  
Sl.  
No. University or Society  Corresponding Institute  
(1) (2) (3) 
 Bengal  Engineering and Science 
University, Shibpur . Indian Institute of Engineering  Science 
and Technology, Shibpur. ] 
 
                                                   
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 2014, s.12 (w.  e. f. 4-3-2014). 
--------------------------The National Rural Employment Guarantee (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 2007--------------------------
THE NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE  
(EXTENSION  TO JAMMU AND  KASHMIR) ACT, 2007  
_____  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Extension and amendment of the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 . 
3. Construction of reference to a law not in force in Jammu and Kashmir . 
 
  THE NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE  
(EXTENSION  TO JAMMU AND  KASHMIR) ACT, 2007  
ACT NO. 23 OF 2007  
[11th May,  2007.]   
An Act to provide for the extension of the National  Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 to 
the State of Jammu and Kashm ir. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:– 
1. Short title and commencement. –(1) This Act maybe called the National Rural Employment 
Guarantee (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 2007.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different areas in the State and any 
reference to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of 
that Act in such areas.  
2. Extension and amendment of the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005. –(1) The 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 (42 of 200 5) (hereinafter referred to as the principal 
Act) and all rules, orders and schemes made thereunder by the Central Government are hereby extended 
to, and shall be in force in, the State of  Jammu and Kashmir.  
(2) With effect from the date of commencement of  this Act, in the principal Act, in sub -section ( 2) of 
section 1, the  words "except the State of Jammu  and Kashmir" shall be omitted.  
3. Construction of reference to a law not in force in Jammu and Kashmir. –Any reference in any 
Act mentioned in the princip al Act to a law which is not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall, 
in relation to that State, be construed as a reference  to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that State.  
______  
                                                           
1. 4th June, 2007, vide notification no. S.O. 943(E) , dated 6th June, 2007 , seeGazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
--------------------------The Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007--------------------------
1 
 THE PAYMENT AND SETTLEMENT SYSTEMS ACT, 2007  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title , extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
DESIGNATED AUTHORITY AND ITS COMMITTEE  
3. Designated authority and its Committee.  
 
CHAPTER III  
AUTHORISATION OF PAYMENT SYSTEM S 
4. Payment system not to operate without authorisation.  
5. Application for authorisation.  
6. Inquiry by the Reserve Bank.  
7. Issue or refusal of authorisation.  
8. Revocation of authorisation.  
9. Appeal to the Cent ral Government.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
REGULATION AND SUPERVISION BY THE RESERVE  BANK  
10. Power to determine standards.  
11. Notice of change in the payment system.  
12. Power to call for returns, documents or other information.  
13. Access to information.  
14. Power to enter and inspect.  
15. Information, etc., to be confidential.  
16. Power to carry out audit and inspection.  
17. Power to issue directions.  
18. Power of Reserve Bank to give directions generally.  
19. Directions of Reserve Bank to be complied with.  
 
CHAPTER V  
RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF A SYSTEM PROVIDER  
20. System provider to act in accordance with the Act, regulations, etc.  
21. Duties of a system provider.  
22. Duty to keep document s in the payment system confidential.  
23. Settlement and netting.  
23A. Protection of funds collected from customers . 
 2 
 CHAPTER VI  
SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES  
SECTIONS  
24. Settlement of disputes.  
25. Dishonour of electronic funds transfer for insufficiency, etc., of funds in the account.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
26. Penalties.  
27. Offences by companies.  
28. Cognizance of offences.  
29. Application of fine.  
30. Power of Reserve Bank to impose fines.  
31. Power to compound offences.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
32. Act to have overriding effect.  
33. Mode of recovery of penalty.  
34. Act not to apply to stock exchanges or clearing corporations of stock exchanges.  
34A. Act to apply to desig nated trade repository and issuer . 
35. Certain persons deemed to be public servants.  
36.  Protection of action taken in good faith.  
37. Power to remove difficulties.  
38. Power of Reserve Bank to make regulations.   3 
 THE PAYMENT AND SETTLEMENT SYSTEMS ACT, 2007  
ACT NO. 51 OF 2007  
[20th December , 2007.]  
An Act to provide for the regulation and supervision of payment systems in India  and to 
designate the Reserve Bank of India as the authority for that purpose and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enac ted by Parliament in the Fifty -eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Payment and Settlement 
Systems Act, 2007.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act, and 
any reference to the commencement in any such provision  of this Act shall be construed as a reference to 
the commencement of that provision.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) ―bank‖ means,— 
(i) a bank included in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India Act,                            
1934   (2 of 1934) ; 
(ii) a post office savings bank;  
(iii) a banking company as defined in clause ( c) of section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 
1949  (10 of 1949) ; 
(iv) a co -operative bank as defined in clause ( cci) of secti on 5, as inserted by section 56  of the 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949  (10 of 1949) ; and  
(v) such other bank as the Reserve Bank may, by notification, specify for the purposes of this 
Act; 
(b) ―derivative ‖ means an instrument, to be settled at a future date, whose value is derived from 
change in interest rate, foreign exchange rate, credit rating or credit index, price of securities (also 
called ―underlying ‖), or any other underlying or a combination of mor e than one of them and includes 
interest rate swaps, forward rate agreements, foreign currency swaps, foreign currency rupee swaps, 
foreign currency options, foreign currency rupee options or any other instrument, as may be specified 
by the Reserve Bank fr om time to time;  
(c) ―electronic funds transfer ‖ means any transfer of funds which is initiated by a person by way 
of instruction, authorisation or order to a bank to debit or credit an account maintained with that bank 
through electronic means and include s point of sale transfers, automated teller machine transactions, 
direct deposits or withdrawal of funds, transfers initiated by telephone, internet and card payment;  
(d) ―gross settlement system ‖ means a payment system in which each settlement of funds or  
securities occurs on the basis of separate or individual instructions;  
2[(da) ―issuer‖ means a person who issues a legal entity identifier or such  other unique 
identification (by whatever name called), as may be specified by  the Reserve Bank from time to time;  
                                                      
1. 12th August, 2008, vide notification  No. S.O. 2032(E), dated 12th August, 2008, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 
2. Ins. by Act 18 of 2015, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2015).  4 
 (db) ―legal entity identifier ‖ means a unique identity code assigned to a  person by an issuer for 
the purpose of identifying that person in such derivatives  or financial transactions, as may be 
specified by the Reserve Bank from time to  time; ] 
(e) ―netting‖ means the determination by the system provider of the amount of money or 
securities, due or payable or deliverable, as a result of setting off or adjusting, the payment 
obligations or delivery obligations among the system participants, including t he claims and 
obligations arising out of the termination by the system provider, on the insolvency or dissolution or 
winding up of any system participant or such other circumstances as the system provider may specify 
in its rules or regulations or bye -laws (by whatever name called), of the transactions admitted for 
settlement at a future date so that only a net claim be demanded or a net obligation be owned;  
(f) ―notification ‖ means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(g) ―payment instruction ‖ means any instrument, authorisation or order in any form, including 
electro nic means, to effect a payment, — 
(i) by a person to a system participant; or  
(ii) by a system participant to another system participant;  
(h) ―payment obligation ‖ means an indebtedness that is owned by one system participant to 
another system participant as a result of clearing or settlement of one or more payment instructions 
relating to funds, securities or foreign exchange or derivatives or other transactions;  
(i) ―payment system ‖ means a system that enables payment to be effected between a payer and a 
beneficiary, involving clearing, payment or settlement service or all of them, but do es not include a 
stock exchange.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause,  ―payment system ‖ includes the systems enabling 
credit card operations, debit card operations, smart card operations, money transfer operations or 
similar operations;  
(j) ―prescribed ‖ means prescribed by regulations made under this Act;  
(k) ―regulation ‖ means a regulation made under this Act;  
(l) ―Reserve Bank ‖ means the Reserve Bank of India, constituted under the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) ; 
(m) ―securities ‖ means the Government securities as defined in the Public Debt Act,                    
1944  (18 of 1944)  or such other securities as may be notified by the Central Government from time to 
time under that Act;  
(n) ―settlement ‖ means settlement of payment instructions and includes the settlement of 
securities, foreign exchange or derivatives or other transactions which involve payment obligations;  
(o) ―systemic ri sk‖ means the risk arising from — 
(i) the inability of a system par ticipant to meet his payment obligations under the payment 
system as and when they become due; or  
(ii) any disruption in the system,  
which may cause other participants to fail to meet their obligations when due and is likely to have an 
impact on the stabil ity of the system:  
Provided that if any doubt or difference arises as to whether a particular risk is likely to have an 
impact on the stability of the system, the decision of the Reserve Bank shall be final;  
(p) ―system participant ‖ means a bank or any oth er person participating in a payment system and 
includes the system provider;  
(q) ―system provider ‖ means a person who operat es an authorised payment system;  5 
 1[(r) ―trade repository ‖ means a person who is engaged in the business of  collecting, collating, 
storing, maintaining, processing or disseminating electronic  records or data relating to such 
derivatives or financial transactions, as may be  specified by the Reserve Bank from time to time. ] 
(2) Words and expressions used, but not defined in this Act and  defined in the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934  (2 of 1934)  or the Banking Regulation Act, 1949  (10 of 1949) , shall have the meanings 
respectively assigned to them in those Acts.  
CHAPTER II  
DESIGNATED AUTHORITY AND ITS COMMITTEE  
3. Designated authority and  its Committee .—(1) The Reserve Bank shall be the designated 
authority for the regulation and supervision of payment systems under this Act.  
(2) The Reserve Bank may, for the purposes of exercising the powers and performing the functions 
and discharging th e duties conferred on it by or under this Act, by regulation, constitute a committee of its 
Central Board to be known as the Board for Regulation and Supervision of Payment and Settlement 
Systems.  
(3) The Board constituted under sub -section ( 2) shall consi st of the following members, namely: — 
(a) Governor, Reserve Bank, who shall be the Chairperson of the Board;  
(b) Deputy Governors, Reserve Bank, out of whom the Deputy Governor who is in -charge of the 
Payment and Settlement Systems, shall be the Vice -Chair person of the Board;  
(c) Not exceeding three Directors from the Central Board of the Reserve Bank of India to be 
nominated by the Governor, Reserve Bank.  
(4) The powers and functions of the Board constituted under sub -section ( 2), the time and venue of its  
meetings, the procedure to be followed in such meetings, (including the quorum at such meetings) and 
other matters incidental thereto shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(5) The Board for Regulation and Supervision of Payment and Settlement Systems consti tuted under 
clause ( i) of sub -section ( 2) of section 58 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934)  shall be 
deemed to be the Board constituted under this section and continue accordingly until the Board is 
reconstituted in accordance with the provi sions of this Act and shall be governed by the rules and 
regulations made under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 in so far as they are not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act.  
CHAPTER III  
AUTHORISATION OF PAYMENT SYSTEMS  
4. Payment system not t o operate without authorisation. —(1) No person, other than the Reserve 
Bank, shall commence or operate a payment system except under and in accordance with an authorisation 
issued by the Reserve Bank under the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall ap ply to— 
(a) the continued operation of an existing payment system on commencement of this Act for a 
period not exceeding six months from such commencement, unless within such period, the operator 
of such payment system obt ains an authorisation under this Act or the application for authorisation 
made under section 7 of this Act is refused by the Reserve Bank;  
(b) any person acting as the duly appointed agent of another person to whom the payment is due;  
(c) a company accepti ng payments either from its holding company or any of its subsidiary 
companies or from any other company which is also a subsidiary of the same holding company;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 2015, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2015).  6 
 (d) any other person whom the Reserve Bank may, after considering the interests of monetary 
policy or efficient operation of payment systems, the size of any payment system or for any other 
reason, by notification, exempt from the provisions of this section.  
(2) The Reserve Bank may, under sub -section ( 1) of this section, authorise a company or corp oration 
to operate or regulate the existing clearing houses or new clearing houses of banks in order to have a 
common retail clearing house system for the banks throughout the country:  
Provided, however, that not less than fifty -one per cent. of the equity  of such company or corporation 
shall be held by public sector banks.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, ―public sector banks ‖ shall include a ―corresponding 
new bank ‖, ―State Bank of India ‖ and ―subsidiary bank ‖ as defined in section 5 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949  (10 of 1949) . 
5. Application for authorisation .—(1) Any person desirous of commencing or carrying on a 
payment system may apply to the Reserve Bank for an authorisation under this Act.  
(2) An application under sub -section ( 1) shall be made in such form and in such manner and shall be 
accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.  
6. Inquiry by the Reserve Bank .—After the receipt of an application under section 5, and before an 
authorisation is issued under this Act, the Reserve Bank may make such inquiries as it may consider 
necessary for the purpose of satisfying itself about the genuineness of the particulars furnished by the 
applicant, his capacity to operate the payment system, the credentia ls of the participants or for any other 
reason and when such an inquiry is conducted by any person authorised by it in this behalf, it may require 
a report from such person in respect of the inquiry.  
7. Issue or refusal of authorisation .—(1) The Reserve Ba nk may, if satisfied, after any inquiry 
under section 6 or otherwise, that the application is complete in all respects and that it conforms to the 
provisions of this Act and the regulations issue an authorisation for operating the payment system under 
this Act having regard to the fo llowing considerations, namely: — 
(i) the need for the proposed payment system or the services proposed to be undertaken by it;  
(ii) the technical standards or the design of the proposed payment system;  
(iii) the terms and condit ions of operation of the proposed payment system including any security 
procedure;  
(iv) the manner in which transfer of funds may be effected within the payment system;  
(v) the procedure for netting of payment instructions effecting the payment obligations under the 
payment system;  
(vi) the financial status, experience of management and integrity of the applicant;  
(vii) interests of consumers, including the terms and conditions governing their relationship with 
payment system providers;  
(viii) monetary and credit policies; and  
(ix) such other factors as may be considered relevant by the Reserve Bank.  
(2) An authorisation issued under sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form as may b e prescribed and 
shall— 
(a) state the date on which it takes effect;  
(b) state the conditions subject to which the authorisation shall be in force;  
(c) indicate the payment of fees, if any, to be paid for the authorisation to be in force;  
(d) if it conside rs necessary, require the applicant to furnish such security for the proper conduct 
of the payment system under the provisions of this Act;  7 
 (e) continue to be in force till the authorisation is revoked.  
(3) Where the Reserve Bank considers that the applica tion for authorisation should be refused, it shall 
give the applicant a written notice to that effect stating the reasons for the refusal:  
Provided that no such application shall be refused unless the applicant is given a reasonable 
opportunity of being he ard. 
(4) Every application for authorisation shall be processed by the Reserve Bank as soon as possible 
and an endeavour shall be made to dispose of such application within six months from the date of filing of 
such application.  
8. Revocation of authorisat ion.—(1) If a system provider, — 
(i) contravenes any provisions of this Act, or  
(ii) does not comply with the regulations, or  
(iii) fails to comply with the orders or directions issued by the designated authority, or  
(iv) operates the payment system contrary to the conditions subject to which the authorisation was 
issued,  
the Reserve Bank may, by order, revoke the authorisation given to such system provider under this Act:  
Provided that no order of revocation unde r sub -section ( 1) shall be made — 
(i) except after giving the system provider a reasonable opportunity of being heard; and  
(ii) without prejudice to the direction of the Reserve Bank to the system provider that the 
operation of the payment system shall not be carried out till the order of revo cation is issued.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to a case where the Reserve Bank considers it 
necessary to revoke the authorisation given to a payment system in the interest of the monetary policy of 
the country or for any other reas ons to be specified by it in the order.  
(3) The order of revocation issued under sub -section ( 1) shall include necessary provisions to protect 
and safeguard the interests of persons affected by such order of revocation.  
(4) Where a system provider becomes insolvent or dissolved or wound up, such system provider shall 
inform that fact to the Reserve Bank and thereupon the Reserve Bank shall take such steps as deemed 
necessary to revoke the authorisation issued to such system provider to operate the payment s ystem.  
9. Appeal to the Central Government .—(1) Any applicant for an authorisation whose application 
for the operation of the payment system is refused under sub -section ( 3) of section 7 or a system provider 
who is aggrieved by an order of revocation under  section 8 may, within thirty days from the date on 
which the order is communicated to him, appeal to the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Government shall endeavour to dispose of an appeal under sub -section ( 1) within a 
period of three months.  
(3) The decision of the Central Government on the appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be final.  
CHAPTER IV  
REGULATION AND SUPERVISION BY THE RESERVE BANK 
10. Power to determine standards .—(1) The Reserve Bank ma y, from time to time, prescribe — 
(a) the format of payment instructions and the size and shape of such instructions;  
(b) the timings to be maintained by payment systems;  
(c) the manner of transfer of funds within the payment system, either through paper, electronic 
means or in any other manner, between banks or between banks and other system participants;  
(d) such other standards to be complied with the payment systems generally;  8 
 (e) the criteria for membership of payment systems including continuation, termination and 
rejection of membership;  
(f) the conditions subject to which the system participants shall participate in such fund transfers 
and the rights and obligations of the system participants in such funds.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Reserve Bank may, fr om time to time, 
issue such guidelines, as it may consider necessary for the proper and efficient management of the 
payment systems generally or with reference to any particular payment system.  
11. Notice of change  in the payment system .—(1) No system prov ider shall cause any change in the 
system which would affect the structure or the operatio n of the payment system without — 
(a) the prior approval of the Reserve Bank; and  
(b) giving notice of not less than thirty days to the system participants after the a pproval of the 
Reserve Bank:  
Provided that in the interest of monetary policy of the country or in public interest, the Reserve 
Bank may permit the system provider to make any changes in a payment system without giving 
notice to the system participants under clause ( b) or requiring the system provider to give notice for a 
period longer than thirty days.  
(2) Where the Reserve Bank has any objection, to the proposed change for any reason,  it shall 
communicate such objection to the systems provider within two weeks of receipt of the intimation of the 
proposed changes from the system provider.  
(3) The system provider shall, within a period of two weeks of the receipt of the objections from t he 
Reserve Bank forward his comments to the Reserve Bank and the proposed changes may be effected only 
after the receipt of approval from the Reserve Bank.  
12. Power to call for returns, documents or other information .—The Reserve Bank may call for 
from an y system provider such returns or documents as it may require or other information in regard to 
the operation of his payment system at such intervals, in such form and in such manner, as the Reserve 
Bank may require from time to time or as may be prescribe d and such order shall be complied with.  
13. Access to information. —The Reserve Bank shall have right to access any information relating to 
the operation of any payment system and system provider and all the system participants shall provide 
access to such  information to the Reserve Bank.  
14. Power to enter and inspect .—Any officer of the Reserve Bank duly authorised by it in writing in 
this behalf, may for ensu ring compliance with the provisions of this Act or any regulations, enter any 
premises where a pa yment system is being operated and may inspect any equipment, including any 
computer system or other documents situated at such premises and call upon any employee of such 
system provider or participant thereof or any other person working in such premises to furnish such 
information or documents as may be required by such officer.  
15. Information, etc., to be confidential .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), any 
document or information obtained by the Reserve Bank under sections 12 to 14 (both  inclusive) shall be 
kept confidential.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Reserve Bank may disclose any 
document or information obtained by it under sections 12 to 14 (both inclusive) to any person to whom 
the disclosure of suc h document or information is considered necessary for protecting the integrity, 
effectiveness or security of the payment system, or in the interest of banking or monetary policy or the 
operation of the payment systems generally or in the public interest.  
16. Power to carry out audit and inspection .—The Reserve Bank may, for the purpose of carrying 
out its functions under this Act, conduct or get conducted audits and inspections of a payment system or 
participants thereof and it shall be the duty of the system provider and the system participants to assist the 
Reserve Bank to carry out such audit or inspection, as the case may be.  
 9 
 17. Power to issue directions .—Where the Reser ve Bank is of the opinion that, — 
(a) a payment system or a system participant i s engaging in, or is about to engage in, any act, 
omission or course of conduct that results, or is likely to result, in systemic risk being inadequately 
controlled; or  
(b) any action under clause ( a) is likely to affect the payment system, the monetary po licy or the 
credit policy of the country,  
the Reserve Bank may issue directions in writing to such payment system or system participant requiring 
it, within such time as the Reserve Bank may specify — 
(i) to cease and desist from engaging in the act, omissi on or course of conduct or to ensure the 
system participants to cease and desist from the act, omission or course of conduct; or  
(ii) to perform such acts as may be necessary, in the opinion of the Reserve Bank, to remedy the 
situation.  
18. Power of Reserv e Bank to give directions generally .—Without prejudice to the provisions of 
the foregoing, the Reserve Bank may, if it is satisfied that for the purpose of enabling it to regulate the 
payment systems or in the interest of management or operation of any of the payment systems or in public 
interest, it is necessary so to do, lay down policies relating to the regulation of payment systems including 
electronic, non -electronic, domestic and international payment systems affecting domestic transactions 
and give s uch directions in writing as it may consider necessary to system providers or the system 
participants or any other person either generally or to any such agency and in particular, pertaining to the 
conduct of business relating to payment systems.  
19. Direc tions of Reserve Bank to be complied with .—Every person to whom a direction has been 
issued by the Reserve Bank under this Act shall comply with such direction without any delay and a 
report of compliance shall be furnished to the Reserve Bank within the t ime allowed by it.  
CHAPTER V  
RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF A SYSTEM PROVIDER  
20. System provider to act in accordance with the Act, regulations, etc .—Every system provider 
shall operate the payment system in accordance with the provisions of this Act, the regulations, the 
contract governing the relationship among the system participants, the rules and regulations which deal 
with the operation of the payment system and the conditions subject to which the authorisation is issued, 
and the directions given by t he Reserve Bank from time to time.  
21. Duties of a system provider .—(1) Every system provider shall disclose to the existing or 
potential system participants, the terms and conditions including the charges and the limitations of 
liability under the payment  system, supply them with copies of the rules and regulations governing the 
operation of the payment system, netting arrangements and other relevant documents.  
(2) It shall be the duty of every system provider to maintain the standards determined under thi s Act.  
22. Duty to keep documents in the payment system confidential .—(1) A system provider shall not 
disclose to any other person the existence or contents of any document or part thereof or other 
information given to him by a system participant, except where such disclosure is required under the 
provisions of this Act or the disclosure is made with the express or implied consent of the system 
participant concerned or where such disclosure is in obedience to the orders passed by a court of 
competent juris diction or a statutory authority in exercise of the powers conferred by a statute.  
(2) The provisions of the Bankers' Book Evidence Act, 1891 (18 of 1991)  shall apply in relation to the 
information or documents or other books in whatever form maintained by the system provider.  
23. Settlement and netting .—(1) The payment obligations and settlement instructions among the 
system participants shall be determined in accordance with the gross or netting procedure, as the case may  10 
 be, approved by the Reserve Bank w hile issuing authorisation to a payment system  1[under section 7, or, 
such gross or netting procedure as may be approved by it under any other provisions of this Act] . 
(2) Where the rules providing for the operation of a payment system indicates a procedur e for the 
distribution of losses between the system participants and the payment system, such procedure shall have 
effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the time being in force.  
(3) A settlement effected under such procedure shall be final and irrevocable.  
2[(4) Where, by an order of a court, Tribunal or authority –– 
(a) a system participant is declared as insolvent or is dissolved or wound up; or  
(b) a liquidator or receiver or assignee (by whatever name called), whether provisional or 
otherwise, is appointed in a proceeding relating to insolvency or dissolution or winding up of a 
system participant,  
then, notwithstanding anything contained in the Banki ng Regulation Act,1949 (10 of 1949) or the 
Companies Act,1956 (1 of 1956) or the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013) or any other law for the time 
being in force, such order shall not affect any settlement that has  become final and irrevocable prior to 
such order or immediately thereafter, and the right of the system provider to appropriate any collaterals 
contributed by the system participants towards its settlement or other obligations in accordance with the 
rules, regulations or bye -laws relating to such s ystem provider. ] 
3[(5) Where an order referred to in sub -section ( 4) is made with respect to  a central counter party, 
then, notwithstanding such order or anything contained  in the Banking Regulation Act,  1949  (10 of 1949)  
or the Companies Act,1956 (1 of 1956) or the Companies  Act, 2013 (18 of 2015) or any other law for the 
time being in force, the payment obligations  and settlement instructions between the central counter party 
and the system  participants including those arising from transactions admitt ed for settlement at  a future 
date, shall be determined forthwith by such central counter party in  accordance with the gross or netting 
procedure, as the case may be, approved  by the Reserve Bank, while issuing authorisation or under any 
other provisions  of this Act, and such determination shall be final and irrevocable.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Banking Regulation  Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) or the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 0f 1956) or the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013 ) or any other  law for t he time 
being in force, the liquidator or receiver or assignee (by whatever  name called) of the central counter 
party, whether appointed as provisional or  otherwise, shall — 
(a) not re -open any determination that has become final and  irrevocable;  
(b) after  appropriating in accordance with the rules, regulations or  bye-laws of the central counter 
party, the collaterals provided by the system  participants towards their settlement or other obligations, 
return the  collaterals held in excess to the system partic ipants concerned.]  
4[Explanation  1].—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the settlement, whether gross 
or net, referred to in this section is final and irrevocable as soon as the money, securities, foreign 
exchange or derivatives or other  transactions payable as a result of such settlement is determined, whether 
or not such money, securities or foreign exchange or derivatives or other  transactions is actually paid.  
5[Explanation  2.—For the purposes of this section, the expression ―central  counter party ‖ means a 
system provider who by way of novation interposes  between system participants in the transactions 
admitted for settlement, thereby  becoming the buyer to every seller and the seller to every buyer, for the 
purpose  of effecting set tlement of their transactions.]  
  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 2015, s.  3 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2015).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 1 -6-2015).  
3. Ins. by s. 3 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-2015).  
4. Existing Explanation  numbered as Explanation  1 by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-2015).  
5. The Explanation  2 ins . by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-2015).  11 
 1[23A.  Protection of funds collected from customers .—(1) The Reserve Bank may, in public 
interest or in the interest of the  customers of designated payment systems or to prevent the affairs of such 
designated  payment system from being conducted in a manner prejudicial to the interests of its  customers, 
require system provider of such payment system to — 
(a) deposit and keep deposited in a separate account or accounts held in  a scheduled commercial 
bank; or  
(b) maintain liquid assets in such manner and form as it may specify from  time to time,  
of an amount equal to such percentage of the amounts collected by the system provider  of designated 
payment system from its customers and remaining outstanding, as may  be specified by the Reserve Bank 
from time to time:  
Provided that the Reserve Bank may specify different percentages and the manner  and forms for 
different categories of designated payment systems.  
(2) The balance held in the account or accounts, referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall not be utilised for 
any purpose other than for discharging the liabilities arising  on account of the usage of the payment 
service by the customers or for repaying to  the customers or for such other purpose as may be specified 
by the Reserve Bank  from time to time.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) , or the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or the Companies Act, 2013  (18 of 2013 ) or any other law for the time 
being  in force, the persons entitled to receive payment under sub -section ( 2) shall have a  first and 
paramount charge on the balance held in that account and the liquidator or  receiver or assignee (by 
whatever name called) of the system provider of the designated  payment system or the scheduled 
commercial bank concerned, whether appointed as  provisional or otherwise, shall not utilise the said 
balances for any other purposes  until all such persons are paid in full or adequate provision is made 
therefor.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this secti on, the expressions — 
(a) ―designated payment system ‖ shall mean a payment system or a class of  payment system, as 
may be specified by the Reserve Bank from time to time,  engaged in collection of funds from their 
customers for rendering payment service;  
(b) ―scheduled commercial bank ‖ shall mean a ―banking company ‖, ―corresponding new bank ‖, 
―State Bank of India ‖ and ―subsidiary bank ‖ as defined in section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 
1949 (10 of 1949) and included in the  Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India Act,                   
1934  (2 of 1934).]  
CHAPTER VI  
SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES  
24. Settlement of disputes .—(1) The system provider shall make provision in its rules or regulations 
for creation of panel consisting of not less than three system par ticipants other than the system 
participants who are parties to the dispute to decide the disputes between system participants in respect of 
any matter connected with the operation of the payment system.  
(2) Where any dispute in respect of any matter conne cted with the operation of the payment system 
arises between two or more system participants, the system provider shall refer the dispute to the panel 
referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Where any dispute arises between any system participant and the syste m provider or between 
system providers or where any of the system participants is not satisfied with the decision of the panel 
referred to in sub -section ( 1), the dispute shall be referred to the Reserve Bank.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 2015, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2015).  12 
 (4) The dispute referred to the Reserve Bank f or adjudication under sub -section ( 3) shall be disposed 
of by an officer of the Reserve Bank generally or specially authorised in this behalf and the decision of 
the Reserve Bank shall be final and binding.  
(5) Where a dispute arises between the Reserve Ba nk, while acting in its capac ity as system provider 
or as system participant, and another system provider or system participant, the matter shall be referred to 
the Central Government which may authorise an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary for  
settlement of the dispute and the decision of such officer shall be final.  
25. Dishonour of electronic funds transfer for insufficiency, etc., of funds in the account .—(1) 
Where an electronic funds transfer initiated by a person from an account maintained  by him cannot be 
executed on the ground that the amount of money standing to the credit of that account is insufficient to 
honour the transfer instruction or that it exceeds the amount arranged to be paid from that account by an 
agreement made with a bank , such person shall be deemed to have committed an offence and shall, 
without prejudice to any other provisions of this Act, be punished with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to twice the amount of the el ectronic funds 
transfer, or with both:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply unless — 
(a) the electronic funds transfer was initiated for payment of any amount of money to another 
person for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any d ebt or other liability;  
(b) the electronic funds transfer was initiated in accordance with the relevant procedural 
guidelines issued by the system provider;  
(c) the beneficiary makes a demand for the payment of the said amount of money by giving a 
notice i n writing to the person initiating the electronic funds transfer within thirty days of the receipt 
of information by him from the bank concerned regarding the dishonour of the electronic funds 
transfer; and  
(d) the person initiating the electronic funds tr ansfer fails to make the payment of the said money 
to the beneficiary within fifteen days of the receipt of the said notice.  
(2) It shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that the electronic funds transfer was initiated 
for the discharge, in who le or in part, of any debt or other liability.  
(3) It shall not be a defence in a prosecution for an offence under sub -section ( 1) that the person, who 
initiated the electronic funds transfer through an instruction, authorisation, order or agreement, did n ot 
have reason to believe at the time of such instruction, authorisation, order or agreement that the credit of 
his account is insufficient to effect the electronic funds transfer.  
(4) The Court shall, in respect of every proceeding under this section, on production of a 
communication from the bank denoting the dishonour of electronic funds transfer, presume the fact of 
dishonour of such electronic funds transfer, unless and until such fact is disproved.  
(5) The provisions of Chapter XVII of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881  (26 of 1881)  shall apply 
to the dishonour of electronic funds transfer to the extent the circumstances admit.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, ―debt or other liability ‖ means a legally enforceable 
debt or other liability , as the case may be.  
CHAPTER VII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
26. Penalties. —(1)Where a person contravenes the provisions of section 4 or fails to comply with the 
terms and conditions subject to which the authorisation has been issued under section 7, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one month but which may extend to 
ten years or with fine which may extend to one crore rupees or with both and with a further fine which 
may extend to one lakh rupees for every day, af ter the first during which the contravention or failure to 
comply continues.  13 
 (2) Whoever in any application for authorisation or in any return or other document or on any 
information required to be furnished by or under, or for the purpose of, any provisio n of this Act, wilfully 
makes a statement which is false in any material particular, knowing it to be false or wilfully omits to 
make a material statement, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
years and shall also be l iable to fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees and which may extend to 
fifty lakh rupees.  
(3) If any person fails to produce any statement, information, returns or other documents, or to furnish 
any statement, information, returns or other docu ments, which under section 12 or under section 13, it is 
his duty to furnish or to answer any question relating to the operation of a payment system which is 
required by an officer making inspection under section 14, he shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to ten lakh rupees in respect of each offence and if he persists in such refusal, to a further fine 
which may extend to twenty -five thousand rupees for every day for which the offence continues.  
(4) If any person discloses any information, the d isclosure of which is prohibited under section 22, he 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to five lakh rupees or an amount equal to twice the amount of the damages incurred by the a ct 
of such disclosure, whichever is higher or with both.  
(5) Where a direction issued under this Act is not complied with within the period stipulated by the 
Reserve Bank or where no such period is stipulated, within a reasonable time or where the penalty 
imposed by the Reserve Bank under section 30 is not paid within a period of thirty days from the date of 
the order, the system provider or the system participant which has failed to comply with the direction or 
to pay the penalty shall be punishable with i mprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one 
month but which may extend to ten years, or with fine which may extend to one crore rupees or with both 
and where the failure to comply with the direction continues, with further fine which may extend  to one 
lakh rupees for every day, after the first during which the contravention continues.  
(6) If any provision of this Act is contravened, or if any default is made in complying with any other 
requirement of this Act, or of any regulation, order or dire ction made or given or condition imposed 
thereunder and in respect of which no penalty has been specified, then, the person guilty of such 
contravention or default, as the case may be, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to ten lakh 
rupees and w here a contravention or default is a continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to 
twenty -five thousand rupees for every day, after the first during which the contravention or default 
continues.  
27. Offences by companies .—(1) Where a person commi tting a contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or any regulation, direction or order made thereunder is a company, every person 
who, at the time of the contravention, was in -charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the 
conduct of busi ness of the company, as well as the company, shall be guilty of the contravention and shall 
be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to punishment 
if he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence 
to prevent such contravention.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where a contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act o r of any regulation, direction or order made thereunder has been committed by a 
company and it is proved that the contravention has taken place with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secre tary or other officer of the company, 
such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sect ion,— 
(a) ―company‖ means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) ―director‖, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  14 
 28. Cognizance of offences. —(1) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this 
Act except upon a complaint in writing made by an officer of the Reserve Bank generally or specially 
authorised by it in writing in this behalf, and no court, lower than that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a 
Judicial Magistrate of th e first class shall try any such offence:  
Provided that the Court may take cognizance of an offence punishable under section 25 upon a 
complaint in writing made by the person aggrieved by the dishonour of the electronic funds transfer.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , a 
Magistrate may dispense with the personal attendance of the officer of the Reserve Bank filing the 
complaint, but the Magistrate may, in his discretion, at any stage of the proceedin gs, direct the personal 
attendance of the complainant.  
29. Application of fine .—A court imposing any fine under this Act may direct that the whole or any 
part thereof shall be applied in, or towards payment of, the costs of the proceedings.  
30. Power of Re serve Bank to impose fines .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 26, 
if a contravention or default of the nature referred to in sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 6) of section 26, as 
the case may be, the Reserve Bank may impose on the person con travening or committing default a 
penalty not exceeding five lakh rupees or twice the amount involved in such contravention or default 
where such amount is quantifiable, whichever is more, and where such contravention or default is a 
continuing one, a furt her penalty which may extend to twenty -five thousand rupees for every day after the 
first during which the contravention or default continues.  
(2) For the purpose of imposing penalty under sub -section ( 1), the Reserve Bank shall serve a notice 
on the defau lter requiring him to show cause why the amount specified in the notice should not be 
imposed as a penalty and a reasonable opportunity of being heard shall also be given to such defaulter.  
(3) Any penalty imposed by the Reserve Bank under this section sha ll be payable within a period of 
thirty days from the date on which notice issued by the Reserve Bank demanding payment of the sum is 
served on the defaulter and, in the event of failure of the person to pay the sum within such period, may 
be recovered on a direction made by the principal civil court having jurisdiction in the area where the 
registered office of the defaulter company or the official business of the person is situated:  
Provided that no such direction shall be made, except on an application made by an officer of the 
Reserve Bank authorised by it in this behalf.  
(4) The Reserve Bank may recover the amount of penalty by debiting the current account, if any, of 
the defaulter or by liquidating the securities held to the credit of the defaulter or  in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act.  
(5) The court which makes a direction under sub -section ( 3) shall issue a certificate specifying the 
sum payable by the defaulter and every such certificate shall be enforceable in the same manner as it were 
a decree made by the court in a civil suit.  
(6) Where any complaint has been filed against any person in any court in respect of the 
contravention or default of the nature referred to in sub -section ( 2), or, as the case may be, sub -section ( 4) 
of section 2 6, then, no proceeding for the imposition of any penalty on the person shall be taken under 
this section.  
31. Power to compound offences .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , any offence punishable under this Act for any contravention, not being an 
offence punishable with imprisonment only, or with imprisonment and also with fine, may, on receipt of 
an application from the person committing such contravention either before or after the institution of  any 
proceeding, be compounded by an officer of the Reserve Bank duly authorised by it in this behalf.  
(2) Where a contravention has been compounded under sub -section ( 1), no proceeding or further 
proceeding, as the case may be, shall be initiated or conti nued, as the case may be, against the person 
committing such contravention under that section, in respect of the contravention so compounded.  
 15 
 CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
32. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwit hstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.  
33. Mode  of recovery of penalty .—(1) The penalty imposed on the defaulter by the Reserve Bank 
under section 30 may be recovered by issuing a notice to any per son from whom any amount is due to the 
defaulter, by requiring such person to deduct from the amount payable by him to the defaulter, the amount 
payable to the Reserve Bank by way of penalty and pay to the Reserve Bank.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in th is section, every person to whom a notice is issued under this  
sub-section shall be bound to comply with such notice, and, in particular, where such notice is issued to a 
post office, bank or an insurer, it shall not be necessary for any passbook, deposit  receipt, policy or any 
other document to be produced for the purpose of any entry, endorsement or the like being made before 
payment is made notwithstanding that any rule, practice or requirement to the contrary.  
(3) Any claim respecting any property in r elation to which a notice under this sub -section has been 
issued arising after the date of the notice shall be void as against any demand contained in the notice.  
(4) Where a person to whom the notice under this sub -section is sent objects to it by a state ment on 
oath that the sum demanded or any part thereof is not due to the defaulter or that he does not hold any 
money for or on account of the defaulter, then, nothing contained in this sub -section shall be deemed to 
require such person to pay any such sum  or part thereof, as the case may be, but if it is discovered that 
such statement was false in any material particular, such person shall be personally liable to the Reserve 
Bank to the extent of his own liability to the defaulter on the date of the notice , or to the extent of the 
penalty imposed on the defaulter by the Reserve Bank, whichever is less.  
(5) The Reserve Bank may at any time or from time to time, amend or revoke any notice issued under 
this section or extend the time for making the payment in pursuance of such notice.  
(6) The Reserve Bank shall grant a receipt for any amount paid to it in compliance with a notice 
issued under this section and the person so paying shall be fully discharged from his liability to the 
defaulter to the extent of the  amount so paid.  
(7) Any person discharging any liability to the defaulter after the receipt of a notice under this section 
shall be personally liable to the Reserve Bank to the extent of his own liability to the defaulter so 
discharged or to the extent of  the penalty imposed on the defaulter by the Reserve Bank, whichever is 
less. 
(8) If the person to whom the notice under this section is sent fails to make payment in pursuance 
thereof to the Reserve Bank, he shall be deemed to be the defaulter in respect of the amount specified in 
the notice and further proceedings may be taken against him for the realisation of the amount as if it were 
an arrear due from him in the manner provided in this section.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, ―defaulter‖ means any person or system provider or 
system participant on whom the Reserve Bank has imposed a penalty under section 30.  
34. Act not to apply to s tock ex changes or clearing cor porations of stock ex changes .—Nothing 
contained in this Act shall apply to st ock exchanges or the clearing corporations of the stock exchanges.  
1[34A.  Act to apply to designated trade repository and issuer .—(1) The provisions of this Act 
shall apply to, or in relation to, a designated  trade repository or issuer, as they apply to, o r in relation to, 
payment systems to the  extent applicable, subject to the modification that, throughout this Act, unless the  
context otherwise requires, — 
(a) references to a ―payment system ‖ or ―system provider ‖ shall be  construed as references to a 
―designated trade repository ‖ or ―issuer‖, as the  case may be;  
 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 2015, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2015).  16 
 (b) references to ―commencement of this Act ‖ shall be construed with  reference to –– 
(i) a designated trade repository, as references to the date on which  a trade repository is 
specified by the Reserve Bank as a designated trade  repository; and  
(ii) an issuer, as references to commencement of the Payment and  Settlement Systems 
(Amendment) Act, 2015  (18 of 2015) . 
(2) The Reserve Bank may, on an application by a designated trade repository or  other wise, permit or 
direct the designated trade repository to provide such other services  as are deemed necessary from time to 
time.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression ―designated  trade repository ‖ shall 
mean a trade repository or a class of trade repositories, as may  be specified by the R eserve Bank from 
time to time.]  
35. Certain persons deemed to be public servants .—Every officer of the Reserve Bank who has 
been entrusted with any power under thi s Act, shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning 
of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
36. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
the Central Government, the Reserve Ban k, or any officer thereof for any damage caused or likely to be 
caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act, any 
regulations, order or direction made or given thereunder.  
37. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provision is 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of two years from 
the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is  made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
38. Power of Reserve Bank to make regulations .—(1) The Reserve Bank may, by notification, 
make regulations consistent with this Act to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to  the generality of the foregoing provision, such regulations 
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the powers and functions of the Committee constituted under sub -section ( 2), the time and 
venue of its meetings and the procedure  to be followed by it at its meetings (including the quorum at 
such meetings) under sub -section ( 4) of section 3;  
(b) the form and manner in which an application for authorisation for commencing or carrying on 
a payment system shall be made and the fees wh ich shall accompany such application under             
sub-section ( 2) of section 5;  
(c) the form in which an authorisation to operate a payment system under this Act shall be issued 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 7;  
(d) the format of payment instruction s and other matters relating to determination of standards to 
be complied with by the payment systems under sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(e) the intervals, at which and the form and manner in which the information or returns required 
by the Reserve Bank shall be furnished under section 12;  
(f) such other matters as are required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(2) Any regulation made under this section shall have effect from such earlier or later date (nor earlier 
than the date of commencement of this Act) a s may be specified in the regulation.  17 
 (3) Every regulation shall, as soon as may be after it is made by the Reserve Bank, be forwarded to 
the Central Government and that Central Government shall cause a copy of the same to be laid before 
each House of Parl iament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the regulation, or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall, 
thereafter, have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under th at regulation.  
_____________  
--------------------------The Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006--------------------------
1 
 THE PROHIBITION OF CHILD MARRIAGE ACT, 2006  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Child marriages to be voidable at the option of contracting party being a child . 
4. Provision for maintenance and residence to female contracting party to child marriage . 
5. Custody and maintenance of children of child marriages.  
6. Legitimacy of children born of child marriages . 
7. Power of district court to modify orders issued under section 4 or section 5.  
8. Court to whic h petition should be made.  
9. Punishment for male adult marrying a child.  
10. Punishment for solemnising a child marriage.  
11. Punishment for promoting or permitting solemnisation of child marriages . 
12. Marriage of a minor child to be void in certain circumstances . 
13. Powe r of court to issue injunction prohibiting child marriages . 
14. Child marriages in contravention of injunction orders to be void . 
15. Offences to be cognizable and non -bailable . 
16. Child Marriage Prohibition Officers.  
17. Child Marriage Prohibition Officers to be public servants . 
18. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
19. Power of State Government to make rules.  
20. Amendment of Act No. 25 of 1955.  
21. Repeal and savings . 
 
  2 
 THE PROHIBITION OF CHILD MARRIAGE ACT, 2006  
ACT NO. 6 OF 2007  
[10th January,  2007. ] 
An Act to provide for the prohibition of solemnisation of child marriages and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -seventh Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act  may be called the Prohibition of Child 
Marriage Act, 2006.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir; and it applies also to all 
citizens of India without and beyond India:  
Provided that nothing contained in this Act shall  apply to the Renoncants of the Union territory of 
Pondicherry.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different States and any re ference in 
any provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed in relation to any State as a reference 
to the coming into force of that provision in that State.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “child” means a person who, if a male, has not completed twenty -one years of age, and if a 
female, has not completed eighteen years of age;  
(b) “child marriage ” means a marriage to which either of the contracting parties is a child;  
(c) “contracting party ”, in re lation to a marriage, means either of the parties whose marriage is or 
is about to be thereby solemnised;  
(d) “Child Marriage Prohibition Officer ” includes the Child Marriage Prohibition Officer 
appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 16;  
(e) “district court” means, in any area for which a Family Court established under section 3 of the 
Family Courts Act, 1984 (66 of 1984) exists, such Family Court, and in any area for which there is no 
Family Court but a city civil court exists, that court and in any ot her area, the principal civil court of 
original jurisdiction and includes any other civil court which may be specified by the State 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, as having jurisdiction in respect of the matters 
dealt with in this Act ; 
(f) “minor” means a person who, under the provisions of the Majority Act, 1875  (9 of 1875) , is to 
be deemed not to have attained his majority.  
3. Child marriages to be voidable at the option of contracting party being a child. —(1) Every 
child marriage, w hether solemnised before or after the commencement of this Act, shall be voidable at the 
option of the contracting party who was a child at the time of the marriage:  
Provided that a petition for annulling a child marriage by a decree of nullity may be file d in the 
district court only by a contracting party to the marriage who was a child at the time of the marriage.  
(2) If at the time of filing a petition, the petitioner is a minor, the petition may be filed through his or 
her guardian or next friend along with the Child Marriage Prohibition Officer.  
(3) The petition under this section may be filed at any time but before the child filing the petition 
completes two years of attaining majority.  
                                                           
1. 1st November, 2007, vide notification N o. S.O. 1850(E), dated 30th October, 2007, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 3 
 (4) While granting a decree of nullity under this section, the dis trict court shall make an order 
directing both the parties to the marriage and their parents or their guardians to return to the other party, 
his or her parents or guardian, as the case may be, the money, valuables, ornaments and other gifts 
received on th e occasion of the marriage by them from the other side, or an amount equal to the value of 
such valuables, ornaments, other gifts and money:  
Provided that no order under this section shall be passed unless the concerned parties have been given 
notices to a ppear before the district court and show cause why such order should not be passed.  
4. Provision for maintenance and residence to female contracting party to child marriage. —(1) 
While granting a decree under section 3, the district court may also make an i nterim or final order 
directing the male contracting party to the child marriage, and in case the male contracting party to such 
marriage is a minor, his parent or guardian to pay maintenance to the female contracting party to the 
marriage until her remarr iage.  
(2) The quantum of maintenance payable shall be determined by the district court having regard to the 
needs of the child, the lifestyle enjoyed by such child during her marriage and the means of income of the 
paying party.  
(3) The amount of maintenan ce may be directed to be paid monthly or in lump sum.  
(4) In case the party making the petition under section 3 is the female contracting party, the district 
court may also make a suitable order as to her residence until her remarriage.  
5. Custody and main tenance of children of child marriages. —(1) Where there are children born of 
the child marriage, the district court shall make an appropriate order for the custody of such children.  
(2) While making an order for the custody of a child under this section, t he welfare and best interests 
of the child shall be the paramount consideration to be given by the district court.  
(3) An order for custody of a child may also include appropriate directions for giving to the other 
party access to the child in such a manne r as may best serve the interests of the child, and such other 
orders as the district court may, in the interest of the child, deem proper.  
(4) The district court may also make an appropriate order for providing maintenance to the child by a 
party to the m arriage or their parents or guardians.  
6. Legitimacy of children born of child marriages. —Notwithstanding that a child marriage has 
been annulled by a decree of nullity under section 3, every child begotten or conceived of such marriage 
before the decree i s made, whether born before or after the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to 
be a legitimate child for all purposes.  
7. Power of district court to modify orders issued under section 4 or section 5. —The district court 
shall have the power to add to, modify or revoke any order made under section 4 or section 5 and if there 
is any change in the circumstances at any time during the pendency of the petition and even after the final 
disposal of the petition.  
8. Court to which petition should be made. —For the purpose of grant of reliefs under sections 3, 4 
and 5, the district court having jurisdiction shall include the district court having jurisdiction over the 
place where the defendant or the child resides, or where the marriage was solemnised or wher e the parties 
last resided together or the petitioner is residing on the date of presentation of the petition.  
9. Punishment for male adult marrying a child. —Whoever, being a male adult above eighteen 
years of age, contracts a child marriage shall be punis hable with rigorous imprisonment which may 
extend to two years or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both.  
10. Punishment for solemnising a child marriage. —Whoever performs, conducts, directs or abets 
any child marriage shall be punishab le with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two years and 
shall be liable to fine which may extend to one lakh rupees unless he proves that he had reasons to believe 
that the marriage was not a child marriage.  
11. Punishment for promoting or permitti ng solemnisation of child marriages. —(1) Where a 
child contracts a child marriage, any person having charge of the child, whether as parent or guardian or 4 
 any other person or in any other capacity, lawful or unlawful, including any member of an organisatio n or 
association of persons who does any act to promote the marriage or permits it to be solemnised, or 
negligently fails to prevent it from being solemnised, including attending or participating in a child 
marriage, shall be punishable with rigorous impri sonment which may extend to two years and shall also 
be liable to fine which may extend up to one lakh rupees:  
Provided that no woman shall be punishable with imprisonment.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, it shall be presumed, unless and until the co ntrary is proved, that 
where a minor child has contracted a marriage, the person having charge of such minor child has 
negligently failed to prevent the marriage from being solemnised.  
12. Marriage of a minor child to be void in certain circumstances. —Wher e a child, being a 
minor— 
(a) is taken or enticed out of the keeping of the lawful guardian; or  
(b) by force compelled, or by any deceitful means induced to go from any place; or  
(c) is sold for the purpose of marriage; and made to go through a form of mar riage or if the minor 
is married after which the minor is sold or trafficked or used for immoral purposes,  
such marriage shall be null and void.  
13. Power of court to issue injunction prohibiting child marriages. —(1) Notwithstanding 
anything to the contrar y contained in this Act, if, on an application of the Child Marriage Prohibition 
Officer or on receipt of information through a complaint or otherwise from any person, a Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class or a Metropolitan Magistrate is satisfied that a child marriage in contravention 
of this Act has been arranged or is about to be solemnised, such Magistrate shall issue an injunction 
against any person including a member of an organisation or an association of persons prohibiting such 
marriage.  
(2) A c omplaint under sub -section ( 1) may be made by any person having personal knowledge or 
reason to believe, and a non -governmental organisation having reasonable information, relating to the 
likelihood of taking place of solemnisation of a child marriage or c hild marriages.  
(3) The Court of the Judicial Magistrate of the first class or the Metropolitan Magistrate may also take 
suomotu  cognizance on the basis of any reliable report or information.  
(4) For the purposes of preventing solemnisation of mass child m arriages on certain days such as 
AkshayaTrutiya , the District Magistrate shall be deemed to be the Child Marriage Prohibition Officer with 
all powers as are conferred on a Child Marriage Prohibition Officer by or under this Act.  
(5) The District Magistrate  shall also have additional powers to stop or prevent solemnisation of child 
marriages and for this purpose, he may take all appropriate measures and use the minimum force required.  
(6) No injunction under sub -section ( 1) shall be issued against any person  or member of any 
organisation or association of persons unless the Court has previously given notice to such person, 
members of the organisation or association of persons, as the case may be, and has offered him or them an 
opportunity to show cause agains t the issue of the injunction:  
Provided that in the case of any urgency, the Court shall have the power to issue an interim injunction 
without giving any notice under this section.  
(7) An injunction issued under sub -section ( 1) may be confirmed or vacated after giving notice and 
hearing the party against whom the injunction was issued.  
(8) The Court may either on its own motion or on the application of any person aggrieved, rescind or 
alter an injunction issued under sub -section ( 1). 
(9) Where an applicatio n is received under sub -section ( 1), the Court shall afford the applicant an 
early opportunity of appearing before it either in person or by an advocate and if the Court, after hearing 
the applicant rejects the application wholly or in part, it shall recor d in writing its reasons for so doing.   5 
 (10) Whoever knowing that an injunction has been issued under sub -section ( 1) against him disobeys 
such injunction shall be punishable with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend 
to two years or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both:  
Provided that no woman shall be punishable with imprisonment.  
14. Child marriages in contravention of injunction orders to be void. —Any child marriage 
solemnised in contravention of an injunction order issued under section 13, whether interim or final, shall 
be void ab initio . 
15. Offences to be cognizable and non -bailable.—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code 
of Criminal Proced ure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , an offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable and 
non-bailable.  
16. Child Marriage Prohibition Officers. —(1) The State Government shall, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint for the whole State, or such part th ereof as may be specified in that notification, 
an officer or officers to be known as the Child Marriage Prohibition Officer having jurisdiction over the 
area or areas specified in the notification.  
(2) The State Government may also request a respectable m ember of the locality with a record of 
social service or an officer of the Gram Panchayat or Municipality or an officer of the Government or any 
public sector undertaking or an office bearer of any non -governmental organisation to assist the Child 
Marriage  Prohibition Officer and such member, officer or office bearer, as the case may be, shall be 
bound to act accordingly.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Child Marriage Prohibition Officer — 
(a) to prevent solemnisation of child marriages by taking such action  as he may deem fit;  
(b) to collect evidence for the effective prosecution of persons contravening the provisions of this 
Act; 
(c) to advise either individual cases or counsel the residents of the locality generally not to 
indulge in promoting, helping, ai ding or allowing the solemnisation of child marriages;  
(d) to create awareness of the evil which results from child marriages;  
(e) to sensitize the community on the issue of child marriages;  
(f) to furnish such periodical returns and statistics as the State Government may direct; and  
(g) to discharge such other functions and duties as may be assigned to him by the State 
Government.  
(4) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazett e, subject to such conditions and 
limitations, invest the Child Marriage Prohibition Officer with such powers of a police officer as may be 
specified in the notification and the Child Marriage Prohibition Officer shall exercise such powers subject 
to such conditions and limitations, as may be specified in the notification.  
(5) The Child Marriage Prohibition Officer shall have the power to move the Court for an order under 
sections 4, 5 and 13 and along with the child under section 3.  
17. Child Marriage Proh ibition Officers to be public servants. —The Child Marriage Prohibition 
Officers shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  
(45 of 1860) . 
18. Protection of action taken in good faith. —No suit, prosecution  or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Child Marriage Prohibition Officer in respect of anything in good faith done or intended to 
be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.  
19. Power of State Government to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in 
the Offici al Gazette, make rules for carr ying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before the State 
Legislature.  6 
 20. Amendme nt of Act No. 25 of 1955. —In the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, in section 18, for clause 
(a), the foll owing claus e shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(a) in the case of contravention of the condition specified in clause ( iii) of section 5, with 
rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees, or with both ”. 
21. Repeal and savings. —(1) The Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929 (19 of 1929) is hereby 
repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, all cases and other proceedings pending or continued under the said 
Act at the commencement of this Act shall be continued and disposed of in accordance with the 
provisions of the repealed Act, as if this Act had not been passed.  
________  
--------------------------The Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology Act, 2007--------------------------
 
1 
 THE RAJIV GANDHI INSTI TUTE OF PETROLEUM TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2007  
_____________ ____  
     ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________ ____ _ 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration of Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology as an  institution of national 
importance . 
3. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
THE INSTITUTE  
4. Incorporation of Institute.  
5. Constitution of Board of Governors.  
6. Term of office of, vacancies among, and allowances payable to, members of Board.  
7. Vesting of p roperties.  
8. Effect of incorporation of Institute . 
9. Function s of Institute.  
10. Power s of Board.  
11. Institute to be open to all races, creeds and classes.  
12. Teaching at the Institute.  
13. Visitor.  
14. Authorities of Institute.  
15. Establishment of General Council.  
16. Powers and function s of Ge neral Council.  
17. Senate.  
18. Function s of Senate.  
19. President of Board.  
20. Director.  
21. Registrar.  
22. Power s and duties of other authorities and officers.  
23. Grants by Central Government.  
24. Fund of Institute.  
25. Setting up of endowment fund.  
26. Accounts and audit.  
27. Pension and p rovident fund.  
28. Appointments.  
29. Statutes.  
   
2 
 SECTIONS  
30. Statutes how made.  
31. Ordinances.  
32. Ordinances how made.  
33. Conduct of business by authorities of Institute.  
34. Tribunal  of Arbitration.  
 
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
35. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated  by vacancies.  
36. Grant of degree s, etc., by Institute.  
37. Sponsored schemes.  
38. Power to remove difficulties.  
39. Transitional provisions.  
40. Statutes, Ordinances and notifications to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before 
Parliament.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
3 
 THE RAJIV GANDHI INSTITUTE OF PETROLEUM TECHNOLOGY ACT , 2007  
ACT NO. 54 OF 2007  
[20th December , 2007.]  
An Act to declare the institution known as the Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology 
to be an institution of national importance and to provide for its incorporation and for 
matters connected therewith.  
 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as follows :— 
CHAPTER 1  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Rajiv Gandhi Institute of 
Petroleum Technology Act, 2007 . 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for dif ferent provisions of this Act.  
2. Declaration of Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology as an insti tution of national 
importance. —Whereas the objects  of the institution known as the Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petro leum 
Technology,  Jais, District — Rae Bareli, Uttar Pradesh are such as to make the institution one of national 
importance, it is hereby declared that the institution known as the Rajiv Gandhi  Institute of Petroleum 
Technology is an ins titution of national importance.  
3. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date appointed under sub -section ( 2) of section ( 1) for coming into 
force of this Act;  
(b) “Board ” means the Board of Governors of the Institute constituted under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 5;  
(c) “Chairperson ” means the Chai rperson of the General Council;  
(d) “Director ” means the Director of the Instit ute appointed under section 20;  
(e) “fund” means the fund of the Institute to be maintained under section 24;  
(f) “General Council ” means the General Council established under sub -section ( 1) of section 15;  
(g) “Institute ” means the Rajiv Gandhi Institute of P etroleum Technology incorporated under 
section 4;  
(h) “President ” means the President of the Board appointed under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 5;  
(i) “Registrar ” means the Registrar of the Insti tute referred to in section 21;  
(j) “Senate ” means the Senate of the Insti tute referred to in section 17;  
(k) “Society ” means the Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology Society, Jais               
District —Rae Bareli, Uttar Pradesh registered under the S ocieties Registration Act, 1860                    
(21 of 1860) ; and  
(l) “Statutes ” and “Ordinances ” mean, respectively, the Statutes and Ordinances of the Institute 
made under this Act.    
4 
 CHAPTER II  
THE INSTITUTE  
4. Incorporation of Institute. —The Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology shall be a body 
corporate having perpetual successio n and a common seal with power , subject  to the provisions of this 
Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract, and s hall, by that name, sue and be s ued. 
5. Const itution of Boa rd of Governors. —(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be constituted by the Central Government 
for the purposes of this Act, a Board to be known as the Board of Governor s consisting of the following 
members, namely: —  
(a) the President to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be provided 
by the Sta tutes:  
Provided that the first President shall be appointed by the Central Government on such terms and  
conditions as it deems fit, for a period not exceeding six months from the date the f irst Statutes comes 
into force.  
(b) the Director of the Institute, ex officio ; 
(c) two persons from the Board of Directors of the promoting companies to be nomin ated by the 
Central Government.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, promoting companies mean those companies 
contributing to the endowment fund ref erred to in section 25;  
(d) one Professor of the Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur to be nominated by the Director 
of that Institute;  
(e) five eminent experts in the field of petroleum technology covering the entire hydrocarbon 
value chain having specialised knowledge or operational experience in respect of education, research, 
engineering and technology t o be nominated by the General Council, in consultation with  the Director 
of the Institute;  
(f) two Professors of the Institute to be nominated by the Senate of the Institute; and  
(g) one representative of the graduates of the Institute to be nominated by the Executive 
Committee of the Alumni Association.  
(2) The Registrar of the Institute shall act as the Secretary of the Board.  
(3) The Board shall ordinarily meet fou r times during a calendar year.  
6. Term of office of, vacancies among, and allowance s pay able to members of Board. —(1) Save 
as otherwise provided in this section, the term of office of the President or any other member of the 
Board, other than ex officio  members shall be three years from the date of his app ointment or nomination 
thereto.  
(2) An ex officio  member shall cease to be a member of the Board as soon as he vacates the office by 
virtue of whi ch he is a member of the Board.  
(3) The term of a member nominated to fill a casual vacancy shall continue for the remainder of the 
term of the member in who se place he has been nominated.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, an outgoing member shall, unless the Central 
Government otherwise directs, continue in office until another person is nominated as a member in his 
place.   
5 
 (5) The members of the Board shall be entitled to such allowances, if any, from the Institute, as may 
be provided for in the Statutes, but no member other than the member referred to in clause ( f) of section 5 
shall be entitled to any salary.  
7. Vesting of  properties. —On and from the appointed day and subject to the other provisions of this 
Act, all pro perties which had vested in the  Society immediately before that day , shall, on and from t hat 
day, vest in the Institute.  
8. Effect of incorporation of Instit ute.—On and from the appointed day, —  
(a) any reference to the Society in any contract or other instrument shall be deemed a s a reference 
to the Institute;  
(b) all the rights and liabilities of the Society shall be transferred to, and be the rights and 
liabilities of, the Institute; and  
(c) every person employed by the Society immediately before the appointed day shall hold office 
or service in the Institute by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and 
conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension, leave, gratuity, provident fund and 
other matters as he would have held the same if this Act had not been passed, and shall continue to be 
so unless and until his employment is terminated or until such tenure, remu neration and terms and 
conditions ar e duly altered by the Statutes:  
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee, his employment may 
be terminated by the Institute in accordance with the terms of the contract with the employee  or, if no 
provision is made therein in this behalf, on payment to him by the Institute of compensation 
equivalent to three months’ remuneration in the case of permanent employees and one month’s 
remuneration in the case of other employees.  
9. Functions o f Institute. —The Institute shall perform t he following functions, namely: — 
(i) nurture and promote quality and excellence in education and research in the area  of petroleum 
and hydrocarbons;  
(ii) provide for programmes and courses of instruction and research leading to the award of the 
Bachelors, Masters and Doctoral degrees in engineering and technology, management, sciences and 
arts in the area  of petroleum and hydrocarbons;  
(iii) grant, subject to such conditions as the Institute may determine, deg rees, diplomas, 
certificates or other academic distinctions or titles at various academic levels to candidates who have 
attained the prescribed standard of proficiency as judged on the basis of examination or on any other 
basis of testing and evaluation an d to withdraw any such degrees, diplomas, certificates or other 
academic distinctions or titles fo r good and sufficient reasons;  
(iv) confer honorary degrees or other distinctions and to institute and award fellowships,  
scholarships, exhibitions, prizes an d medals;  
(v) lay down standards of admission to the Institute through an examination or any other me thod 
of testing and evaluation;  
(vi) fix, demand and receive fees and other charges;  
(vii) manage the content, quality, design and continuous evaluation of  its academic and research 
programmes in a manner that earns accreditation of an international  stature;  
(viii) promote research and development for the benefit of oil, gas and petrochemical industry 
through the integr ation of teaching and research;   
6 
 (ix) foster close educational and research interaction through networking with national, regional 
and international players in the oil, gas and petrochemical industry;  
(x) co-operate with educational and research institutions in any part of the world having objec ts 
wholly or partly similar to those of the Institute by exchange of teachers and scholars, conduct of joint 
research, undertaking sponsored research  and consultancy projects, etc;  
(xi) organise national and international symposia, seminars and conferences  in the area  of 
petroleum and hydrocarbons;  
(xii) establish, maintain and manage halls, resid ences and hostels for students;  
(xiii) create academic, administrative, technical and other posts an d to make appointments 
thereto;  
(xiv) lay down conditions of service including a code of conduct for teachers and  other categories 
of employees;  
(xv) supervise, control and regulate the discipline of all categories of employees of the Institute 
and to make arrangements for promoting their health and gener al welfare;  
(xvi) supervise and regulate the discipline of students and to make arrangements for p romoting 
their health, general w elfare a nd cultural and corporate life;  
(xvii) frame Statutes and Ordinances and to alt er, modify or rescind the same;  
(xviii) deal with any property belonging to or vested in the Institute in such manner as the 
Institute may deem  fit for advancing its objects;  
(xix) receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from the Central and State Governments and 
to receive bequests, donations, g rants and transfers of movable or immovable properties from 
testators, donors, transferors, alumni , industry or any other person;  
(xx) borrow money for the purposes of the Institute with or without security of the property of the 
Institute;  
(xxi) integrate  new technology in the classroom to encourage student -centric learning strategies 
and the developme nt of an attitude for learning;  
(xxii) develop and maintain an information resource centre of print and non -print knowledge 
resources in the field of petrole um sector covering the entire hydrocarbon value chain as well as other 
related a reas of science and technology;  
(xxiii) provide for further education to the working professionals and other employees of the 
Institute in the advanced areas of technology rela ting to oil, gas and comple te hydrocarbon value 
chain; and  
(xxiv) do all things, not specifically covered above, as may be necessary, incidental or conducive 
to the attainment of all or any of the objects of the Institute.  
10. Powers o f Board.—(1) Subject  to the provisions of this Act, the Board shall be responsible for 
the general superintendence, direction and control of the affairs of the Institute and shall exercise all the 
powers not otherwise provided for by this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances,  and shall have the power 
to review the acts of the Senate.  
 
  
7 
 (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Board shall —  
(a) take decisions on questions of policy relating to the administration and working of the 
Institute;  
(b) lay down policy regarding the duration of the courses, nomenclature of the degrees and other 
distinctions to  be conferred by the Institute;  
(c) institute courses of study and to lay down standards of proficiency and other academic 
distinctions in respect of the co urses offered by the Institute;  
(d) lay down policy regarding the cadre structure, qualification, the method of recruitment and 
conditions of service of the teaching and research faculty as well as ot her employees of the Institute;  
(e) guide resource mobili sation of the Institute and to la y down policies for investment;  
(f) consider and approve proposals for taking loans for purposes of the Institute with or without 
security o f the property of the Institute;  
(g) frame Statutes and to alt er, modify or rescind  the same;  
(h) consider and pass resolutions on the annual report, the annual accounts and the budget 
estimates of the Institute for the next financial year as it thinks fit together with a statemen t of its 
development plans; and  
(i) do all such things as may be nece ssary, incidental or conducive to the attainment of all or any 
of the aforesaid powers.  
(3) The Board shall have the power to appoint such committees as it considers necessary for the 
exercise of its powers and the performanc e of its duties und er this Act.  
(4) The Board shall have the power to establish campus and academic centres at any pla ce within or 
outside India:  
Provided that no campus or academic centre shall be established outside India without prior approval 
of the Central Government.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 4, the Board shall not dispose of in any manner,  
any immovable property of the I nstitute without prior appr oval of the Central Government.  
(6) The Board may, through a specific resolution to this effect, delegate any of its powers and duties 
to the President, Director, any officer or any authority of the Institute subject to reserving the right to 
review the action that may be taken under such delegated authority.  
11. Institute to be open to all races, creeds and classes. —(1) The Institute shall be open to persons 
of either sex and of whatever race, creed, caste or class, and no test or condition shall be imposed as to 
religious belief or profes sion in admitting students, appointing teachers or employees or in a ny other 
connection whatsoever.  
(2) No bequest, donation or transfer of any property shall be accepted by the Institute which in the 
opinion of the Board involves conditions or obligations  opposed to the spirit and object of this section.  
12. Teaching at the Institute. —All teaching and other academic activities at the Institute shall be 
conducted by or in the name of the Institute in accordance with the Statutes and the Ordinances made in 
this behalf.  
13. Visitor. —(1) The President of India shall b e the Visitor of the Institute.  
(2) The Visitor may appoint one or more persons to revie w the work and progress of the I nstitute and 
to hold inquiries into the affairs thereof and to report thereon in such ma nner as the Visitor may direct.   
8 
 (3) Upon receipt of any such report, the Visitor may take such action and issue such directions as he 
considers necessary in respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report and the Institute shall be  
bound to comply with such directions.  
14. Authorities of Institut e.—The following shall be the authori ties of the Institute, namely: — 
(a) the General Counci l; 
(b) the Board of Governors;  
(c) the Senate; and  
(d) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the Institute.  
15. Est ablishment of General Council. —(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there  shall be established, for the purposes of this 
Act, a body to b e known as the General Council.  
(2) The General Council shall consist of the following members, namely: —  
(a) the Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in the Central Government, ex officio , 
who shall be the Chairperson;  
(b) the Chairman, Indian Oil Corporation Limited, ex officio ; 
(c) the Chairman and Managing Director, Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, ex officio;  
(d) the Chairman and Managing Director, Bharat Petroleum Corp oration Limited, ex officio ; 
(e) the Chairman and Managing Director, Oil and Natural Gas Corporation, ex officio ; 
(f) the Chairman and Managing Director, Gas Authority of India Limited, ex officio ; 
(g) the Chairman and Managing Director, Oil India Limited, ex officio ; 
(h) the Director General of Hydrocarbons, ex officio ; 
(i) the Principal Advisor (Energy), Planning Commission, ex officio ;  
(j) the Executive Director, Oil Industry Safety Directorate, ex officio ;  
(k) the Director, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, ex officio ;  
(l) the Director, University Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai University, ex officio ; 
(m) the Secretary, Oil Industry Development Board, ex officio ;  
(n) the Presiden t of the Board, ex officio ; 
(o) the Director of the Institute, ex officio ; and  
(p) persons, not less than two but not exceeding four, representing the private entities in the field 
of petroleum sector operating in the country, to b e nominated by the Chairperson.  
(3) The Registrar of the Institute shall be the ex officio  Secretary of the General Council.  
(4) The Chairperson shall have the power to invite any person who is not a member of the General 
Council to attend its meeting but such invitee  shall not be entitled to vote.  
   
9 
 16. Powers and  functions of General Council. —Subject to the provisions of this Act, the General 
Council shall have the following  powers and functions, namely: — 
(a) review from time to time the broad policies and programmes  of the institute and to suggest 
measures for the impro vement and development thereof;  
(b) consider the annual statement of accounts including a balance -sheet together with the audit 
report thereto and the observations of the Board of Governors thereon and  to suggest improvements in 
fiscal management of the Institute;  
(c) review and evaluate overall quality and effectiveness of the Institute and to advise measures 
for improvement of performance and for confidence -building between the Institute and its 
stake holders;  
(d) provide credibility, aura, connectivity and contacts for the Institute especially with regard to 
student placement  and resource mobilisation; and  
(e) advise the Institute and its Board in respect of the advanced areas of technology in the fiel d of 
petroleum sector covering the entire hydrocarbon value chain as well as in respect of any other matter 
that may be referred to it for advice by the Board.  
17. Senate. —The Senate of the Institute shall be the principal academic body and its composition 
shall be such as may be provided by the Statutes.  
18. Functions of Senate. —Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the 
Senate shall have the control and general regulation, and be responsible for the maintenance of standards 
of instruction, education and examination in the Institute and shall exercise such other powers and 
perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed upon it by the Statutes.  
19. P resident of Board. —(1) The President shall ordinarily p reside at the meetings of the Board and 
at the Convocations of the Institute.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the President to ensure that the decisions taken by the Board are 
implemented . 
(3) The President shall exercise such other powers and perform such oth er duties as may be assigned 
to him by this Act or the Statutes.  
20. Director. —(1) The Director of the Institute shall be appointed by the Central Government in such 
manner and on such terms and conditions as m ay be provided by the Statutes:  
Provided that the first Director shall be appointed by the Central Government on such terms and 
conditions as it deems fit, for a period not exceeding six months from the date the first Statutes comes 
into force.  
(2) The Director shall be the principal academic and executive officer  of the Institute and shall be 
responsible for the proper administration and academic performance of the Institute and for imparting of 
instruction and maintenance of discipline the rein. 
(3) The Director shall submit annual rep orts and accounts to the Board.  
(4) The Director shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be assigned to 
him by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
   
10 
 21. Registrar. —(1) The Registrar of the Institute shall be appointed in such manner and on such 
terms and conditions as may be provided by the Statutes and shall be the custodian of records, the 
common seal, the funds of the Institute and such other property of the Institute as the Bo ard shall commit 
to his charge.  
(2) The Registra r shall act as the Secretary of the General Council, the Board, the Senate and such 
committees as m ay be provided by the Statutes.  
(3) The Registrar shall be responsible to the Director for the proper discharge of his functions.  
(4) The Registrar shall ex ercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be assigned 
to him by this Act, the Statutes or by the Director.  
22. Powers and duties of o ther authorities and officers. —The powers and duties of authorities and 
officers, other than those her einbefore mentioned, shall  be determined by the Statutes.  
23. Grants by Central Government. —For the purpose of enabling the institute to discharge its 
functions efficiently under this Act, the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the institute in each financial year such sums of money and in 
such manner as it may think fit.  
24. Fund of Institute. —(1) The Institute shall maintain a fund to which shall be credited —  
(a) all moneys provided by the Central Government;  
(b) all fees and other charges;  
(c) all moneys received by the Institute by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests 
or transfers; and  
(d) all moneys received by the Institute in any other manner or from any other source.  
(2) All moneys credited to the fund shall be deposited in such banks or invested in such manner as 
may be decided by the Board.  
(3) The fund shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of the Institute including expenses 
incurred in the exercis e of its powers and discharg e of its duties under this Act.  
25. Setting up of endowment fund. —Notwithstanding anything contained in section 24, the Institute 
may, —  
(a) set up an endowment fund and any other fu nd for a specified purpose; and  
(b) transfer money from its fund to the endowment fund or any other fund.  
26. Accounts and audit. —(1) The Institute shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the balance -sheet, in such f orm as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Institute shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and 
any expenditure incurred by him in Connection with such audit shall be payable by the Institute to the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Institute sha ll have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India has in connection with the 
audit of the Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production o f 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the offices of the 
Institute.   
11 
 (4) The accounts of the Institute as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this b ehalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament . 
27. Pension and provident fund. —(1) The Institute shall constitute for the benefit of its employees, 
including the Director, such pension, insurance and provident fund scheme as it deems fit, in such manner 
and subject to such conditions as may be provided by the Statutes.  
(2) Where any s uch provident fund has been so constituted, the Central Government may declare that 
the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925) , shall apply to such fund as if it were a 
Government provident fund.  
28. Appointments. —All appointments of the  staff of the Institut e, except that of the Director shall be 
made in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Statutes, — 
(a) by the Board, if the appointment is made on the academic staff in the post of Assistant 
Professor or above or if the appointment is made on the non -academic staff in any cadre, the 
maximum of the pay -scale for which is the same or higher than that of Ass istant Professor; and  
(b) by the Director, in any other case.  
29. Statutes. —Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any o f the 
following matters, namely: — 
(a) the formation of departments of tea ching and other academic units;  
(b) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes;  
(c) the classification of posts, term of office, method of appointment, powers and duties and other 
terms and conditions of service of the officers of the Institute in cluding the President, the Director, 
the Registrar, and such other officers as may be declared as officers of  the Institute by the Statutes;  
(d) the classification, the method of appointment and the determination of the terms and 
conditions of service of o fficers, teachers an d other staff of the Institute;  
(e) the reservation of posts for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and other categories of 
persons as may be determ ined by the Central Government;  
(f) the constitution of pension, insurance and p rovident funds for the benefit of the officers, 
teachers an d other staff of the Institute;  
(g) the constitution, powers and duties of the other authorities of the Institute referr ed in clause 
(d) of section 14;  
(h) the delegation of power;  
(i) the code of conduct, disciplinary actions thereto for misconduct including removal from 
service of employees on account of misconduct and the procedure for appeal against the actions of an 
officer  or authority of the Institute;  
(j) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(k) the establishment and maintenance of  halls, residences and hostels;  
(l) the authentication of the orders and decisions of the Boa rd; and  
(m) any other matter which by this Act is to be, or may be, provided by the Statutes.   
12 
 30. Statutes how made. —(1) The first Statutes of the Institute shall be framed by the Central 
Government and a copy of the same shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, b efore each House of 
Parliament.  
(2) The Board may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes o r may amend or repeal the 
Statutes in the manner here after in this section provided.  
(3) A new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require the 
previous approval of the General Council  who may assent thereto or with hold assent or remit it  to the 
Board for consideration  
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless 
it has been assented to by the General Council.  
31. Ordinances .—Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely: —  
(a) the admission of t he students to the Institute;  
(b) the reservation for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes a nd o ther categories of 
persons;  
(c) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of the Institute;  
(d) the conditions under which students shall be admitted to the degree, diploma and certificate 
courses and to the examinati ons of the Institute and the eligibility conditions for awarding the same;  
(e) the conditions of award of the fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, m edals and prizes;  
(f) the conditions and manner of appointment and duties of examining bo dies, examiners and 
moderators;  
(g) the conduct of examinations;  
(h) the maintenance of discipline among  the students of the institute;  
(i) the fees to be charged for courses of study at the Institute and for  admission to the 
examinations;  
(j) the conditions of residence of students of the Institute and the levying of the fees for residence 
in the halls and ho stels and of other charges; and  
(k) any other matter which by this Act or the Statutes is to be, or may be, provided for by the 
Ordinances.  
32. Ordinances how made. —(1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, Ordinanc es shall be made 
by the Senate.  
(2) All Ordinances made by the Senate shall have effect from such date as it may direct, but every 
Ordinance so made shall be submitted, as soon as may be, to the Board  and shall be considered by the 
Board at its next succeeding meeting.  
(3) The Board shall have power by resolution to modify or cancel any such Ordinance and such 
Ordinance shall from the date of such resolution stand modified accordingly or cancelled, as  the case may 
be.  
33. Conduct of busines s by authorities of Institute. —The authorities of the Institute may have their 
own rules of procedure, consistent with the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the 
conduct of their own business and that of the committees, if any, appointed by them and not provided  for 
by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.   
13 
 34. Tribunal of Arbitr ation.—(1) Any dispute arising out of a contract between the Institute and any 
of its employees shall, at the request of the employee concerned or at the instance of the Institute, be  
referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by the Institute, one member 
nominated by the employee, and an umpire appointed by the Visitor.  
(2) The decision of the Tribunal of Arbitration shall be final.  
(3) No s uit or procee ding shall lie in any court in respect of any matter which is required by                      
sub-section ( 1) to be referred to  the Tribunal of Arbitration.  
(4) The Tribunal of Arbitration shall have power to regulate its own procedure.  
(5) Nothing in any  law for the time being in force relating to arbitration shall apply to arbitrations 
under this section.  
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
35. Acts and proceedings not t o be invalidated by vacancies. —No act of the Institute or the 
General Council or Board or Senate or any other body set up under this Act or the Statutes, shall be 
invalid merely by reasons of —  
(a) any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution thereof, or  
(b) any defect in the election,  nomination or appointment of a person  acting as a member thereof, 
or 
(c) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the case.  
36. Grant o f degrees, etc., by Institute. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the University 
Grants Commiss ion Act, 1956 (3 of 1956) , or in any other law for the time being in force, the Institute 
shall have power to grant degrees and other academic distinct ions and titles under this Act.  
37. Sponsored schemes. —Notwithstanding anything in this Act, whenever the  Institute receives 
funds from any Government, the University Grants Commission or any other agency including industry 
sponsoring a research scheme, a consultancy assignment, a teaching programme or a chaired 
professorship or a scholarship, to be executed or endowed at the Institute, —  
(a) the amount received shall be kept by the Institute separately from the fund of the Institute and 
utilised only for  the purpose of the scheme; and  
(b) the staff required to execute the same shall be recruited in accordance  with the terms and 
conditions stipulated by the sponsoring organisation:  
Provided that any money remaining unutilised under clause ( a) shall be transferred to the 
endowment fund created under section 25.  
38. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
or give such directions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or 
expedie nt for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the appointed day.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
  
14 
 39. Transitional provisions. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act ,— 
(a) the Board of Governors of the Society functioning as such immediately before the 
commencement of this Act shall continue to so function until a new Board is constituted for the 
Institute under this Act, but on the constitution of a new Board under this Act, the members of the 
Board holding office before s uch constitution sh all cease to hold office; and  
(b) until the first Statutes and the Ordinances are made under this Act, the Statutes and the 
Ordinances of the Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology Society, or notification as in force, 
immediatel y before the commencement of this Act, shall continue to apply to the Institute in so far as 
they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.  
40. Statutes , Ordinances and notifications to be published in the Official Gazette and to be l aid 
before Parliament. —(1) Every Statute and every Ordinance made or notification issued under this Act 
shall be pub lished in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute and every Ordinance made or notification issued under this Act shall be laid , as 
soon as may b e after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a tot al period 
of thirty days which m ay be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the s ession or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the Statut e, Ordinance or notification or  both Houses 
agree that the Statute, Ordinance or notification should not be made or issued, the Statute, Ordinance or 
notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that Stat ute, Ordina nce or notification.  
(3) The power to make the Statutes, Ordinances or notification shall include the power to give 
retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the Statutes, 
Ordinances, notifications or any of  them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any Statute, 
Ordinance or notification so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such Statute, 
Ordinance or notification may be applicable.  
_________  
--------------------------The Rajiv Gandhi University Act, 2006--------------------------
1 
  THE RAJIV GAND HI UNIVERSITY ACT, 2006  
____________  
     ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Establishment of the University  
4. Effect of establishment of the University.  
5. Objects of the University.  
6. Powers of the University.  
7. Jurisdictions.  
8. University  open to all classes, castes and creed.  
9. The Visitor.  
10. The Chief Rector.  
11. Officers of the University.  
12. The Chancellor.  
13. The Vice -Chancellor.  
14. The Pro -Vice -Chancellor.  
15. The Deans of Faculties.  
16. The Registrar.  
17. The Finance Officer.  
18. The Controller of Examinations.  
19. The Librarian.  
20. Other officers.  
21. Authorities of the University.  
22. The Court.  
23. The Executive Council.  
24. The Academic Council.  
25. The College Development Council.  
26. The Board of Studies.  
27. The Finance Committee.  
28. Other authorities o f the University.  
29. Power to make Statutes.  
30. Statutes how to be made.  
31. Power to make Ordinances.  
32. Regulations.  
33. Annual report.  
34. Annual accounts.  
35. Returns and information.  
36. Conditions of service of employees.  
37. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases  against students.  
38. Right to appeal.  
39. Provident and pension funds.  
40. Disputes as to constitution of authorities and bodies.  
41. Filling of casual vacancies.  2 
 SECTIONS  
42. Procee dings of authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.  
43. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
44. Mode of proof of University record.  
45. Power to remove difficulties.  
46. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before 
Parliament.  
47. Transitional provisions.  
48. Repeal of Arunachal Pradesh Act 1 of 1984.  
49. Amendment of Act 24 of 1973.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
 
 
 
  3 
 THE RAJIV GAND HI UNIVERSITY ACT, 2006  
ACT NO. 8 OF 2007  
[10th January , 2007.]  
An Act to establish and incorporate a teaching and affiliating University in the State of 
Arunachal Pradesh and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliam ent in the Fifty -seventh Year of  the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Rajiv Gandhi University Act, 
2006.  
(2) It shall c ome into force on such date 1as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definition s.—In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless the context otherwise 
requires,— 
(a) “Academic Council ” means the Academic Council of the University;  
(b) “academic staff ” means such categories of staff as are designated as academic staff by the 
Ordinances;  
(c) “Affiliated College ” means a college admitted to the privileges of the University;  
(d) “Approved I nstitution ” means an Institution approved by the University for offering 
programmes of study leading to a certificate or diploma or both, not being an institution imparting 
programmes of study leading to a degree;  
(e) “Approved teachers ” means such persons  as may be approved by the University for the 
purpose of imparting instruction in an Approved Institution;  
(f) “Board of Studies ” means the Board of Studies of the University;  
(g) “Chancellor ”, “Vice -Chancellor ” and “Pro-Vice -Chancellor ” mean, respectively , the 
Chancellor, Vice -Chancellor and Pro -Vice -Chancellor of the University;  
(h) “College Development Council ” means the College Development Council of the University;  
(i) “Constituent College ” means a college maintained by the University;  
(j) “Court ” means the Court of the University;  
(k) “Department ” means a Department of Studies and includes a Centre of Studies;  
(l) “distance education system ” means the system of imparting education through any means of 
communication, such as broadcasting, telecasti ng, correspondence courses, seminars, contact 
programmes or the combination of any two or more such means;  
(m) “employee ” means any person appointed by the University and includes teachers and other 
staff of the University;  
(n) “Executive Council ” means the Executive Council of the University;  
(o) “Faculty ” means a Faculty of the University ; 
(p) “Hall” means a unit of residence or of corporate life for the students of the University, or of a 
College or an Institution, maintained by the University;  
(q) “Institution ” means an academic institution, not being a College, maintained by, or admitted 
to the privileges of, the University;  
                                                           
1. 1st April, 2007, vide notification N o. S.O. 512(E), dated 1st April, 2007, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, s ec. 3(ii). 4 
 (r) “Principal ” means the Head of a College or an Institution maintained by the University and 
includes, where there is no Principal, the person for the time being duly appointed to act as Principal, 
and in the absence of the Principal, or the acting Principal, a Vice -Principal duly appointed as such;  
(s) “recognised teachers ” means such persons as may be recognised by the University for the 
purpose of imparting instructions in a College or an Institution admitted to the privileges of the 
University;  
(t) “Regulations ” means the Regulations made by any authority of the University under this Act 
for the time being in force;  
(u) “Statutes ” and “Ordinances ” mean, respectively, the Statutes and the Ordinances of the 
University for the time being in force;  
(v) “teachers of the U niversity ” means Professors, Readers, Lecturers and such other persons as 
may be appointed for imparting instruction or conducting research in the University or in any College 
or Institution maintained by the University and are designated as teachers by th e Ordinances;  
(w) “University ” means the Rajiv Gandhi University established and incorporated as a University 
under this Act.  
3. Establishment of the University .—(1) The Rajiv Gandhi University in the State of Arunachal 
Pradesh, established under the Rajiv  Gandhi University Act, 1984  (Arunachal Pradesh Act 1 of 1984),  
shall be established as a body corporate under this Act by the same name of “Rajiv Gandhi University ”. 
(2) The first Chancellor, the first Vice -Chancellor and the first members of the Court, the Executive 
Council and the Academic Council, and all persons who may hereafter become such officers or members, 
so long as they continue to hold such office or membership, shall constitute the University.  
(3) The University shall have perpetual successi on and a common seal and shall sue and be sued by 
the said name.  
(4) The headquarters of the University shall be at Itanagar.  
4. Effect of establishment of the University .—On and from the dat e of commencement of this Act, — 
(a) any reference to the Rajiv Gandhi University in any contract or other instrument shall be 
deemed as a reference to the University;  
(b) all property, movable and immovable, of or belonging to the Rajiv Gandhi University shall 
vest in the University;  
(c) all rights and liabilities of the Rajiv Gandhi University shall be transferred to, and be the rights 
and liabilities of, the University;  
(d) every person employed by the Rajiv Gandhi University immediately before the 
commencement of this Act shall hold his office or service in the Univ ersity by the same tenure, at the 
same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges 
as to pension, leave, gratuity, provident fund and other matters as he would have held the same if this 
Act had not been enac ted, and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment is terminated 
or until such tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions are duly altered by the Statutes:  
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee, his emp loyment may 
be terminated by the University in accordance with the term of the contract with the employee or, if 
no provision is made therein in this behalf, on payment to him by the University of compensation 
equivalent to three months' remuneration in ca se of permanent employees and one month's 
remuneration in the case of other employees:  
Provided further that every person employed before the commencement of this Act, pending the 
execution of a contract under section 36, shall be deemed to have been appointed in accordance with 
the provisions of a contract consistent with the provisions of this Act and the Statutes:  
 5 
 Provided also that any reference, by whatever form of words, to the Vice -Chancellor and Pro -Vice -
Chancellor of the Rajiv Gandhi Universi ty in any law for the time being in force, or in any instrument or 
other document, shall be construed as a reference respectively to the Vice -Chancellor and the Pro -Vice -
Chancellor of the University;  
(e) the Vice -Chancellor of the Rajiv Gandhi University, appointed under the provisions of the Rajiv 
Gandhi University Act, 1 984 (Arunachal Pradesh Act 1 of 1984) shall be deemed to have been appointed 
as the Vice -Chancellor under this Act, and shall hold office for a period of three months or till such time 
the first Vice -Chancellor is appointed under section 47 of the Act, whichever is earlier; and  
(f) all Colleges, Institutions, Faculties and Departments affiliated to, or admitted to the privileges of, 
or maintained by, the Rajiv Gandhi University shall stand affiliated to, or admitted to the privilege of, or 
maintained by, the University.  
5. Objects of the University. —The objects of the University shall be to disseminate and advance 
knowledge by providing instructional and research facilities in such branches of learning as it may deem 
fit; to make provisions for integrated courses in humanities, natural and physical sciences, social sciences, 
forestry and other allied disciplines in the educational programmes of the University; to take appropriate 
measures for  promoting innovations in teaching -learning process , inter -disciplinary studies and research; 
to educate and train manpower for the development of the State of Arunachal Pradesh; and to pay special 
attention to the improvement of the social and economic co nditions and welfare of the people of that 
State, their intellectual, academic and cultural development.  
6. Powers of the Univers ity.—The University shall have  the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to provide for instructions in such branches of learning as t he University may, from time to time, 
determine and to make provisions for research and for the advancement and dissemination of knowledge;  
(ii) to grant, subject to such conditions as the University may determine, diplomas or certificates to, 
and confer d egrees or other academic distinctions on the basis of examinations, evaluation or any other 
method of testing, on persons, and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or other academic 
distinctions for good and sufficient cause;  
(iii) to organise and to undertake extramural studies, training and extension services;  
(iv) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner prescribed by the Statutes;  
(v) to provide facilities through the distance education system to such persons as it may determine;  
(vi) to institute Principalships, Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships and other teaching or 
academic positions, required by the University and to appoint persons to such Principalships, 
Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships  or other teaching or academic positions;  
(vii) to recognise an Institution of higher learning for such purposes as the University may determine 
and to withdraw such recognition;  
(viii) to recognise persons for imparting instructions in any College or Inst itution admitted to the 
privileges of the University;  
(ix) to appoint persons working in any other University or educational institution as teachers of the 
University for a specified period;  
(x) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make appointments thereto;  
(xi) to co -operate or collaborate or associate with any other University or authority or Institution of 
higher learning in such manner and for such purposes as the University may determine;  
(xii) to establish, with the prior appr oval of the Central Government, such Centres and specialised 
laboratories or other units for research and instruction as are, in the opinion of the University, necessary 
for the furtherance of its objects;  
(xiii) to institute and award fellowships, scholar ships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(xiv) to establish and maintain Colleges, Institutions and Halls;  6 
 (xv) to make provision for research and advisory services and for that purpose to enter into such 
arrangements with other institutions, industrial or other organisations, as the University may deem 
necessary;  
(xvi) to organise and conduct refresher courses, workshops, seminars and other programmes for 
teachers, evaluators and other academic staff;  
(xvii) to admit to its privileges Colleges and Instituti ons within the State of Arunachal Pradesh not 
maintained by the University; to withdraw all or any of those privileges in accordance with such 
conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes; torecognise, guide, supervise, and control Halls not 
maintained by the University and other accommodation for students, and to withdraw any such 
recognition;  
(xviii) to appoint on contract or otherwise visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors, Consultants, 
Scholars and such other persons who may contribute to the advan cement of the objects of the University;  
(xix) to confer autonomous status on a College or an Institution or a Department, as the case may be, 
in accordance with the Statutes;  
(xx) to determine standards of admission to the University, which may include ex amination, 
evaluation or any other method of testing;  
(xxi) to demand and receive payment of fees and other charges;  
(xxii) to supervise the residences of the students of the University and to make arrangements for 
promoting their health and general welfar e; 
(xxiii) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, including their code of 
conduct;  
(xxiv) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the employees, and to take such 
disciplinary measures in this regard as may be deemed by the University to be necessary;  
(xxv) to make arrangements for promoting the health and general welfare of the employees;  
(xxvi) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold and manage, and to dispose of, 
with the previous ap proval of the Central Government, any property, movable or immovable, including 
trust and endowment properties for the purposes of the University;  
(xxvii ) to borrow, with the approval of the Central Government, on the security of the property of the 
Univer sity, money for the purposes of the University;  
(xxviii ) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the 
attainment of all or any of its objects.  
7. Jurisdiction. —(1) The jurisdiction of the University shall extend to the whole of the State of 
Arunachal Pradesh.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force, no educational institution 
within the State of Arunachal Pradesh shall be associated in any way with or be admitted to any privileges  
of any other University incorporated by law in India, and any such privileges granted by any such other 
University to an educational institution within the State of Arunachal Pradesh prior to the commencement 
of this Act shall be deemed to be withdrawn on  the commencement of this Act:  
Provided that the Central Government may, by order in writing, direct that the provisions of this                
sub-section shall not apply in case of any educational institution specified in the order.  
8. University open to  all classes, castes and creed .—The University shall be open to persons of 
either sex and of whatever caste, creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt 
or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or pr ofession in order to entitle him to be 
appointed as a teacher of the University or to hold any other office therein or be admitted as a student in 
the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof:  7 
 Provided that nothing in  this section shall be deemed to prevent the University from making special 
provisions for the employment or admission of women, persons with disabilities or of persons belonging 
to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled Ca stes and the Scheduled Tribes.  
9. The Visitor. —(1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University.  
(2) The Visitor may, from time to time, appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress 
of the University, including Colleges and Institutions maintained by it, and to submit a report thereon; and 
upon receipt of that report, the Visitor may, after obtaining the views of the Executive Council thereon 
through the Vice -Chancellor, take such action and issue such directions as he consid ers necessary in 
respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report and the University shall be bound to comply with 
such directions.  
(3) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made by such person or persons as he 
may direct, of the University, its buildings, libraries, laboratories and equipment, and of any College or 
Institution maintained by the University or admitted to its privileges; and also of the examinations, 
teaching and other work conducted or done by the University an d to cause an inquiry to be made in like 
manner in respect of any matter connected with the administration or finances of the University, Colleges 
or Institutions.  
(4) The Visitor shall, in every matter referred to in sub -section ( 3), give notice of his in tention to 
cause an ins pection or inquiry to be made, — 
(a) to the University, if such inspection or inquiry is to be made in respect of the University or 
any College or Institution maintained by it, or  
(b) to the management of the College or Institution, i f the inspection or inquiry is to be made in 
respect of College or Institution admitted to the privileges of the University,  
and the University or the management, as the case may be, shall have the right to make such 
representations to the Visitor, as it m ay consider necessary . 
(5) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University or the management, as the 
case may be, the Visitor may cause to be made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in                 
sub-section ( 3). 
(6) Wh ere any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the University or the 
management shall be entitled to appoint a representative, who shall have the right to be present and be 
heard at such inspection or inquiry.  
(7) The Visitor may,  if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of the University or any College or 
Institution maintained by it, address the Vice -Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or 
inquiry together with such views and advice with regard to the  action to be taken thereon, as the Visitor 
may be pleased to offer, and on receipt of address made by the Visitor, the Vice -Chancellor shall 
communicate, to the Executive Council, the views of the Visitor with such advice as the Visitor may offer 
upon the  action to be taken thereon.  
(8) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of any College or Institution 
admitted to the privileges of the University, address the management concerned through the Vice -
Chancellor with reference to the  result of such inspection or inquiry, his views thereon and such advice as 
he may be pleased to offer upon the action to be taken thereon.  
(9) The Executive Council or the management, as the case may be, shall communicate, through the 
Vice -Chancellor to t he Visitor such action, if any, as it proposes to take or has been taken upon the result 
of such inspection or inquiry.  
(10) Where, the Executive Council or the management, does not, within a reasonable time, take action 
to the satisfaction of the Visitor,  the Visitor may, after considering any explanation furnished or 
representation made by the Executive Council or the management, issue such directions as he may think 
fit and the Executive Council or the management, as the case may be, shall comply with su ch directions.  8 
 (11) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Visitor may, by order in 
writing, annul any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with the Act, the Statutes or 
the Ordinances:  
Provided that before m aking any such order, he shall call upon the Registrar to show cause why such 
an order should not be made, and, if any cause is shown within a reasonable time, he shall consider the 
same.  
(12) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
10. The Chief Rector .—The Governor of the State of Arunachal Pradesh shall be the Chief Rector of 
the University.  
11. Officers of the University .—The following shall be the officers of the University: — 
(1) the Chancellor;  
(2) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(3) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(4) the Deans of Faculties;  
(5) the Registrar;  
(6) the Finance Officer;  
(7) the Controller of Examinations;  
(8) the Librarian; and  
(9) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be officers of th e University.  
12. The Chancellor .—(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the head of the University and shall, if present, 
preside at the Convocations of the University held for conferring degrees and meetings of the Court.  
13. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of the University and 
shall exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of the University and give effect to the 
decisions of all the authorities of the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may, if he is of the opinion that immediate action is necessary on any matter, 
exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under this Act and shall report to 
such authority at its next meeting the action taken by him on such matter:  
Provided that if the authority concerned is of the opinion that such action ought not to have been 
taken, it may refer the matter to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final:  
Provided further that any person in the service of the University who is a ggrieved by the action taken 
by the Vice -Chancellor under this sub -section shall have the right to represent against such action to the 
Executive Council within three months from the date on which decision on such action is communicated 
to him and thereupo n the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the action taken by the Vice -
Chancellor.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that any decision of any authority of the University is 
beyond the powers of the authority conferred by the pro visions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances 
or that any decision taken is not in the interest of the University, may ask the authority concerned to 
review its decision within sixty days of such decision and if the authority refuses to review the de cision 
either in whole or in part or no decision is taken by it within the said period of sixty days, the matter shall 
be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.  9 
 (5) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform su ch other duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
14. The Pro -Vice-Chancellor .—The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed in such manner and on 
such terms and conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duti es, as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
15. The Deans of Facultie s.—Every Dean of Faculty shall be appointed in such manner and shall 
exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
16. The  Registrar .—(1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and 
conditions of service as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreements, sign documents and authenticate 
records on behalf of the University and sha ll exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
17. The Finance Officer .—The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statute s. 
18. The Controller of Examinations. —The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed in such 
manner and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
19. The Librarian. —The Librarian shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and 
conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as ma y be prescribed by 
the Statutes.  
20. Other officers .—The manner of appointment and powers and duties of other officers of the 
University s hall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
21. Authorities of the University .—The following shall be the  authorities of the University: — 
(1) the Court;  
(2) the Executive Council;  
(3) the Academic Council;  
(4) the College Development Council;  
(5) the Board of Stud ies; 
(6) the Finance Committee; and  
(7) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the 
University.  
22. The Court .—(1) The constitution of the Court and the term of office of its members shall be 
prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that such number of members as may be prescribed by the Statutes shall be elected from 
among the teachers, employees and students of the University.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall have the followin g powers and  functions, 
namely:— 
(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of the University and to 
suggest measures for the improvement and development of the University;  
(b) to consider and pass resolutions on the annual report and the annu al accounts of the University 
and the audit report on such accounts;  
(c) to advise the Visitor in respect of any matter which may be referred to it for advice; and  
(d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
  10 
 23. The Executive Council .—(1) The Executive Council shall be the principal executive body of the 
University.  
(2) The constitution of the Executive Council, the term of office of its members and its powers and 
functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that such number of members as may be prescribed by the Statutes shall be from among the 
elected members of the Court.  
24. The Academic Council .—(1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the 
University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, co -ordinate 
and exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University.  
(2) The constitution of the Academic Council, the term of office of its members and its powers and 
funct ions shall be prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that such number of members as may be prescribed by the Statutes shall be from among the 
elected members of the Court who are teachers of the University.  
25. Th e College Development Council. —(1) The Colleg e Development Council shall be responsible 
for admitting Colleges to the privileges of the University.  
(2) The constitution of the College Development Council, the term of office of its members and its 
powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statut es. 
26. The Board of Studies .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Studies shall be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
27. The Finance Committee .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes . 
28. Other authorities of the University .—The constitution, powers and functions of other  
authorities, as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the University, shall be prescribed 
by the Statutes.  
29. Power to make Statutes .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all 
or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of authorities and other bodies of the University, as 
may be constituted from time to time;  
(b) the appointmen t and continuance in office of the members of the said authorities and bodies, 
the filling up of vacancies of members, and all other matters relating to those authorities and other 
bodies for which it may be necessary or desirable to provide;  
(c) the appoi ntment, powers and duties of the officers of the University and their emoluments;  
(d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees of the University, their 
emoluments and conditions of service;  
(e) the recognition and approval of persons  as recognised teachers and approved teachers;  
(f) the appointment of teachers, academic staff working in any other University or organisation 
for a specific period for undertaking a joint project;  
(g) the conditions of service of employees including provi sions for pension, insurance, provident 
fund, the manner of termination of service and disciplinary action;  
(h) the principles governing the seniority of service of the employees of the University;  
(i) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute betw een employees or students and the 
University;  
(j) the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council by any employee or student against the 
action of any officer or authority of the University;  11 
 (k) the conferment of autonomous status on a College or an Institution or a Department;  
(l) the establishment and abolition of Faculties, Departments, Centres, Halls, Colleges and 
Institutions;  
(m) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(n) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinct ions;  
(o) the conditions under which Colleges and Institutions may be admitted to the privileges of the 
University and the withdrawal of such privileges;  
(p) the management of Colleges and Institutions established by the University;  
(q) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the University;  
(r) the maintenance of discipline among the employees and students; and  
(s) all other matters which by this Act are to be or may b e provided for by the Statutes.  
30. Statutes how to be made .—(1) The first Statutes are those set out in the Schedule.  
(2) The Executive Council may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend or 
repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that the Executive Council shall not mak e, amend or repeal any Statutes affecting the status, 
powers or constitution of any authority of the University until such authority has been given an 
opportunity of expressing an opinion in writing on the proposed changes, and any opinion so expressed 
shall be considered by the Executive Council.  
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require 
the assent of the Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold assent or remit to the Executive Council for 
re-consideration.  
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless 
it has been assented to by the Visitor.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may make new or 
additional Statutes or amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1), during the period of three 
years immediately after the commencement of this Act:  
Provided that the Visitor may, on the expiry of the said period of three years, make, withi n one year 
from the date of such expiry, such detailed Statutes as he may consider necessary and such detailed 
Statutes shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may direct the 
University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by him and if the 
Executive Council is unable to implement such direction within sixty days of its receipt, the Visitor may, 
after considering the reasons, if any, communicated by the Executive Council for its inability to comply 
with such direction, make or amend the Statutes suitably.  
31. Power to make Ordinances .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the 
Ordinances may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of the 
University;  
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;  
(d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions, the qualifications 
for the same and the means to be taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the same;  
(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission to the 
examinations, degrees and diplomas of the University;  12 
 (f) the conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(g) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and mann er of appointment and the 
duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators;  
(h) the conditions of residence of the students of the University;  
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence, and teaching of women 
students and  the prescribing of special courses of studies for them;  
(j) the establishment of Centres of Studies, Boards of Studies, Specialised Laboratories and other 
Committees;  
(k) the manner of co -operation and collaboration with other Universities, Institutions a nd other 
agencies not involving the carrying on of any activity for profit including learned bodies or 
associations;  
(l) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is considered necessary for 
improving the academic life of the Universi ty; 
(m) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(n) the supervision of management of Colleges and Institutions admitted to the privileges of the 
University;  
(o) the setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances of employees; and  
(p) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes, are to be or may be, provided for by the 
Ordinances.  
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice -Chancellor with the previous approval of the 
Central Government an d the Ordinances so made may be amended, repealed or added to at any time by 
the Executive Council in the manner prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that till such time as the first Ordinances are not so made by the Vice -Chancellor, in respect 
of the matt ers that are to be provided for by the Ordinances under this Act and the Statutes, the relevant 
provisions of the Statutes and the Ordinances of the Rajiv Gandhi University in force immediately before 
the commencement of this Act shall be applicable insofa r as they are not inconsistent with the provisions 
of this Act and the Statutes.  
32. Regulations .—The authorities of the University may make Regulations, consistent with this Act, 
the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business and th at of the Committees, if any, 
appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances, in the manner 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
33. Annual report .—(1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of 
the Executive Council, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the University 
towards the fulfilment of its objects and shall be submitted to the Court on or after such date as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes and the Court shall cons ider the report in its annual meeting.  
(2) The Court shall submit the annual report to the Visitor along with its comments, if any. 
(3) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub -section ( 1), shall also be submitted to the 
Central Government, which  shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of 
Parliament.  
34. Annual accounts .—(1) The annual accounts and balance -sheet of the University shall be 
prepared under the directions of the Executive Council and shall, once at least  every year and at intervals 
of not more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or by such 
persons as he may authorise in this behalf.  
(2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report thereon shall b e submitted to the 
Court and the Visitor along with the observations of the Executive Council.  13 
 (3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall be brought to the notice of the 
Court and the observations of the Court, if any, shall, after being considered by the Executive Council, be 
submitted to the Visitor.  
(4) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report as submitted to the Visitor, shall also 
be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, c ause the same to be laid before 
both Houses of Parliament . 
(5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before both Houses of Parliament shall be 
published in the Official Gazette.  
35. Returns and information .—The University shall furnish to the Central Government such returns 
or other information with respect to its property or activities as the Central Government may, from time to 
time, require.  
36. Condi tions of service of employees .—(1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed 
under  a written contract, which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be furnished 
to the employee concerned.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any employee shall, at the 
request of the employee, be r eferred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by 
the Executive Council, one member nominated by the employee concerned and an umpire appointed by 
the Visitor.  
(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final, and no suit shall lie in any civil court in respect of the 
matters decided by the Tribunal:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall preclude the employee from availing of the judicial 
remedies available under articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution.  
(4) Every request ma de by the employee under sub -section ( 2), shall be deemed to be a submission to 
arbitration upon the terms of this section within the meaning of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996  
(26 of 1996) . 
(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribu nal shall  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
37. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students .—(1) Any student 
or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed from the rolls of the University by the 
orders or resolutio n of the Vice -Chancellor, Discipline Committee or Examination Committee, as the case 
may be, and who has been debarred from appearing at the examinations of the University for more than 
one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt of such orders o r copy of such resolution by him, 
appeal to the Executive Council and the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the decision 
of the Vice -Chancellor or the Committee, as the case may be.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action take n by the University against a student shall, 
at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of                             
sub-sections ( 2), (3), (4) and ( 5) of section 36 shall, as far as may be, apply to a reference made under this 
sub-section.  
38. Right to appeal .—Every employee or student of the University or of a College or Institution 
maintained by the University or admitted to its privileges shall, notwithstanding anything contained in 
this Act, have a right to appeal within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes, to the Executive 
Council against the decision of any officer or authority of the University or of the Principal or the 
management of any College or an Institution, as the case may be, a nd thereupon the Executive Council 
may confirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed against.  
39. Provident and pension funds .—(1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its 
employees such provident or pension fund or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit in such 
manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Where such provident fund or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central Government may 
declare that the provisions of the Provident Fu nds Act, 1925  (19 of 1925) , shall apply to such fund, as if it 
were a Government provident fund.  14 
 40. Disputes as to constitution of authorities and bodies .—If any question arises as to whether any 
person has been duly elected or appointed as, or is entitle d to be, a member of any authority or other body 
of the University, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.  
41. Filling of casual vacanci es.—All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio  
members) o f any authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the 
person or body who appoints, elects or co -opts the member whose place has become vacant and person 
appointed, elected or co -opted to a casual vacancy shall be a memb er of such authority or body for the 
residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member.  
42. Proceedings of authorities or bodies not invalidat ed by vacancies .—No act or proceedings of 
any authority or other body of the University shall be invalid merely by reason of the existence of a 
vacancy or vacancies among its members.  
43. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any 
officer or other employee of the University for  anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
44. Mode of proof of University record .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872)  or in any other law for the time being in force, a copy of any receipt, 
application, notice, order, proceeding or resolution of any authority or other body of the University, or 
any other document in possession of the University, or any entry in an y register duly maintained by the 
University, if certified by the Registrar, shall be received as prima facie  evidence of such receipt, 
application, notice, order, proceeding, resolution or document or the existence of entry in the register and 
shall be ad mitted as evidence of the matters and transactions therein where the original thereof would, if 
produced, have been admissible in evidence.  
45. Power to remove difficultie s.—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period o f thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the order or both Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the v alidity of anything previously done under that order.  
46. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette a nd to be laid 
before Parliament .—(1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be published 
in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation or both Hou ses agree that the Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation should not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulmen t shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that Statute, Ordinance or Regulation.  
  15 
 (3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shall include the power to give 
retrospective effect, from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the Statutes, 
Ordinances or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be  given to any Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such S tatute, 
Ordinance or Regulation may be applicable.  
47. Transitional provisions .—Notwithstanding anything containe d in this Act and the Statutes, — 
(a) the first Chancellor and first Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Central Government in 
such manner  and on such conditions as may be deemed fit and each of the said officer shall hold 
office for such term, not exceeding five years, as may be specified by the Central Government;  
(b) the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Central Government 
and each of the said officers shall hold office for a term of three years;  
(c) the first Court and the first Executive Council shall consist of not more than thirty -one 
members and eleven members, respectively, who shall be nominated  by the Central Government and 
shall hold office for a term of three years;  
(d) the first College Development Council shall consist of not more than eleven members, who 
shall be nominated by the Central Government and they shall hold office for a term of t hree years;  
(e) the first Academic Council shall consist of not more than twenty -one members, who shall be 
nominated by the Central Government and they shall hold office for a term of three years:  
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or  authorities, the same shall be filled by 
appointment or nomination, as the case may be, by the Central Government, and the person so 
appointed or nominated shall hold office for so long as the officer or member in whose place he is 
appointed or nominated would have held office, if such vacancy had not occurred.  
48. Repeal of Arunachal Pradesh Act 1 of 1984 .—(1) The Rajiv Gandhi University Act, 1984  is 
hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repea l,— 
(a) all appointments made, orders issued, degrees and other academic distinctions conferred, 
diplomas and certificates awarded, privileges granted, or other things done under the Rajiv Gandhi 
University Act, 1984  (Arunachal Pradesh Act 1 of 1984) , shall be deemed to have been respectively 
made, issued, confer red, awarded, granted or done under the corresponding provisions of this Act 
and, except as otherwise provided by or under this Act or the Statutes, continue in force unless and 
until they are superseded by any order made under this Act or the Statutes; an d 
(b) all proceedings of Selection Committees for the appointment or promotion of teachers that 
took place before the commencement of this Act and all actions of the Executive Council in respect of 
the recommendations of such Selection Committees where no orders of appointment on the basis 
thereof were passed before the commencement of this Act shall, notwithstanding that the procedure 
for selection has been modified by this Act, be deemed to have been valid but further proceeding in 
connection with such pe nding selections shall be taken in accordance with the provisions of this Act 
and be continued from the stage where they stood immediately before such commencement, except if 
the concerned authorities take, with the approval of the Visitor, a decision to t he contrary.  
49. Amendment of Act 24 of 1973 .—In the North -Eastern Hill University Act, 1973, — 
(i) in section 1, in sub -section ( 2), for the words “States of Meghalaya and Arunachal Pradesh ”, 
the words “State of Meghalaya ” shall be substituted;  
(ii) in section 2, in clause ( l), for the words “States of Meghalaya and Arunachal Pradesh ”, the 
words “State of Meghalaya ” shall be substituted;  
(iii) in section 6, in sub -section ( 1), for the words “States of Meghalaya and Arunachal Pradesh ”, 
the words “State of  Meghalaya ” shall be substituted.  
 16 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 30)  
THE STATUTES OF THE UNIVERSITY  
1. The Chancellor. —(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less 
than three persons recommended by the Executive Council from amongst persons of eminence in the 
academic or public life of the country:  
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons so recommended, he may call for 
fresh recommendations from the Executive Council.  
(2) The Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years and shall not be eligible for re -
appointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office, the Chancellor shall continue to hold 
office until his successor enters upon his office.  
2. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of 
not less than three persons who shall be recommended by a Committee as constituted under clause ( 2): 
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons included in th e panel, he may call 
for an extended fresh panel.  
(2) The Committee referred to in clause ( 1) shall consist of three persons, out of whom two shall be 
nominated by the Executive Council and one by the Visitor and the nominee of the Visitor shall be the 
convener of the Committee:  
Provided that none of the members of the Committee shall be an employee of the University or an 
Institution maintained by, or admitted to the privileges of, the University or a member of any authority of 
the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters 
upon his office, or until he attains the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier , and he shall not be 
eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of five years, he shall continue in office 
until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office:  
Provided further that the Visitor may dir ect any Vice -Chancellor after his term has expired, to 
continue in office for such period, not exceeding a total period of one year, as may be specified by him.  
(5) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Vice -Chancellor shall be as follo ws:— 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor shall be paid a monthly salary and allowances, other than house rent 
allowance, at the rates fixed by the Central Government from time to time and he shall be entitled, 
without payment of rent, to use a furnished residence througho ut his term of office and no charge 
shall fall on the Vice -Chancellor in respect of th e maintenance of such residence;  
(ii) the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to such terminal benefits and allowances as may be fixed 
by the Central Government from time t o time:  
Provided that where an employee of the University, or a College or an Institution maintained by, 
or admitted to the privileges of, the University, or of any other University or any College or 
Institution maintained by or admitted to the privileges of, such other University, is appointed as the 
Vice -Chancellor, he may be allowed to continue to  contribute to any provident fund of which he is a 
member and the University shall contribute to the account of such person in that provident fund at the 
same rate at which the person had been contributing immediately before his appointment as the                   
Vice -Chancellor:  
  17 
 Provided further that where such employee had been member of any pension scheme, the 
University shall make the necessary contribution to such  scheme.  
(iii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to travelling allowance at such ra tes as may be fixed by 
the Executive Council.  
(iv) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full pay at the rate of thirty days in a 
calendar year and the leave shall be credited to his account in advance in two half -yearly in  stalments 
of fifteen  days each on the first day of January and July every year:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor assumes or relinquishes charge of the office of the                  
Vice -Chancellor during the currency of a half year, the leave shall be credited proportion ately at the 
rate of two and -a-half days for each completed month of service.  
(v) In addition to the leave referred to in sub -clause ( iv), the Vice -Chancellor shall also be entitled 
to half -pay leave at the rate of twenty days for each completed year of service, and half -pay leave 
may also be availed of as commuted leave on full pay on medical certificate:  
Provided that when such commuted leave is availed of, twice the amount of half -pay leave shall 
be debited against half -pay leave due.  
(6) If the office  of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or otherwise, or if he 
is unable to perform his duties due to ill -health or any other cause, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall perform 
the duties of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the Pro -Vice -Chancellor is not available, the senior -most Professor shall perform the 
duties of the Vice -Chancellor until a new Vice -Chancellor assumes office or the existing Vice -Chancellor 
resumes the duties of his office, as the case may be.  
3. Powers and dutie s of the Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be ex officio  
Chairman of the Executive Council, the Academic Council and the Finance Committee and shall, in the 
absence of the Chancellor, preside at the Convocations held for conferring degrees and  at meetings of the 
Court.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and address, any meeting of any authority 
or other body of the University, but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he is a member of such 
authority or body.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice -Chancellor to see that this Act, the Statutes, the Ordinances and the 
Regulations are duly observed and he shall have all the powers necessary to ensure such observance.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall have all the powers ne cessary for the proper maintenance of discipline 
in the University and he may delegate any such powers to such person or persons as he deems fit.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall have the power to convene or cause to be convened the meetings of the 
Executive Council, the Academic Council and the Finance Committee.  
4. Pro -Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Executive Council 
on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that where the recommendation of the Vice -Chance llor is not accepted by the Executive 
Council, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor who may either appoint the person recommended by 
the Vice -Chancellor or ask the Vice -Chancellor to recommend another person to the Executive Council:  
Provided furth er that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor, 
appoint a Professor to discharge the duties of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor in addition to his own duties as a 
Professor.  
(2) The term of office of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be suc h as may be decided by the Executive 
Council but it shall not in any case exceed five years or until the expiration of the term of office of the 
Vice -Chancellor, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that a Pro -Vice -Chancellor whose term of office has expired sha ll be eligible for                            
re-appointment:  18 
 Provided further that, in any case, a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall retire on attaining the age of sixty -five 
years:  
Provided also that a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall, while discharging the duties of t he Vice -Chancellor 
under clause ( 6) of Statute 2, continue in office notwithstanding the expiration of his term of office as 
Pro-Vice -Chancellor, until the Vice -Chancellor resumes office or a new Vice -Chancellor assumes office, 
as the case may be.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be such 
as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall assist the Vice -Chancellor in respect of such matters as may be 
specified by the Vice -Chan cellor in this behalf, from time to time, and shall also exercise such powers 
and perform such duties as may be assigned or delegated to him by the Vice -Chancellor.  
5. Deans of Faculties .—(1) Every Dean of Faculty shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor from 
amongst the Professors in the Faculty by rotation in the order of seniority for a period of three years:  
Provided that in case there is only one Professor or no Professor in a Faculty, the Dean shall be 
appointed, for the time being, from amongst the Professor, if any, and the Readers in the Faculty by 
rotation in the order of seniority:  
Provided further that a Dean on attaining the age of sixty -two years shall cease to hold office as such.  
(2) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is,  by reason of illness, absence or any 
other cause, unable to perform duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by the 
senior -most Professor or Reader, as the case may be, in the Faculty.  
(3) The Dean shall be the Head of the Faculty  and shall be responsible for the conduct and 
maintenance of the standards of teaching and research in the Faculty and shall have such other functions 
as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at a ny meeting of the Boards of Studies 
or Committees of the Faculty, as the case may be, but shall not have the right to vote thereat unless he is a 
member thereof.  
6. The Registrar .—(1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the 
recomme ndation of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and shall be a whole -time salaried 
officer of the University.  
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for re -appointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and c onditions of service of the Registrar shall be such as may 
be prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time:  
Provided that the Registrar shall retire on attaining the age of sixty -two years:  
Provided further that a Registrar shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty -two years, 
continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office or until the expiry of a period 
of one year, whichever is earlier.  
 (4) When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registra r is, by reason of illness, absence 
or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed 
by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) (a) The Registrar shall have power to tak e disciplinary action against such of the employees, 
excluding teachers and other academic staff, as may be specified in the order of the Executive Council 
and to suspend them pending inquiry, to administer warnings to them or to impose on them the penalty  of 
censure or the withholding of increment:  
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him.  19 
 (b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice -Chancellor against any order of the Registrar imposing any of the 
penalties specified in sub -clause ( a). 
(c) In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the power of the Registrar is called 
for, the Registrar shall, upon the conclus ion of the inquiry, make a report to the Vice -Chancellor along 
with his recommendations:  
Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Executive Council against an order of the Vice -Chancellor 
imposing any penalty.  
(6) The Registrar shall be ex officio  Secretar y of the Executive Council, the Academic Council and 
the College Development Council, but shall not be deemed to be a member of any of these authorities and 
he shall be ex officio  Member -Secretary of the Court.  
(7) It shall be the duty of the Registrar — 
(a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such other property of the University 
as the Executive Council shall commit to his charge;  
(b) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council, the College Development Council and of any Committees appointed by those authorities;  
(c) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council, the College Development Council and of any Committees appointed by thos e authorities;  
(d) to conduct the official correspondence of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council and the College Development Council;  
(e) to supply to the Visitor, copies of the agenda of the meetings of the authorities of the 
University  as soon as they are issued and the minutes of such meetings;  
(f) to represent the University in suits or proceedings by or against the University, sign powers of 
attorney and verify pleadings or depute his representative for the purpose; and  
(g) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances or the 
Regulations or as may be required from time to time, by the Executive Council or the Vice -
Chancellor.  
7. The Finance Officer .—(1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed by  the Executive Council on 
the recommendations of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time 
salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The Finance Officer shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible fo r                        
re-appointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Finance Officer shall be such as 
may be prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time:  
Provided that the Finance Officer shall retire on at taining the age of sixty -two years:  
Provided further that the Finance Officer shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty -two 
years, continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office or until the expiry of a 
period of  one year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Finance Officer is vacant or when the Finance Officer is, by reason of 
illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall 
be performed by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) The Finance Officer shall be ex officio  Secretary of the Finance Committee, but shall not be 
deemed to be a member of such Committee.  
(6) The Finance Officer shall — 
(a) exercise general  supervision over the funds of the University and shall advise it as regards its 
financial policy; and  20 
 (b) perform such other financial functions as may be assigned to him by the Executive Council or 
as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(7) Subject to the control of the Executive Council, the Finance Officer shall — 
(a) hold and manage the property and investments of the University including trust and endowed 
property;  
(b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Executive Council for recurring  and non -recurring 
expenditure for a year are not exceeded and that all moneys are expended on the purpose for which 
they are granted or allotted;  
(c) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget of the University and for 
their pres entation to the Executive Council;  
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank balances and on the state of 
investments;  
(e) watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advise on the methods of collection 
employed;  
(f) ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture and equipment are maintained up -to-date 
and that stock -checking is conducted, of equipment and other consumable materials in all offices, 
Departments, University, Institutes, Centres and Specialised Laboratories;  
(g) bring to the notice of the Vice -Chancellor unauthorised expenditure and other financial 
irregularities and suggest disciplinary action against persons at fault; and  
(h) call for from any office, Department, Centre, Laboratory, College or Institution m aintained by 
the University any information or returns that he may consider necessary for the performance of his 
duties.  
(8) Any receipt given by the Finance Officer or the person or persons duly authorised in this behalf by 
the Executive Council for any m oney payable to the University shall be sufficient discharge for payment 
of such money.  
8. The Controller of Examinations .—(1) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed by the 
Executive Council on the recommendations of a Selection Committee const ituted for the purpose and he 
shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for 
re-appointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditio ns of service of the Controller of Examinations shall 
be such as may be prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time:  
Provided that the Controller of Examinations shall retire on attaining the age of sixty -two years:  
Provided further that the Controller of Examinations shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of 
sixty -two years, continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office or until the 
expiry of a period of one year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the offic e of the Controller of Examinations is vacant or when the Controller of 
Examinations is, by reason of illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his 
office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for 
the purpose.  
(5) The Controller of Examinations shall arrange for and superintend the examinations of the 
University in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances.  
9. The Librarian .—(1) The Librarian shall be appointed by the Executiv e Council on the 
recommendations of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time 
salaried officer of the University.  21 
 (2) The Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to him by 
the E xecutive Council.  
10. Meetings of the Court .—(1) An annual meeting of the Court shall be held on a date to be fixed 
by the Executive Council unless some other date has been fixed by the Court in respect of any year.  
(2) At an annual meeting of the Court, a report on the working of the University during the previous 
year, together with a statement of the receipt s and expenditure, the balance -sheet as audited, and the 
financial estimates for the next year shall be presented.  
(3) A copy of the statement of re ceipts and expenditure, the balance -sheet and the financial estimates 
referred to in clause ( 2) shall be sent to every member of the Court at least seven days before the date of 
the annual meeting.  
(4) Special meetings of the Court may be convened by the E xecutive Council or the Vice -Chancellor 
or if there is no Vice -Chancellor, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor or if there is no Pro -Vice -Chancellor, by the 
Registrar.  
(5) Eleven members of the Court shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Court.  
11. Quorum for meeti ng of the Executive Council .—Seven members of the Executive Council 
shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Executive Council.  
12. Powers and fun ctions of the Executive Council .—(1) The Executive Council shall have the 
power of management and administration of the revenues and property of the University and the conduct 
of all administrative affairs of the University not otherwise provided for.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Executive Council shal l, 
in addition to all other powers vested in it, hav e the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to create teaching and other academic posts, to determine the number and emoluments of such 
posts and to define the duties and conditions of service of Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other 
academic staff:  
Provided that no action shall be taken by the Executive Council in respect of the number and 
qualifications of teachers and other academic staff otherwise than after consideration of the 
recommendations of the Academic Council;  
(ii) to appoint such Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other academic sta ff, as may be necessary, 
on the recommendation of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and to fill -up 
temporary vacancies therein;  
(iii) to recognise persons as University recognised teachers in the manner prescribed by the 
Ordinances;  
(iv) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts (including Chairs) and to make 
appointments thereto in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(v) to grant leave of absence to any officer of the University other than the Chancellor and th e 
Vice -Chancellor, and to make necessary arrangements for the discharge of the functions of such 
officer during his absence;  
(vi) to regulate and enforce discipline among employees in accordance with the Statutes and the 
Ordinances;  
(vii) to manage and reg ulate the finances, accounts, investments, property, business and all other 
administrative affairs of the University and for that purpose to appoint such agents as it may think fit;  
(viii) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non -recurring ex penditure for a year on the 
recommendation of the Finance Committee;  
(ix) to invest any money belonging to the University, including any unapplied income, in such 
stocks, funds, shares or securities, from time to time as it may think fit or in the purchase  of 
immovable property in India, with the like powers of varying such investment from time to time;  22 
 (x) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immovable property on behalf of the 
University;  
(xi) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and app aratus and other means needed for carrying 
on the work of the University;  
(xii) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on behalf of the University;  
(xiii) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and if thought fit, to redress any grievances of the empl oyees 
and students of the University who may, for any reason, feel aggrieved;  
(xiv) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if necessary, to remove them, and to fix their fees, 
emoluments and travelling and other allowances, after consulting the Academic Council;  
(xv) to select a common seal for the University and provide for the custody and use of such seal;  
(xvi) to make such special arrangements as may be necessary for the residence of women 
students;  
(xvii) to institute fellowships, scholarships, stude ntships, medals and prizes;  
(xviii) to provide for the appointment of Visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors, Consultants and 
Scholars and determine the terms and conditions of such appointments; and  
(xix) to exercise such other powers and perform such o ther duties as may be conferred or imposed 
on it by the Act or the Statutes.  
13. Quorum for meetings of the Academic Council .—Nine members of the Academic Council 
shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Academic Council.  
14. Powers and functions of the A cademic Counci l.—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the 
Statutes and the Ordinances, the Academic Council shall, in addition to all other powers vested in it, hav e 
the following powers, namely: — 
(a) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University and to give 
directions regarding methods of instruction, co -ordination of teaching among the Colleges and the 
Institutions, evaluation of research and improvement of academic standards;  
(b) to bring about and promote inter -Facult y co -ordination and to establish or appoint such 
committees or boards as may be deemed necessary for the purpose;  
 (c) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own initiative, or on a reference 
by a Faculty or the Executive Council, a nd to take appropriate action thereon; and  
(d) to frame such Regulations and rules consistent with the Statutes and the Ordinances regarding 
the academic functioning of the University, discipline, residence, admissions, award of fellowships 
and studentship s, fees, concessions, corporate life and attendance.  
15. Faculties and Departments .—(1) The University shall have such Faculties as may be specified 
in the Statutes.  
(2) Every Faculty shall have a Faculty Board and the members of the first Faculty Board sh all be 
nominated by the Executive Council for a period of three years.  
(3) The composition, powers and functions of a Faculty Board shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The conduct of the meetings of a Faculty Board and the quorum required for such m eetings shall 
be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(5) (a) Every Faculty shall consist of such Departments as may be assigned to it by the Ordinances:  
Provided that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic Council, establish 
Centres of Studies to which may be assigned such teachers of the University as the Executive Council 
may consider necessary.  
  23 
 (b) Each Department shall consist of the following membe rs, namely: — 
(i) Teachers of the Department;  
(ii) Persons conducting research in the  Department ; 
(iii) Dean of the Faculty;  
(iv) Honorary Professors, if any, attached to the Department; and  
(v) Such other persons as may be members of the Department in accordance with the provisions 
of the Ordinances.  
16. Board of Studie s.—(1) Each Department shall have a Board of Studies.  
(2) The constitution of the Board of Studies and the term of office of its members shall be prescribed 
by the Ordinances.  
(3) Subject to the overall control and supervision of the Academic Council, the functions of  a Board 
of Studies shall be to approve subjects for research for various degrees and other requirements of research 
degrees and to recommend to the concerned Faculty Board in the manne r prescribed by the Ordinances — 
(a) courses of studies and appointment of examiners for courses, but excluding research degrees;  
(b) appointment of supervisors for research; and  
(c) measures for the improvement of the standard of teaching and research:  
Provided that the above functions of a Board of Studies shall, during the period of three years 
immediately after the commencement of the Act, be performed by the Department.  
17. The Finance Committee. —(1) The Finance Committee shall consist of the following me mbers, 
namely:— 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(ii) the Pro-Vice -Chancellor;  
(iii) one person to be nominated by the Court;  
(iv) three persons to be nominated by the Executive Council, out of whom at least one shall be a 
member of the Executive Council; and  
(v) three persons to be nominated by the Visitor.  
(2) Five members of the Finance Committee shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Finance 
Committee.  
(3) All the members of the Finance Committee, other than ex officio  members, shall hold office for a 
term of three years.  
(4) A member of the Finance Committe e shall have the right to record a minute of dissent if he does 
not agree with any decision of the Finance Committee.  
(5) The Finance Committee shall meet at least thrice every year to examine the accounts and to 
scrutinise proposals for expenditure.  
(6) All proposals relating to creation of posts, and those items which have not been included in the 
Budget, shall be examined by the Finance Committee before they are considered by the Executive 
Council.  
(7) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of t he University prepared by the Finance Officer 
shall be laid before the Finance Committee for consideration and comments and thereafter submitted to 
the Executive Council for approval.  
(8) The Finance Committee shall recommend limits for the total recurring  expenditure and the total 
non-recurring expenditure for the year, based on the income and resources of the University (which, in the 
case of productive works, may include the proceeds of loans).  24 
 18. Selection Committee s.—(1) There shall be Selection Committees for making recommendations 
to the Executive Council for appointment to the posts of Professor, Reader, Lecturer, Registrar, Finance 
Officer, Librarian and Principals of Colleges and Institutions maintained by the University.  
(2) The Selection Co mmittee for appointment to the posts specified in Column 1 of the Table below 
shall consist of the Vice -Chancellor, a nominee of the Visitor and the persons specified in the 
corresponding entry in Column 2 of the said Table:  
TABLE  
 
1 2 
Professor  (i) The D ean of the Faculty.  
(ii) The Head of the Department if he is a 
Professor.  
(iii) Three persons not in the service of the 
University, nominated by the Executive Council, 
out of a panel of names recommended by the 
Academic Council for their special knowledge of, 
or interest in, the subject with which the Professor 
will be concerned.  
Reader/Lecturer  (i) The Head of the Department.  
(ii) One Professor nominated by the Vice -
Chancellor.  
(iii) Two persons not in the service of the 
University, nominated by the Executive Council, 
out of a panel of names recommended by the 
Academic Council for their special knowledge of, 
or interest in, the subject with which the 
Reader/Lecturer will be concerned.  
Registrar/Finance Officer  (i) Two members of the Executive Council  
nominated by it.  
(ii) One person not in the service of the University 
nominated by the Executive Council.  
Librarian  (i) Two persons not in the service of the University 
who have special knowledge of the subject of the 
Library Science/Library Administrati on nominated 
by the Executive Council.  
(ii) One person not in the service of the University 
nominated by the Executive Council.  
         Principal of College or  
         Institution    maintained  
         by the University.  Three persons not in the servi ce of the University 
Institution maintained of whom two shall be 
nominated by the Executiveby the University. 
Council and one by the Academic Council for their 
special knowledge of, or interest in, a subject in 
which instruction is being provided by the Co llege 
or Institution.  
 
 25 
 Note  1.—Where the appointment is being made for an inter -disciplinary project, the head of the 
project shall be deemed to be the Head of the Department concerned.  
Note  2.—The Professor to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor shall be a Professor concerned with 
the speciality for which the selection is being made and the Vice -Chancellor shall consult the Head of the 
Department and the Dean of Faculty before nominating the Professor.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor, or in his absence the Pro -Vice -Chancellor, shall convene and preside at the 
meeting of the Selection Committee:  
Provided that the meeting of the Selection Committee shall be fixed after prior consultation with, and 
subject to the convenience of Visitor's nominee and the experts nom inated by the Executive Council:  
Provided further that the proceedings of the Selection Commi ttee shall not be valid unless, — 
(a) where the number of Visitor's nominee and the persons nominated by the Executive Council is 
four in all, at least three of the m attend the meeting; and  
(b) where the number of Visitor's nominee and the persons nominated by the Executive Council is 
three in all, at least two of them attend the meeting.  
(4) The procedure to be followed by the Selection Committee shall be laid down in the Ordinances.  
(5) If the Executive Council is unable to accept the recommendations made by the Selection 
Committee, it shall record its reasons and submit the case to the Visitor for final orders.  
(6) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made  in the manner indicated below: — 
(i) If the temporary vacancy is for duration longer than one academic session, it shall be filled on 
the advice of the Selection Committee in accordance with the procedure indicated in the foregoing 
clauses:  
Provided that if the  Vice -Chancellor is satisfied that in the interests of work it is necessary to fill 
the vacancy, the appointment may be made on a purely temporary basis on the advice of a local 
Selection Committee referred to in sub -clause ( ii) for a period not exceeding six months.  
(ii) If the temporary vacancy is for a period less than a year, an appointment to such vacancy shall 
be made on the recommendation of a local Selection Committee consisting of the Dean of the Faculty 
concerned , the Head of the Department  and a  nominee of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and the Head of the Department, 
the Selection Committee may contain two nominees of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that in the case of sudden casual vacancies of teaching posts caused by death or 
any other reason, the Dean may, in consultation with the Head of the Department concerned, make a 
temporary appointment for a month and report to the Vice -Chancellor and the Registrar about such 
appointment.  
(iii) No teacher appointed temporarily shall, if he is not recommended by a regular Selection 
Committee for appointment under the Statutes, be continued in service on such temporary 
employment, unless he is subsequently selected by a local Selection Committee or a regular Selection 
Committee, for a temporary or permanent appointment, as the case may be.  
19. Special mode of appointment .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 18, the 
Executive Cou ncil may invite a person of high academic distinction and professional attainments to 
accept a post of Professor or any other equivalent academic post in the University on such terms and 
conditions as it deems fit and on the person agreeing to do so appoin t him to the post.  
(2) The Executive Council may appoint a teacher or any other academic staff working in any other 
University or organisation for undertaking a joint project in accordance with the manner laid down in the 
Ordinances.  
  26 
 20. Appointment for a fixed tenure .—The Executive Council may appoint a person selected in 
accordance with the procedure laid down in Statute 18 for a fixed tenure on such terms and conditions as 
it deems fit.  
21. Recognised teachers .—(1) The qualifications of recognised teac hers shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(2) All applications for the recognition of teachers shall be made in such manner as may be laid down 
by the Ordinances.  
(3) No teacher shall be recognised as a teacher except on the recommendation  of a Selection 
Committee constituted for the purpose in the manner laid down in the Ordinances.  
(4) The period of recognition of a teacher shall be determined by the Ordinances made in that behalf.  
(5) The Academic Council may, by a special resolution pas sed by a majority of not less than two -
thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw recognition from a teacher:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until notice in writing has been given to the person 
concerned calling upon him to show c ause, within such time as may be specified in the notice, why such 
resolution should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in 
support of them have been considered by the Academic Council.  
22. Approved teachers .—The qualifications, manner of recognising, and withdrawal of recognition, 
of approved teachers shall be such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
 23. Committees .—(1) An authority of the University may appoint as many standing or special 
Committees as it m ay deem fit, and may appoint to such Committees persons who are not members of 
such authority.  
(2) A Committee appointed under clause ( 1) may deal with any subject delegated to it subject to 
subsequent confirmation by the authority appointing it.  
24. Terms  and conditions of service and code of conduct of the teachers, etc .—(1) All the 
teachers and other academic staff of the University shall, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, 
be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of cond uct as are specified in the Statutes, 
the Ordinances and the Regulations.  
(2) The emoluments of members of the academic staff shall be such as may be prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(3) Every teacher and member of the academic staff of the University shall b e appointed on a written 
contract, the form of which shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) A copy of every contract referred to in clause ( 3) shall be deposited with the Registrar.  
25. Terms and conditions of service and cod e of conduct of other empl oyees .—(1) All the 
employees of the University, other than the teachers and other academic staff shall, in the absence of any 
contract to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as are 
specified in the Statutes,  the Ordinances and the Regulations.  
(2) The manner of appointment and emoluments of employees, other than the teachers and other 
academic staff, shall be such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
26. Seniority list. —(1) Whenever, in accordance with the  Statutes, any person is to hold an office or 
be a member of an authority of the University by rotation according to seniority, such seniority shall be 
determined according to the length of continuous service of such person in his grade and in accordance 
with such other principles as the Executive Council may, from time to time, prescribe.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain in respect of each class of persons to 
whom the provisions of these Statutes apply, a complete and up-to-date seniority list in accordance with 
the provisions of clause ( 1). 27 
 (3) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous service in a particular grade or the relative 
seniority of any person or persons is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar may,  on his own motion and shall, 
at the request of any such person, submit the matter to the Executive Council whose decision thereon shall 
be final.  
27. Removal of  employees of the University .—(1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct 
against a teacher,  a member of the academic staff or other employee of the University, the Vice -
Chancellor, in the case of the teacher or a member of the academic staff, and the authority competent to 
appoint (hereinafter referred to as the appointing authority) in the case  of other employee may, by order in 
writing, place such teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee, as the case may be, under 
suspension and shall forthwith report to the Executive Council the circumstances in which the order was 
made:  
Provided that the Executive Council may, if it is of the opinion, that the circumstances of the case do 
not warrant the suspension of the teacher or a member of the academic staff, revoke such order.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of t he contract of appointment or of any other 
terms and conditions of service of the employees, the Executive Council in respect of teachers and other 
academic staff, and the appointing authority in respect of other employees, shall have the power to 
remove a  teacher or a member of the academic staff or other employee, as the case may be, on grounds of 
misconduct.  
 (3) Save as aforesaid, the Executive Council, or as the case may be, the appointing authority, shall 
not be entitled to remove any teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee except for a good 
cause and after giving three months' notice or on payment of three months' salary in lieu thereof.  
(4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall be removed under clause ( 2) or 
clause ( 3) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed 
to be taken in regard to him.  
(5) The removal of a teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall take effect from 
the date on which t he order of removal is made:  
Provided that where the teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee is under suspension 
at the time of his removal, such removal shall take effect from the date on which he was placed under 
suspension.  
(6) Notwithst anding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Statute, a teacher, member 
of the academic staf f or other employee may resign, — 
(a) if he is a permanent employee, only after giving three months' notice in writing to the 
Executive Council or t he appointing authority, as the case may be, or by paying three months' salary 
in lieu thereof;  
(b) if he is not a permanent employee, only after giving one month's notice in writing to the 
Executive Council or, as the case may be, the appointing authority  or by paying one month's salary in 
lieu thereof:  
Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date on which the resignation is accepted 
by the Executive Council or the appointing authority, as the case may be.  
28. Honorary degrees. —(1) The  Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic 
Council and by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and 
voting, make proposals to the Visitor for the conferment of honorary degrees:  
Provided tha t in case of emergency, the Executive Council may, on its own motion, make such 
proposals.  
(2) The Executive Council may, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the 
members present and voting, withdraw, with the previous sancti on of the Visitor, any honorary degree 
conferred by the University.  28 
 29. Withdrawal of degrees, etc .—The Executive Council may, by a special resolution passed by a 
majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw any degree o r academic 
distinction conferred on, or any certificate or diploma granted to, any person by the University for good 
and sufficient cause:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been given to that person 
calling upon  him to show cause within such time as may be specified in the notice why such a resolution 
should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in support of 
them, have been considered by the Executive Council.  
30. Mainte nance of discipline among students of the University .—(1) All powers relating to the 
maintenance of discipline and disciplinary action in relation to the students of the University shall vest in 
the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) There shall be a Proctor of the Univ ersity to assist the Vice -Chancellor in the exercise of the 
powers referred to in clause ( 1), who shall be appointed by the Executive Council from amongst the 
Professors and Readers in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may de legate all or any of the powers referred to in clause ( 1), as he deems 
proper, to the Proctor and to such other officers as he may specify in this behalf.  
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to the maintenance of discipline and 
taking such action, as may seem to him appropriate for the maintenance of discipline, the Vice -Chancellor 
may, in exercise of such powers, by order, direct that any student or students be expelled or rusticated, for 
a specified period, or be not admitted t o a course or courses of study in a College, Institution or 
Department or a Faculty of the University for a stated period, or be punished with fine for an amount to 
be specified in the order, or be debarred from taking an examination or examinations conduc ted by the 
University, College, Institution or Department or a Faculty for one or more years, or that the results of the 
student or students concerned in the examination or examinations in which he or they have appeared be 
cancelled.  
(5) The Principals of Colleges, Institutions, Deans of Faculties and Heads of teaching Departments in 
the University shall have the authority to exercise all such disciplinary powers over the students in their 
respective Colleges, Institutions, Faculties and teaching Department s in the University, as may be 
necessary for the proper conduct of such Colleges, Institutions, Faculties and teaching Departments.  
(6) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice -Chancellor and the Principal and other persons 
specified in clause ( 5), detailed rules of discipline and proper conduct shall be made by the University. 
The Principals of Colleges, Institutions, Deans of Faculties and Heads of teaching Departments in the 
University may also make such supplementary rules as they deem necessary for the purposes stated 
therein.  
(7) At the time of admission, every student shall be required to sign a declaration to the effect that he 
submits himself to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Vice -Chancellor and other authorities of the 
University.  
31. Maintenance of discipline among students of Colleges or an Instituti on not maintained by 
University. —All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in relation to students of a College 
or an Institution not maintained by the University, shall ve st in the Principal of the College or Institution, 
as the case may be, in accordance with the procedure prescribed by the Ordinances.  
32. Admission of Colleges, etc., to the  privileges of the University .—(1) Colleges and other 
Institutions situated within  the jurisdiction of the University may be admitted to such privileges of the 
University as the Executive Council and the College Development Council may decide on the f ollowing 
conditions, namely: — 
(i) Every such College or Institution shall have a regularly constituted Governing Body, 
consisting of not more than fifteen persons approved by the Executive Council and including among 
others, two teachers of the University to be nominated by the Executive  Council and three 
representatives of the teaching staff of whom the Principal of the College or Institution shall be one.  29 
 The procedure for appointment of members of the Governing Body and other matters affecting 
the management of a College or an Institu tion shall be prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that the said condition shall not apply in the case of Colleges and Institutions 
maintained by Government which shall, however, have an Advisory Committee consisting of not 
more than fifteen persons whic h shall consist of among others, three teachers including the Principal 
of the College or Institution, and two teachers of the University nominated by the Executive Council.  
(ii) Every such College or Institution shall satisfy the Executive Council and the  College 
Development Council on  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the suitability and adequacy of its accommodation and equipment for teaching;  
(b) the qualifications and adequacy of its teaching staff and the conditions of their service;  
(c) the arrangements for the residence, welfare, discipline and supervision of students;  
(d) the adequacy of financial provision made for the continued maintenance of the College or 
Institution; and  
(e) such other matters as are essential for the maintenance of th e standards of University 
education.  
(iii) No College or Institution shall be admitted to any privileges of the University except on the 
recommendation of the Academic Council made after considering the report of a Committee of 
Inspection appointed for the  purpose by the Academic Council.  
(iv) Colleges and Institutions desirous of admission to any privileges of the University shall be 
required to intimate their intention to do so in writing so as to reach the Registrar not later than the 
15th August, preced ing the year from which permission applied for is to have effect.  
(v) A College or an Institution shall not, without the previous permission of the Executive 
Council, College Development Council and the Academic Council, suspend instruction in any subject 
or course of study which it is authorised to teach and teaches.  
(2) Appointment to the teaching staff and Principal of Colleges or Institutions admitted to the 
privileges of the University shall be made in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to Colleges and Institutions maintained by 
Government.  
(3) The service conditions of the administrative and other non -academic staff of every College or 
Institution referred to in clause ( 2) shall be such as may be l aid down in the Ordinances:  
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to Colleges and Institutions maintained by 
Government.  
(4) Every College or Institution admitted to the privileges of the University shall be inspected at least 
once in every two academic years by a Committee appointed by the Academic Council, and the report of 
the Committee shall be submitted to the Academic Council, which shall forward the same to the College 
Development Council and Executive Council with such recommendations as it may deem fit to make.  
(5) The College Development Council and the Executive Council, after considering the report and the 
recommendations, if any, of the Academic Council, shall forward a copy of the report to the Governing 
Body of the College or Instit ution with such remarks, if any, as they may deem fit for suitable action.  
(6) The Executive Council may, after consulting the College Development Council and Academic 
Council, withdraw any privileges granted to a College or an Institution, at any time it considers that the 
College or Institution does not satisfy any of the conditions on the fulfilment of which the College or 
Institution was admitted to such privileges:  
Provided that before any privileges are so withdrawn, the Governing Body of the College or 
Institution concerned shall be given an opportunity to represent to the Executive Council as to why such 
action should not be taken.  30 
 (7) Subject to the conditions set forth in clause ( 1), the Ordinances may prescribe — 
(i) such other conditions as may be  considered necessary; and  
(ii) the procedure for the admission of Colleges and Institutions to the privileges of the University 
and for the withdrawal of those privileges.  
33. Convocations .—Convocations of the University for the conferring of degrees or for other 
purposes shall be held in such manner as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
34. Acting Chairman of meetings .—Where no provision is made for a President or Chairman to 
preside over a meeting of any authority of the University or any Committee of  such authority or when the 
President or Chairman so provided for is absent, the members present shall elect one from among 
themselves to preside at such meeting.  
35. Resignation .—Any member, other than an ex officio member of the Court, the Executive 
Coun cil, the Academic Council or any other authority of the University or any Committee of such 
authority may resign by letter addressed to the Registrar and the resignation shall take effect as soon as 
such letter is received by the Registrar.  
36. Disqualif ications .—(1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a 
member of any of th e authorities of the University — 
(i) if he is of unsound mind;  
(ii) if he is an undischarged insolvent;  
(iii) if he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving moral turpitude and 
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of the 
disqualifications mentioned in clause ( 1), the ques tion shall be referred to the Visitor and his decision 
shall be final and no suit or other proceeding shall lie in any civil court against such decision.  
37. Residence condition for membership  and office .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Statutes , a person who is not ordinarily resident in India shall not be eligible to be an officer of the 
University or a member of any authority of the University.  
38. Membership of authorities by virtue of membership of other bodies .—Notwithstanding 
anything cont ained in the Statutes, a person who holds any post in the University or is a member of any 
authority or body of the University in his capacity as a member of a particular authority or body or as the 
holder of a particular appointment shall hold such office  or membership only for so long as he continues 
to be a member of that particular authority or body or the holder of that particular appointment, as the 
case may be.  
39. Alumni Association .—(1) There shall be an Alumni Association for the University.  
(2) The subscription for membership of the Alumni Association shall be prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(3) No member of the Alumni Association shall be entitled to vote or stand for election unless he has 
been a member of the Association for at least one year pr ior to the date of election and is a degree holder 
of the University of at least five years standing:  
Provided that the condition relating to the completion of one year's membership shall not apply in the 
case of the first election.  
40. Students' Council .—(1) There shall be constituted in the University, a Students' Council for 
every academic year, consisting of — 
(i) the Dean of Students' Welfare who shall be the Chairman of the Students' Council;  
(ii) twenty students to be nominated by the Academic Council  on the basis of merit in studies, 
sports and extra -curricular activities; and  31 
 (iii) such number of elected representatives of students as may be specified by the Academic 
Council:  
Provided that any student of the University shall have the right to bring up any matter concerning the 
University before the Students' Council if so permitted by the Chairman, and he shall have the right to 
participate in the discussions at any meeting when the matter is taken up for consideration.  
(2) The functions of the Stude nts' Council shall be to make suggestions to the appropriate authorities 
of the University in regard to the programmes of studies, students’ welfare and other matters of 
importance, in regard to the working of the University in general and such suggestions  shall be made on 
the basis of consensus of opinion.  
(3) The Students' Council shall meet at least once in an academic year preferably in the beginning of 
that year.  
41. Ordinances, how made .—(1) The first Ordinances made under sub -section ( 2) of section 31 may 
be amended, repealed or added to at any time by the Executive Council in the manner specified in the 
following clauses.  
(2) No Ordinance in respect of the matters enumerated in sub -section ( 1) of section 31 shall be made 
by the Executive Council unl ess a draft of such Ordinance has been proposed by the Academic Council.  
(3) The Executive Council shall not have power to amend any draft of any Ordinance proposed by the 
Academic Council under clause ( 2), but may reject the proposal or return the draft t o the Academic 
Council for re -consideration, either in whole or in part, together with any amendment which the 
Executive Council may suggest.  
(4) Where the Executive Council has rejected or returned the draft of an Ordinance proposed by the 
Academic Counci l, the Academic Council may consider the question afresh and in case the original draft 
is reaffirmed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting and more than 
half the total number of members of the Academic Council, the dr aft may be sent back to the Executive 
Council which shall either adopt it or refer it to the Visitor whose decision shall be final.  
(5) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall come into effect immediately.  
(6) Every Ordinance made by the Execut ive Council shall be submitted to the Visitor within two 
weeks from the date of its adoption.  
(7) The Visitor shall have the power to direct the University to suspend the operation of any 
Ordinance.  
(8) The Visitor shall inform the Executive Council about his objection to the Ordinance referred to in 
clause ( 7) and may, after receiving the comments of the University, either withdraw the order suspending 
the Ordinance or disallow the Ordinance, and his decision shall be final.  
42. Regulations .—(1) The author ities of the University may make Regulations consistent with the 
Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for  the following matters, namely: — 
(i) laying down the procedure to be observed at their meetings and the number of members 
required to form a quorum;  
(ii) providing for all matters which are required by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances to be 
prescribed by Regulations;  
(iii) providing for all other matters solely concerning such authorities or committees appointed by 
them and not provided for by the  Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
  32 
 (2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the giving of notice to the 
members of such authority of the dates of meetings and of the business to be considered at meetings and 
for the k eeping of a record of the proceedings of meetings.  
(3) The Executive Council may direct the amendment in such manner as it may specify of any 
Regulation made under the Statutes or the annulment of any such Regulation.  
 43. Delegation of Powers .—Subject to the provisions of the Act and the Statutes, any officer or 
authority of the University may delegate his or its powers to any other officer or authority or person under 
his or its respective control and subject to the condition that overall responsibility f or the exercise of the 
powers so delegated shall continue to vest in the officer or authority delegating such powers . 
 
--------------------------The Sashastra Seema Bal Act, 2007--------------------------
1 
 THE SASHASTRA SEEMA BAL ACT, 2007  
––––––  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
––––––  
CHAPTER 1  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Persons subject to this Act.  
 
CHAPTER II 
CONSTITUTION OF  THE FORCE  AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF THE MEMBERS OF THE  FORCE  
4. Constitution of the Force.  
5. Control, direction, etc.  
6. Enrolment.  
7. Liability for service outside India.  
8. Resignation and withdrawal from the post.  
9. Tenure of service under the Act . 
10. Termination of service by Central Government.  
11. Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank by the Director - General and by other officers.  
12. Certificate of termination of service.  
13. Restrictions respecting right to form association, freedom of speech, etc.  
14. Redres sal of grievances of persons other than officers.  
15. Redressal of grievances of officers.  
 
CHAPTER III  
OFFENCES  
16. Offences in relation to enemy and punishable with death.  
17. Offences in relation to the enemy and not punishable with death.  
18. Offences punishable more severely on active duty than at other times.  
19. Mutiny.  
20. Desertion and aiding desertion.  
21. Absence without leave.  
22. Striking or threatening superior officer.  
23. Disobedience to superior officer.  
24. Insubordination and obstruction.  
25. False information on enrolment.  
26. Unbecom ing conduct.  
27. Certain forms of disgraceful conduct.  
28. Ill-treating a subordinate.  
29. Intoxication.  
30. Permitting escape of person in custody.  
31. Irregularity in connection with arrest or confinement.  
32. Escape from custody.  
33. Offences in respect of property.  
34. Extortion and exaction.  
35. Making away with equipment.  
36. Injury to property, etc.  
37. False accusations.  
38. Falsifying official documents and false declarations.  2 
 SECTIONS  
39. Signing in blank and failure to report.  
40. Offences relating to Force Court.  
41. False evidence.  
42. Unlawful detention of pay.  
43. Violation of good order and discipline.  
44. Miscellaneous offences.  
45. Attempt.  
46. Abetment of offences that have been committed.  
47. Abetment of offences punishable with death and not committed.  
48. Abetment of offences punishable with imprisonment and not committe d. 
49. Civil offences.  
50. Civil offences not triable by a Force Court.  
 
CHAPTER IV 
PUNISHMENT  
51. Punishment by Force Courts.  
52. Alternative punishments by Force Courts.  
53. Combination of punishments.  
54. Retention in the Force of a person convicted on active duty.  
55. Punishments  otherwise than by Force Courts.  
56. Minor punishments.  
57. Limit of punishments under section 56.  
58. Punishment of persons of or below the rank of Commandant by Inspector -General and others.  
59. Cancellation, variation or remittance of sentence.  
60. Collective fines.  
 
CHAPT ER V  
DEDUCTIONS FROM PAY AND ALLOWANCES  
61. Deductions from pay and allowances of persons subject to this Act.  
62. Pay and allowances during trial.  
63. Limit of certain deductions.  
64. Deduction from public money due to a person.  
65. Pay and allowances of prisoner of war during inquiry into his conduct.  
66. Remission of deductions.  
67. Provision for dependants of prisoner of war from his remitted deductions and pay and allowances.  
68. Period during which a person is deemed to be a prisoner of war.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
ARREST AND PROCEEDINGS BE FORE TRIAL  
69. Custody of offenders.  
70. Duty of commanding officer in regard to detention.  
71. Interval between committal and trial.  
72. Arrest by civil authorities.  
73. Capture of deserters.  
74. Inquiry into absence without leave.  
75. Force Police Officers.  
 
  3 
 CHAPTER VII  
FORCE  COURTS  
SECTIONS  
76. Kinds of Force Courts.  
77. Power to convene a General Force Court.  
78. Power to convene a Petty Force Court.  
79. Warrants issued under sections 77 and 78.  
80. Composition of a General Force Court.  
81. Composition of a Petty Force Court.  
82. Summary Force Court.  
83. Dissolution of a Force Court.  
84. Powers of a General Force Court.  
85. Powers of a Petty Force Court.  
86. Powers of a Summary Force Court.  
87. Prohibition of second trial.  
88. Period of limitation for trial.  
89. Trial, etc., of offender who ceases to be subject to this Act.  
90. Appli cation of Act during term of sentence.  
91. Place of trial, etc.  
92. Choice between criminal court and Force Court.  
93. Power of criminal court to require delivery of offender.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
PROCEDURE  OF FORCE  COURTS  
94. Presiding officer.  
95. Judge Attorneys.  
96. Objections.  
97. Oath  of members, Judge Attorneys and witnesses.  
98. Voting by members.  
99. General rule as to evidence.  
100. Judicial notice.  
101. Summoning of witnesses.  
102. Documents exempted from production.  
103. Commission for examination of witnesses.  
104. Examination of a witness on commission.  
105. Convic tion for offences not charged.  
106. Presumption as to signatures.  
107. Enrolment paper.  
108. Presumption as to certain documents.  
109. Reference by accused to Government officer.  
110. Evidence of previous convictions and general character.  
111. Lunacy of accused.  
112. Subsequent fitness of lunatic accused for trial.  
113. Transmission to Central Government of order under section  112. 
114. Release of lunatic accused.  
115. Delivery of lunatic accused to relatives.  
116. Order for custody and disposal of property pending trial.  
117. Order for disposal of property regardi ng which offence is committed.  
118. Powers of Force Court in relation to proceedings under this Act.  
119. Tender of pardon to accomplices.  
120. Trial of person not complying with conditions of pardon.  
  4 
 CHAPTER IX  
CONFIRMATION AND REVISION OF PROCEEDINGS  
SECTIONS  
121. Finding  and sentence not valid unless confirmed.  
122. Power to confirm finding and sentence of General Force Court.  
123. Power to confirm finding and sentence of Petty Force Court.  
124. Limitation of powers of confirming authority.  
125. Power of confirming authority to mitigate, rem it or commute sentences.  
126. Confirming of findings and sentences on board a ship.  
127. Revision of finding or sentence.  
128. Finding and sentence of a Summary Force Court.  
129. Transmission of proceedings of Summary Force Court.  
130. Alteration of finding or sentence in certain cases.  
131. Petition against order, finding or sentence of Force Court.  
132. Annulment of proceedings.  
 
CHAPTER X  
EXECUTION OF SENTENCES, PARDONS, REMISSIONS, ETC . 
133. Execution of sentence of death.  
134. Commencement of sentence of imprisonment.  
135. Execution of sentence of imprisonment.  
136. Temporary custody of convict.  
137. Execution of sentence of imprisonment in special cases.  
138. Conveyance of prisoner from place to place.  
139. Communication of certain orders to prison officers.  
140. Recovery of fine.  
141. Informality or error in order or warrant.  
142. Pardon and remission.  
143. Cancellation of conditional pardons, release on parole or remission.  
144. Suspension of sentence of imprisonment.  
145. Orders pending suspension of sentence.  
146. Release on suspension of sentence.  
147. Computation of period of sentence.  
148. Order after suspension of sentence.  
149. Reconsideration of case after suspension of sentence.  
150. Fresh sentence after suspension.  
151. Scope of power of suspension of sentence.  
152. Effect of suspension and remission of sentence on dismissal.  
 
CHAPTER XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
153. Powers and dutie s conferrable and imposable on members of the Force.  
154. Protection for acts of members of the Force.  
155. Power to make rules.  
156. Provisions as to existing Sashastra Seema Bal.  
 
  5 
 THE SASHASTRA SEEMA BAL ACT, 2007  
ACT NO. 53 OF 2007  
[20th December,  2007.]  
An Act to provide for the constitution and regulation of an armed force of the Union for ensuring 
the security of the borders of India and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: – 
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. –(1) This Act may be called the  Sashastra Seema Bal Act, 2007.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification, in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions. –(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise  requires,– 
(a) "active duty", in relation to a person subject to this Act, means any duty as a member of the 
Force during the period in which such person is attached to, or for ms part of, a unit of  the Force– 
(i) which is engaged in operations against any enemy, or  
(ii) which is operating at a picket or engaged on patrol or other guard duty along the borders 
of India, and includes duty by such person during any period declared by the Central Governm ent 
by order as a period of active duty with reference to any area in which any person or class of 
persons subject to this Act may be serving;  
(b) "battalion" means a unit of the Force constituted as a battalion by the Central Government;  
(c) "civil offence" means an offence which is triable by a criminal court;  
(d) "civil prison" means any jail or place used for the detention of any criminal prisoner under the 
Prisons Act, 1894  (9 of 1894) , or under any other law for the time being in force;  
(e) "com manding officer" means a Commandant or any officer for the time being in command of 
the unit or any separate portion of the Force to which such person belongs or is attached to and 
discharging his functions under this Act or the rules made thereunder;  
(f) "criminal court" means a court of ordinary criminal justice in any part of India constituted 
under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) ; 
(g) "Deputy Inspector -General" an d "Additional Deputy Inspector -General" mean respectively a 
Deputy Inspector -General and an Additional Deputy Inspector -General of the Force appointed under 
section 5;  
(h) "Director -General" and "Additional Director -General" mean respectively the Director -General 
and an Additional Director -General of the Force appointed under section 5;  
(i) "enemy" includes all mutineers, armed rebels, armed rioters, pirates, terrorists and any person 
in arms against whom it is the duty of any person subject to this Act to take action;  
(j) "enrolled person" means an under -officer or other  person enrolled under this Act;  
(k) "Force" means the Sashastra Seema Bal;  
(l) "Force Court" means a  Court  referred to in section  76; 
(m) "Force custody" means  the arrest or confinement of  a member  of the Force under section 69;  
(n) "Inspector -General" means the Inspector -General of the Force appointed under section 5;  
(o) "Judge Attorney -General", "Additional Judge Attorney -General",  "Deputy Judge Attorney -
General" and "Judge Attorney" mean respectively the Judge Attorney -General, an Additional Judge 
Attorney -General, a Deputy Judge Attorney -General and a Judge Attorney of the Force appointed 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 95;  
––––––––––––––––––––––––   
 
1. 1st August, 2009, vide notification No. S.O. 1871(E), dated 31 st July, 2009,  see Gazette of India, Extraordinary , Part II, Sec. 
3(ii).  6 
 (p) "member of the Force" means an officer, a subordinate officer,  an under -officer or other 
enrolled  person;  
(q) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(r) "offence" means any act or omission punishable under this Act and includes a civil offence;  
(s) "officer" means a person appointed or in pay as an officer of the Force,  but does not include a 
subordinate offi cer or an under -officer;  
(t) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(u) "rule" means a rule made under this Act;  
(v) "subordinate officer" means a person appointed or in pay as a Subedar Major or  Inspector or 
Sub-Inspector and Assistant Sub -Inspector of the Force;  
(w) "superior officer", when used in relation to a pe rson subject to this Act, means – 
(i) any member of the Force to whose command such person is for the time being subject in 
accordance  with the rules;  
(ii) any officer of a higher rank or class or of a higher grade in the same class,  and includes, 
when such person is not  an officer, a subordinate  officer or an under -officer of higher  rank, class 
or grade;  
(x) "under -officer " means a Head  Constable of the Force;  
(y) "unit" includes – 
(i) any body of officers and other members of the Force for which a separate authorised 
establishment exists;  
(ii) any separate body of persons subject to this Act employed on any service and not attached 
to a unit as aforesaid;  
(iii) any other separate body of persons composed wholly or partly of persons subject to this 
Act and specified as a unit by the Central Government.  
(2) All words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Indian  Penal Code  
(45 of 1 860), the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950) or the National Security Guard Act, 1986  (47 of 1986) , 
shall have the same meanings respectively assigned to them in that Code or those Acts.  
(3) In this Act, references to any law not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall be 
construed as references to the corresponding law in force in that State.  
3. Persons subject to this  Act.–(1) The following persons appointed (whether on deputation or in 
any other manner) in the Force shall be subject to this Act, wherever they may be, namely: – 
(a) officers and subordinate officer; and  
(b) under -officers and other persons enrolled under this Act.  
(2) Every person subject to this Act shall remain so subject until repatriated, retired, released, 
discharged, removed or dismissed from the Force in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the 
rules.  
CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTION OF  THE FORCE  AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF THE MEMBERS OF THE  FORCE  
4. Cons titution of the Force. –(1) There shall be an armed force of  the Union called the Sashastra 
Seema Bal for ensuring the security of  the borders of India and performing such other duties as may be 
entrusted to it by the Central Government.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Force shall be co nstituted in such manner as may be 
prescribed and the conditions of service of the members of the Force shall be such as may be prescribed.  
  7 
 5. Control, direction, etc. –(1) The general  superintendence,  direction and control of the Force shall 
vest in, and  be exercised by, the Central Government and subject thereto and to the provisions of this Act 
and the rules made in this behalf, the command and supervision of the Force shall vest in an officer to be 
appointed by the Central Government as the Director -General of the Force.  
(2) The Director -General shall, in the discharge of his duties under this Act, be assisted by such 
number of Additional Directors -General, Inspectors -General, Deputy Inspectors -General, Additional 
Deputy Inspectors -General, Commandants and other officers, as may be appointed by the Central 
Government.  
6. Enrolment. –The persons to be enrolled to the Force, the mode of enrolment and the procedure for 
enrolment shall be such as may be prescribed.  
7. Liability for service outside India. –Every member of the Force shall be liable to serve in any part 
of India as well as outside India.  
8. Resignation and withdrawal from the post. –No member of  the Force shall be at liberty, – 
(a) to resign his appointment during the term of his e ngagement;  or 
(b) to withdraw himself from all or any of the duties of his appointment, except with the previous 
permission in writing of the prescribed authority.  
9. Tenure of  service under the Act. –Every person subject to this Act shall hold office during the 
pleasure of the President.  
10. Termination of service by Central Government. –Subject to the provisions of this Act and the 
rules, the Central Government may dismiss or remove from the service any person subject to this Act.  
11. Dismissal, removal or red uction in rank by the Director -General and by other officers. –(1) 
The Director -General, or any Additional Director -General or Inspector -General may dismiss or remove 
from the service or reduce to a lower grade or rank any person subject to this Act other than  an officer.  
(2) An officer not below the rank of Deputy Inspector -General or any prescribed officer may dismiss 
or remove from the service any person under his command other than an officer or a subordinate officer 
of such rank as may be prescribed.  
(3) Any such officer as is mentioned in sub -section ( 2) may reduce to a lower grade or rank any 
person under his command except an officer or a subordinate officer.  
(4) The exercise of any power under this section shall be subject to the provisions of this Act and the 
rules.  
12. Certificate of termination of service. –A subordinate officer, or an under -officer or other 
enrolled person who is retired, discharged, released, removed or dismissed from the service shall be 
furnished by the officer, to whose command he is subject, with a certificate in Hindi or English langua ge 
setting forth  – 
(a) the authority terminating his service;  
(b) the cause for such termination; and  
(c) the full period of his service in the Force.  
13. Restrictions respecting right to form association, freedom of speech, etc. –(1) No person  
subject to this Act shall, without the  previous sanction in writing of the Central Government or of the 
prescribed authority, – 
(a) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any trade union, labour union, political 
association, or with any class of trade unions, labour unions or political associations; or  
(b) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any society, insti tution, association or 
organisation which is not recognised as part of the Force or is not of a purely social, recreational or 
religious nature; or  
(c) communicate with the press or publish or cause to be published any book, letter or other 
document except where such communication or publication is in the bona fide  discharge of his duties 8 
 or is of a purely literary, artistic or scientific character or is of a prescribed nature.  
Explanation. –If any question arises as to whether any society, institution, association or organisation 
is of a purely social, recreational or religious nature under clause ( b) of this sub -section, the decision of 
the Central Government thereon shall be final.  
(2) No person subject to this Act shall participate in, or address, any meeting or take part in any 
demonstration organised by any body of persons for any political purposes or for such other purposes as 
may be prescribed . 
14. Redressal of grievances of persons other than officers. –(1) Any person subject to this Act other 
than an officer who deems himself wronged by any superior or other officer may complain to the officer 
under whose command he is serving.  
(2) When the officer complained against is the officer to whom any complaint should, under sub -
section ( 1), be preferred, the aggrieved person may complain to such officer's next superior officer.  
(3) Every officer receiving any such complaint shall make as complete an  investigation into it as may 
be possible for giving full redress to the complainant, or when necessary, refer the complaint to a superior 
authority.  
(4) The Director -General may revise any decision made under any of the foregoing sub -sections, but, 
subjec t thereto, such decision shall be final.  
15. Redressal of grievances of officers. –Any officer who deems himself wronged by his 
commanding officer or any other superior officer and who, on due application made to his commanding 
officer or such other superior officer, does not receive the redress to which he considers himself entitled, 
may complain to the Director -General or the Central Government through proper channel.  
CHAPTER III  
OFFENCES  
16. Offences in relation to enemy and punishable with death. –Any person subject to this Act who 
commits any of the following offences, namely: – 
(a) shamefully abandons or delivers up any post, place or guard, committed to his charge or 
which it is his duty to defend; or  
(b) intentionally uses any means to compel or induce any person subject to this Act or to any 
other law relating to military, naval, air force or any other armed force of the Union to abstain from 
acting against the enemy or to discourage such person from acting against the enemy; or  
(c) in the presen ce of the enemy, shamefully casts away his arms, ammunition, tools or equipment 
or misbehaves in such manner as to show cowardice; or  
(d) treacherously holds correspondence with, or communicates intelligence to, the enemy, 
terrorist or any person in arms a gainst the Union; or  
(e) directly or indirectly assists the enemy or terrorist with money, arms, ammunition, stores or 
supplies or in any other manner whatsoever; or  
(f) in time of active operation against the enemy or terrorist, intentionally occasions a false alarm 
in action, camp, quarters, or spreads or causes to be spread reports calculated to create alarm or 
despondency; or  
(g) in time of action leaves his commanding officer or other superior officer  or his post, guard, 
picket, patrol or party without  being regularly relieved or without leave; or  
(h) having been captured by the enemy or made a prisoner of war, voluntarily serves with or aids 
the enemy; or  
(i) knowingly harbours or protects an enemy, not being a prisoner; or  
(j) being a sentry in time of active operation against the enemy or alarm, sleeps upon his post or is 
intoxicated; or  9 
 (k) knowingly does any act calculated to imperil the success of the Force or the military, naval or  
air force of India or any forces co-operating therewith or any p art of such forces,  
shall, on conviction  by a Force Court, be liable to suffer death or such less punishment as is in this Act 
mentioned.  
17. Offences in relation to the enemy and not punishable with death. –Any person subject to this 
Act who commits any of  the following offences, namely: – 
(a) is taken prisoner or captured by the enemy, by want of due precau tion or through 
disobedience of order, or willful neglect of duty, o r having been taken prisoner or so capture d fails to 
rejoin his service when able to do so;  or 
(b) without due authority holds correspondence  with,  or communicates  intelligence to, the enemy 
or any person in league with the enemy or having come by the knowledge of any such 
correspondence or communication, wilfully omits to disclose it immediately to his commandant or 
other superior officer,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
18. Offences punishable more  severely on  active duty  than at other  times.–Any person subject to 
this Act who commits  any of the following offences, namely: – 
(a) forces a safeguard, or forces or u ses criminal force to a sentry;  or 
(b) breaks into any  house or other place  in search of plunder;  or 
(c) being a sentry,  sleeps upon his post  or is intoxicated; or  
(d) without orders from his superior officer leaves his guard, picket, patrol or post; or  
(e) intentionally or through neglect occasions a false alarm in camp or quarters, or spreads or 
causes to be spread reports calculated to create unnecessary alarm or despondency; or  
(f) makes known the  parole, watchword or  countersign to any person not entitled to receive it; or 
knowing ly gives a parole, watchword or a countersign differen t from what he received,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, – 
(i) if he commits any such offence when  on active duty,  be liable to  suffer imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
(ii) if he commits any such offence when not on active duty, be liable to suffer imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
19. Mutiny.–Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, namely: – 
(a) begins, incites, causes or conspires with any other person to cause any mutiny in the Force or 
in the military, naval or air force of India or any forces co -operating therewith; or  
(b) joins in any such mutiny; or 
(c) being present at any such mutiny, does not use his utmost  endeavours to suppress the same; or  
(d) knowing or having reason to believe in the existence of any such mutiny, or of any intention 
to mutiny or of any such conspiracy, does not, without delay, giv e information thereof to his 
commanding officer or other superior officer; or  
(e) endeavours to seduce any person in the Force or in the military, naval or air force of India or 
any forces co -operating therewith from his duty or allegiance to the Union,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer death or  such less punishment as is in  this Act 
mentioned.  
  10 
 20. Desertion and aiding desertion. –(1) Any person subject  to this Act who deserts or attempts to 
desert the service shall, on conviction by a Force Court, – 
(a) if he commits the offence when on active duty or when under orders for active duty, be liable 
to suffer death or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
(b) if he commits the offence under any other circumsta nces, be liable to suffer imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
(2) Any person subject to this Act who knowingly harbours any such deserter shall, on conviction by 
a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
(3) Any person subject to this Act who, being cognizant of any desertion or attempt at desertion of a 
person subject to this Act, does not forthwith give notice to his own or some other superior officer, or take 
any steps in his power to cause such person to be apprehended, shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be 
liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to two year s or such less punishment as is in 
this Act mentioned.  
(4) For the purposes of this Act, a person  deserts,– 
(a) if he absents from his unit or the place of duty at any time with the intention of not reporting 
back to such unit or place, or who, at any time  and under any circumstances when absent from his 
unit or place of duty, does any act which shows that he has an intention of not reporting to such unit 
or place of duty;  
(b) if he absents himself without leave with intent to avoid any active duty.  
21. Absence without leave. –Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the  following 
offences, namely: – 
(a) absents himself without leave; or  
(b) without sufficient cause overstays leave granted to him; or  
(c) being on leave of absence and having receive d information from the appropriate authority that 
any battalion or part thereof or any other unit of the Force, to which he belongs, has been ordered on 
active duty, fails, without sufficient cause, to rejoin without delay; or  
(d) without sufficient cause fails to appear at the time fixed at the parade or place appointed for 
exercise or duty; or  
(e) when on parade, or on the line of march, without sufficient cause or without leave from his 
superior officer, quits the parade or line of march; or  
(f) when in camp or elsewhere, is found beyond any limits fixed or in any place prohibited, by 
any general, local or other order, without a pass or written leave from his superior officer; or  
(g) without leave from his superior officer or without due cause, absents hi mself from any school 
or training institution when duly ordered to attend there, shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be 
liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or such less punishment as is 
in this Act mentioned.  
22. Striking or threatening superior officer. –Any person subject to this Act who commits any of 
the following offences, namely: – 
(a) uses criminal force to or assaults his superior officer; or  
(b) uses threatening language to such officer; or  
(c) uses insubordinate language to such officer,   
shall, on conviction by  a Force Court ,– 
(i) if such officer is at the time in the execution of his office or, if the offence is committed on 
active duty, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years or such 
less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  11 
 (ii) in othe r cases, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which  may extend to ten years  or 
such less punishment as is in this Act  mentioned:  
Provided that in the case of an o ffence specified in clause ( c), the imprisonment shall not exceed five 
years.  
23. Disobedience to superior officer. –(1) Any person subject to this Act who disobeys in such 
manner as to show a wilful defiance of authority any lawful command given personally  by his superior 
officer in the execution of his office whether the same is given orally, or in writing or by signal or 
otherwise, shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to fourteen years or such  less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
(2) Any person subject to this Act who disobeys any lawful command given by his superior officer 
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, – 
(a) if he commits such offence when on active duty, be liable to suffer i mprisonment for a term 
which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
(b) if he commits such offence when not on active duty, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to five years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
24. Insubordination and obstruction .–Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, namely: – 
(a) being concerned in any quarrel, affray or disorder, refuses to obey any officer, though  of 
inferior rank, who orders him into arrest, or uses criminal force to, or assaults, any such officer; or  
(b) uses criminal force to, or assaults any person, whether subject to this Act or not, in whose 
custody he is lawfully placed, and whether he is or  is not his superior officer; or  
(c) resists an escort whose duty it is to apprehend him or to have him in charge; or  
(d) breaks out of barracks, camp or quarters; or  
(e) neglects to obey any general, local or other order; or  
(f) impedes the Force Police referred to in section 75 or any person lawfully acting on his behalf, 
or when called upon, refuses to assist in the execution of his duty a Force Police or any person 
lawfully acting on his behalf,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffe r imprisonment for a term which may extend, in 
the case of the offences specified in clauses ( d) or ( e), to two years, and in the case of the offences 
specified in the other clauses, to ten years, or in either case such less punishment as is in this Act 
mentioned.  
25. False information on enrolment. –Any person having become subject to this Act who is 
discovered to have knowingly given at the time of enrolment false information to any question set forth in 
the prescribed form of enrolment which has been put to him by the enrolling officer before whom he 
appears for the purpose of being enrolled, shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or such less punishment as is in this Act 
mentio ned. 
26. Unbecoming conduct. –Any officer or subordinate officer who behaves in a manner unbecoming 
of his position and the character expected of him shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to be 
dismissed or to suffer such less punishment as is in  this Act mentioned.  
27. Certain forms of disgraceful conduct. –Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, namely: – 
(a) is guilty of any disgraceful conduct of a cruel, indecent or unnatural kind; or  
(b) maligns, or feigns, or  produces disease or infirmity in himself or intentionally delays his cure 
or aggravates his disease or infirmity; or  
(c) with intent to render himself or any other person unfit for service, voluntarily causes hurt to 
himself or that person,  12 
 shall, on conv iction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
28. Ill-treating a subordinate. –Any officer, subordinate officer or under -officer, who uses criminal 
force to or otherwise ill -treats any person subject to this Act, being his subordinate in rank or position, 
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
seven years or such less punishment as is in t his Act mentioned.  
29. Intoxication. –(1) Any person subject to this Act who is found in  a state of intoxication, whether 
on duty or not, shall, on conviction by a F orce Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to six months or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), a person shall be deemed to be in a state of intoxication if, 
owing to the influence of alcohol or any drug whether alone, or any combination with any other 
substance, he is unfit to be entrusted with his duty or with any duty which he may be called upon to 
perform or, behaves in a disorderly manner or in a manner likely to bring discredit to the Force.  
30. Permitting escape of person in custody. –Any person su bject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, namely: – 
(a) when in command of a guard, picket, patrol, detachment or post, releases without proper 
authority, whether wilfully or without reasonable excuse, any person committed to his charge, or 
refuse to receive any prisoner or person so committed; or  
(b) wilfully or without reasonable excuse allow to escape any person who is committed to his 
charge, or whom it is his duty to keep or guard,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable, if he has acted wilfully, to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned, and if he has not acted 
wilfully, to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or such less punis hment as is 
in this Act mentioned.  
31. Irregularity in connection with arrest or confinement. –Any person subject to this Act who 
commits any of the following offences, namely: – 
(a) unnecessarily detains a person in arrest or confinement without bringing hi m to trial, or fails 
to bring his case before the proper authority for investigation; or  
(b) having committed a person to Force custody fails without reasonable cause to deliver at the 
time of such committal, or as soon as practicable, and in any case with in forty -eight hours thereafter, 
to the officer or other person into whose custody the person arrested is commited, an account in 
writing signed by himself of the offence with which the person so committed is charged,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court,  be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
one year or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
32. Escape from custody. –Any person subject to this Act, who, being in lawful custody, escapes or 
attempts to escape, shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
33. Offences in respect of property. –Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
followi ng offences, namely: – 
(a) commits theft of any property belonging to the Government, or to any Force mess, band or 
institution, or to any person subject to this Act; or  
(b) dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use any such property; or  
(c) commits criminal breach of trust in respect of any such property; or  
(d) dishonestly receives or retains any such property in respect of  which any of the offences under 
clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) has been  committed, knowing or having reasons to believe the c ommission of 
such offences; or  
(e) wilfully destroys or injures any property of the Government entrusted to him; or  13 
 (f) does any other thing with intent to defraud, or to cause wrongful gain to one person or 
wrongful loss to another person,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten 
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
34. Extortion and exaction. –Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences , namely:– 
(a) commits extortion; or  
(b) without proper authority exacts from any person money, provisions or service,   
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten 
years or such less punishment  as is in this Act mentioned.  
35. Making away with equipment. –Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, namely: – 
(a) makes away with, or is concerned in making away with, any arms, ammunition, equipment, 
instruments, tools, clothing or any other thing being the property of the Government issued to him for 
his use or entrusted to him; or  
(b) loses by neglect anything mentioned in clause ( a); or 
(c) sells, pawns, destroys or defaces any medal or decoration granted to him,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend, in 
the case of the offences specified in clause ( a), to ten years, and in the case of the offences, specified in 
the other clauses, to five years, or in ei ther case such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
36. Injury to property, etc. –Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, namely: – 
(a) destroys or injures any property mentioned in clause ( a) of section  35, or any property 
belonging to any Force mess, band or institution, or to any person subject to this Act; or  
(b) commits any act which causes damage to, or destruction of, any property of the Government 
by fire; or  
(c) kills, injures, makes away with, ill -treats or  loses, any animal entrusted to him,   
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable, if he has acted wilfully, to  suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to ten  years o r such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and if he  has acted 
witho ut reasonable excuse, to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
37. False accusations. –Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, 
namely:– 
(a) makes a false accusation against any person subject to this Act, knowing or having reason to 
believe such accusation to be false; or  
(b) in making a complaint against any person subject to this Act makes any statement affecting 
the character of such person, know ing or having reason to believe such statement to be false, or 
knowingly and wilfully suppresses any material facts,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
38. Falsifying official documents and false declarations. –Any person subject to this Act who 
commits any of the following offenc es, namely: – 
(a) in any report, return, list, certificate, book or other document made or signed by  him, or of the 
contents of which it is his duty to ascertain the accuracy, knowingly makes, or is privy to the making 
of, any false or fraudulent statement; or  
  14 
 (b) in any document of the description mentioned in clause ( a) knowingly makes, or is privy t o 
the making of, any omission, with  intent to defraud; or  
(c) knowingly and with intent to injure any person, or knowingly and with intent to defraud, 
suppresses, defaces, alters or makes away with any document which it is his duty to preserve or 
produce; or 
(d)  where it is his official duty to make a declaration respecting any matter knowingly makes a 
false declaration; or  
(e) obtains for himself, or for any other person, any pension,  allowance or other advantage or  
privilege by a statement which is false , and which he  either knows or  believes to be false or does not  
believe to be true, or by making or using a false entry in any book or record, or by making any 
document containing a false statement, or by omitting to make a true entry or docume nt containin g a 
true statement,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten 
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
39. Signing in blank and failure to report. –Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, namely: – 
(a) when signing any document relating to pay, arms, ammunitions, equipment, clothing, supplies 
or stores, or any property of the Government fraudulently leaves in blank any  material part for which 
his signature is a voucher; or  
(b) refuses or by culpable neglect omits to make or send a report or return which it is his duty to 
make or send,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term wh ich may extend to 
three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
40. Offences relating to Force Court. –Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, namely: – 
(a) being duly summoned or ordered to attend as a witness before a Force Court, wilfully or 
without reasonable excuse, makes default in attending; or  
(b) refuses to take an oath or make an affirmation legally required by a Force Court to be taken or 
made; or  
(c) refuses to produce or deliver any document in his power or control legally required by a Force 
Court to be produced or delivered by him; or  
(d) refuses, when a witness, to answer any question which he is by law bound to answer; and  
(e) is guilty of contempt of the Force Court by using insulting or threatening language, or by 
causing any interruption or disturbance in the proceedings of such court,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years or such less punishment as is in this A ct mentioned.  
41. False evidence. –Any person subject to this Act who, having been duly sworn or affirmed before 
any Force Court or other court competent under this Act to administer an oath or affirmation, makes any 
statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, 
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
42. Unlawful detent ion of pay.–Any officer, subordinate officer or an under -officer who, having 
received the pay of a person subject to this Act unlawfully detains or refuses to pay the same when due, 
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment fo r a term which may extend to 
five years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
43. Violation of good order and discipline. –Any person subject to this Act who is guilty of any act 
or omission which, though not specified in this Act, is prejudicial to good order and discipline of the 
Force shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which m ay extend 15 
 to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
44. Miscellaneous offences. –Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, namely: – 
(a) being in command at any post or on the march, and receiving a complaint that any one under 
his command has beaten or otherwise maltreated or oppressed any person, or has disturbed any fair or 
market, or committed any riot or trespass, fails to have due reparation made to the injured person or to 
report the case to th e proper authority; or  
(b) by defiling any place of worship, or otherwise, intentionally insults the religion, or wounds the 
religious feelings of, any person; or  
(c) attempts to commit suicide, and in such attempt does any act towards the commission of su ch 
offence; or  
(d) being below the rank of subordinate officer, when off duty, appears without proper authority, 
in or about camp, or in or about, or when going to, or returning from, any town or bazaar, carrying a 
rifle, sword or other offensive weapon; or 
(e) directly or indirectly accepts or obtains, or agrees to accept, or attempts to obtain, for himself 
or for any other person, any gratification as a motive or reward for procuring the enrolment of any  
person, or leave of absence, promotion or any othe r advantage or indulgence for any person in the 
service; or  
(f) commits any offence against the property or person of any inhabitant of, or resident in, the 
country in which he is serving,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer impriso nment for a term which may extend to 
seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
45. Attempt. –Any person subject to this Act who attempts to commit any of the offences specified in 
sections 16 to 44 (both inclusive) and in such attempt  does any act towards the  commission of the offence 
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, where no express provision is made by this Act for the punishm ent 
of such attempt, be liable, – 
(a) if the offence attempted to be committed is punishable with death,  to suffer imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
(b) if the offence attempted to be committed is punishable with imprisonment, to suffer 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one -half of the longest term provided for that offence 
or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
46.  Abetment of offences that have been committed. –Any person subject to this Act who abets the 
commission of any of the offences specified in s ections 16 to 44 (both inclusive) shall, on conviction by a 
Force Court, if the Act abetted is committed in consequence of the abetment and no express provision is 
made by this Act for the punishment of such abetment, be liable to suffer the punishment pro vided for 
that offence or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
47. Abetment of offences punishable  with death and not committed. –Any person subject to this 
Act who abets the commission of any of the offences punishable wi th death, under sections 16, 19 and 
sub-section  (1) of section 20 shall, on conviction by a Force Court, if that offence be not committed in 
consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Act for the punishment of such 
abetment, be l iable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
48. Abetment of offences punishable with imprisonment and not committed. –Any person subject 
to this Act who abets the commission  of any of the offences specified in sections 16 to 44 (both inclusive) 
and punishable with imprisonment shall, on conviction by a Force Court, if that offence be not committed 
in consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Act fo r the punishment of such 
abetment, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to one -half of the longest term 
provided for that offence or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
  16 
 49. Civil offences. –Subject to the provisions o f section 50, any person subject to this Act who at any 
place in, or beyond, India commits any civil offence shall be deemed to be guilty of an offence against 
this Act and, if charged therewith under this section shall be liable to be tried by a Force Cou rt and, on 
conviction, be  punishable as follows, namely: – 
(a) if the offence is one which would be punishable under any law in force in India with death, he 
shall be liable to suffer any punishment, assigned for the offence, by the aforesaid law and such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
(b) in any other case, he shall be liable to suffer any punishment, assigned for the offence by the 
law in force in India, or imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
50. Civil offences not triable by a Force Court. –A person subject to this Act who commits an 
offence of murder or culpable homicide not amounting to murder against, or of rape in relation to, a 
person not subject to this Act sh all not be deemed to be guilty of an offence under this Act and shall not 
be tried by a Force Court, unless he c ommits any of the said offences – 
(a) while on active duty; or  
(b) at any place outside India; or  
(c) at any place specified by the Central Gover nment by notification, in this behalf.  
CHAPTER IV  
PUNISHMENTS  
51. Punishment by Force Courts. –(1) Punishments may be inflicted in  respect of offences 
committed by persons subject to this Act and convicted by Force Courts according to the scale following, 
namely:– 
(a) death;  
(b) imprisonment which may be for the term of life or any other lesser term but excluding 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months in Force custody;  
(c) dismissal or removal from the service;  
(d) compulsory retirement from the  service;  
(e) imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months in Force custody;  
(f) reduction to the ranks or to a lower rank or grade or a place in the list of their rank in the case 
of an under -officer;  
(g) reduction to next lower rank in case of an officer or subordinate officer:  
Provided that no officer shall be reduced to a rank lower than the one to which he was initially 
appointed;  
(h) forfeiture of seniority of rank and forfeiture of all or any part of the service for the purpose of 
promotion;  
(i) forfeiture of service for the purpose of increased pay or pension;  
(j) fine, in respect of civil offences;  
(k) severe reprimand or reprimand except in the case of persons below the rank of an under -
officer;  
(l) forfeiture of pay and allowances for a period not exceeding three months for an offence 
committed on active duty;  
(m) forfeiture in the case of person sentenced to dismissal from the service of all arrears of pay 
and allowances and other public money due to him at the time of such dismissal;  
(n) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned by the offence for 
which he is convicted is made good.  17 
 (2) Each of the punishments specified in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be inferior in degree to 
every punishment preceding it in the above scale.  
52. Alternative punishments by Force Courts. –Subject to the provisions of this Act, a Force Court 
may, on convicting a person subject to this Act of any of the offences specified in sections 16 to 48 (both 
inclusive) award either the particular punishment with which the offence is stated in the said sections to 
be punishable or, in lieu thereof, any one of the punishments lower in the scale set out in section 51 regard 
being had to the nature and degree of the offence.  
53. Combination of punishments. –A Force Court may award in addition to, or without, any other 
punishment, the punishment specified in clause  (c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 51 or any one or more of 
the punishments specified in clauses ( f) to ( n) of that sub-section.  
54. Retention in the Force of a person convicted on active duty .–When on active duty an enrolled 
person has been sentenced by a Force Court to imprisonment whether combined with dismissal or not, the 
prescribed officer may direct that such per son may be retained to serve in the ranks, and such service shall 
be reckoned as part of his term of imprisonment.  
55. Punishments otherwise than by Force Courts. –Punishments may also be inflicted in respect of 
offences committed by persons subject to this  Act without the intervention of a Force Court in the manner 
stated in sections 56, 58 and 59.  
56. Minor punishments. –(1) Subject to the provisions of section 57, a commanding officer of and 
above the rank of Commandant may, in the prescribed manner, proce ed against a person subject to this 
Act, other than an officer or a subordinate officer, who is charged with an offence under this Act and 
award such person, to the extent prescribed, one or more of the  following punishments, namely: – 
(a) imprisonment in F orce custody up to twenty -eight days;  
(b) detention up to twenty -eight days;  
(c) confinement to the lines up to twenty -eight days;  
(d) extra guards or duties;  
(e) deprivation of any special position or special emoluments or any acting rank;  
(f) severe reprimand or reprimand;  
(g) fine up to fourtee n days' pay in any one month;  
(h) deductions from his pay and allowances of any sum required to make good any loss or 
damage occasioned by the offence for which he is punished.  
(2) If any unit, training centre or other establishment of the Force is being temporarily commanded by 
an officer of the rank of Second -in Command or Deputy Commandant, such officer shall have full powers 
of a commanding officer specified in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Subject to the provisions  of section 57, a Deputy Commandant or an  Assistant Commandant, 
commanding a company or a detachment or an outpost, shall have the power to proceed against a person 
subject to this Act, other than an officer or a subordinate officer,  who is  charged with an  offence under 
this Act and award such person to the  extent prescribed, one or more of the punishments specified in 
clauses  (a) to (d) and ( h) of sub -section ( 1) provided that the maximum limit of punishment awarded  
under each of the clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) shall  not exceed fourteen days.  
(4) A subordinate officer not below the rank of Sub -Inspector who is  commanding a detachment or an  
outpost shall have the powers to proc eed against a person subject to this Act, other than a  subordinate  
officer  or an under -officer, who is  charged with an  offence under this  Act  and award such person to the 
extent prescribed,  one or  more of the  punishments specified under  clauses ( c) and   (d) of sub-section (1) 
provided that the maximum limit of punishment awarded under  clause ( c) shall not exceed fourteen days.  
57. Limit of pu nishments under section 56. –(1) In the case of an award  of two or more of the 
punishments specified in clauses ( a), (b), (c) and ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 56, the punishments 
specified in  clause ( c) or clause ( d) shall take effect only at the end of the punishment specified in clause 
(a) or clause ( b). 18 
 (2) When two or more of the punish ments specified in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 56 are awarded to a person conjo intly, or when already undergoing one or more of the said 
punishments, the whole extent of the punishments shall not exceed in the aggregate forty -two days.  
(3) The punishments specified in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) of sub  section ( 1) of section 56 shall not be 
awarded to any person who is of the rank of an under -officer or was, at the time of committing the 
offence for which he is punished, of such rank.  
(4) The punishment specified in clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of section 56 shall not be awarded to an y 
person below the rank of an under -officer.  
58. Punishment of persons of or below the rank o f Commandant by Inspector -General and  
others.–(1) An officer not below the rank of Inspector -General may, in  the prescribed manner, proceed 
against an officer of or below the rank of Commandant who is charged with an offence under this Act and 
award one or more of the  following punishments, namely: – 
(a) forfeiture of seniority, or in the case of any of them whose promotion depends upon length of 
service, forfeiture  of service for the purpose of promotion for a period not exceeding one year, but 
subject to the right of the accused previous to the award to elect to be tried by a Force Court;  
(b) severe reprimand or reprimand;  
(c) deduction from pay and allowances of any sum required to make good any proved loss or 
damage occasioned by the offence of which he is convicted.  
(2) An officer not below the rank of Additional Deputy Inspector -General may, in the prescribed 
manner, proceed against a person of or below the rank of Subedar -Major or Inspector who is charged with 
an offence under this Act and award one or more of the  following punishments, namely: – 
(a) forfeiture of seniority, or in the case of any of them whose promotion depends upon the length 
of service, for feiture of service for the purpose of promotion for a period not exceeding one year, but 
subject to the right of the accused previous to the award to elect to be tried by a Force Court;  
(b) severe reprimand or reprimand;  
(c) deduction from pay and allowanc es of any sum required to make good any proved loss or 
damage occasioned by the offence of which he is convicted.  
(3) An officer not below the rank of Commandant may, in the prescribed manner, proceed against a 
person of or b elow the rank of Subedar -Major or Inspector who is charged with an offence under this Act 
and award any one or both of the  following punishments, namely: – 
(a) severe reprimand or reprimand;  
(b) deduction from pay and allowances of any sum required to make good any proved loss or 
damage occasioned by the offence of which he is convicted.  
59. Cancellation, variation or remittance of sentence. –(1) In every  case in which punishment has 
been awarded under section 58, certified true copies of the proceedings shall be forwarded, in the 
prescribed manner, by the officer awarding the punishment to the prescribed superior authority who may, 
if the punishment awarded appears to him to be illegal, unjust or excessive, cancel, vary or remit the 
punishment and make such other direction as may b e appropriate in the circumstances of the case.  
(2) For the purpose of sub -section ( 1), a "superior authority" means, – 
(a) any officer superior in command to such officer who has awarded the punishment;  
(b) in the case of punishment awarded by Director -General, the Central Government.  
60. Collective fines. –(1) Whenever any weapon or part of weapon or  ammunition, forming part of the 
equipment of a unit, is lost or stolen, a commanding officer not below the rank of the Commandant of that 
unit may,  after making such enquiry as he thinks fit, impose such collective fine as may be prescribed, 
upon the subordinate officers, under -officers and men of such unit, or upon so many of them as, in his 
judgment, should be held responsible for such loss or thef t. 
(2) Such fine shall be assessed as a percentage of the pay of the individuals on whom it falls.  19 
 CHAPTER V  
DEDUCTIONS FROM PAY AND ALLOWANCES  
61. Deductions from pay and allowances of persons subject to this Act. –(1) The following 
deductions may be made from the pay and al lowances of an officer, namely: – 
(a) all pay and allowances due to an officer for every day he absents himself without leave, unless 
a satisfactory explanation has been given to, and accepted by, the Inspector -General under whom he 
is for the time being serving;  
(b) all pay and allowances for every day while he is in custody on a charge for an offence for 
which he is afterwards convicted by a criminal court or Force Court or by an officer exercising 
authority under section 58;  
(c) any sum  required to make good the pay of any person subject to this Act which he has 
unlawfully retained or unlawfully refused to pay;  
(d) any sum required to make good such compensation for any expenses, loss, damage or 
destruction occasioned by the commission o f an offence as may be determined by the Force Court by 
whom he is convicted of such offence or by an officer exercising authority under section 58;  
(e) all pay and allowances ordered by Force Court;  
(f) any sum required to be paid as fine awarded by a criminal court or a Force Court;  
(g) any sum required to make good any loss, damage or destruction of  public or Force property 
which, after due investigation, appears to the Inspector -General unde r whom the officer is for the time 
being serving,  to have been  occasioned by the wrongful act or negligence on the part  of the officer;  
(h) all pay and allowances forfeited by order of the Central Government  if the officer is found by  
a court of inquiry consti tuted by the Director -General in this behalf, to have deserted to the enemy, or 
while in enemy hands, to have served with, or under the orders of, the enemy, or in any manner to 
have aided the enemy, or to have allowed himself to be taken prisoner by the enemy through want of 
due precaution or through disobed ience of orders or wilful neglect of duty, or having been taken 
prisoner by the enemy, to have failed to rejoin h is service when it was possible to do so;  
(i) any sum r equired by order of  the Central Govern ment to be paid for  the maintenance of his 
wife or  his legitimate or illegitimate child or step child or towards the cost of any relief given by the 
said Government to the said wife or child.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 63, the following deductions may be made from the pay and 
allowances of a  person subject to this Act, other than an officer, namely: – 
(a) all pay and allowances for every day of absence either on desertion  or without leave or as a 
prisoner of  war unless a satisfactory  explanation has been given and accepted by his commanding 
officer and for every day of imprisonment awarded by a criminal court, Force  Court or an officer 
exercising authority  under section 56;  
(b) all pay and allowances for every day  while he is in custody on a charge for an offence of 
which he is afterwards convicted by a criminal court or Force Court or on a charge of absence without 
leave for which  he is afterwards awarded imprisonment by an officer exercising authority under 
section 56;  
(c) all pay and allowances for every day on which he is in hospital on  account of sickness 
certified by the medical officer attending on him to have been caused by an offence under this Act 
committed by him;  
(d) all pay and allowances for every day on which he is in hospital on account of sickness 
certified by the medical of ficer attending on him to have been caused by his own misconduct or 
imprudence, such sum as may be specified by the order of the Director -General;  
(e) all pay and allowances ordered by Force Court or by an officer exercising authority under any 
of the sect ions 56 and 58 to be forfeited or stopped;  
  20 
 (f) all pay and allowances for every day between his being recovered from the enemy and his 
dismissal from the service in consequence of his conduct when being taken prisoner by, or while in 
the hands of the enemy;  
(g) any sum required to make good such compensation for any expenses, loss, damage or 
destruction caused by him to the Central Government or to any building or property or any private 
fund of the Force as may be awarded by his commanding officer;  
(h) any sum required to pay a fine awarded by a criminal court, Force Court exercising 
jurisdiction under section 49 or an officer exercising authority under any of the sections 56 and 60;  
(i) any sum required by order of the Central Government or any prescribed officer to be paid for 
the maintenance of his wife, or his legitimate or illegitimate child or step child or towards the cost of 
any relief given by the said Government to the said wife or child.  
(3) For computation of time of absence or custody  under thi s section,– 
(a) no person shall be treated as absent or in custody for a day unless  the absence or custody has 
lasted, whether wholly in one day, or partly in one day and partly in another for six consecutive hours 
or upwards;  
(b) any absence or custody for less than a day may be reckoned as absence or custody for a day, if 
such absence or custody prevented the absentee from fulfilling any duty as member of the Force 
which was thereby thrown upon some other person;  
(c) absence or custody  for twelv e consecutive hours or upwards may be  reckoned as absence or 
custody for the whole of each day during any  portion of which the person was absent or in custody;  
(d) a peri od of absence, or imprisonment, which commences before, and  ends after , midnight may 
be reckoned as a day. 
62. Pay and allowances during trial. –In the case of any person subject to this Act who is in custody 
or under suspension from duty on a charge for an offence, the prescribed officer may direct that the whole 
or any part  of the pay and allowances of such person shall be withheld, pending the result of his trial on 
the charge against him,  in order to g ive effect to the provisions of clause   (b) of sub-sections  (1) and ( 2) 
of section 61.  
63. Limit of certain deductions. –The total deductions from the pay and allowances of a person made 
under clauses ( e) and ( g) to ( i) of sub -section ( 2) of section 61 shall not, except where he is sentenced to 
dismissal or removal, exceed in any one month one -half of his pay and allowances for  that month.  
64. Deduction from public money due  to a person. –Any sum authorised by this Act to be deducted 
from the pay and allowances of any person may, without prejudice to any other mode of recovering the 
same, be deducted from any public money due to him other than a pension.  
65. Pay and allowances of prisoner of war during inquiry into his conduct. –Where the conduct of 
any person subject to this Act when being taken prisoner by, or while in the hands of, the enemy, is to be 
inquired into under this Ac t or any other law, the Director -General or any officer authorised by him may 
order that the whole or any part of the pay and allowances of such person shall be withheld pending the 
result of such inquiry.  
66. Remission of deductions. –Any deduction from pay and allowances authorised by this Act may 
be remitted in such manner and to such extent, and by such authority, as may from time to time be 
prescribed.  
67. Provision for dependants of prisoner of war from his remitted  deduction s and pay and 
allowances. –(1) In the case of all persons  subject to this Act, being prisoners of war, whose pay and 
allowances have been forfeited under clause ( h) of sub -section ( 1) or clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 61 but in respect of whom a remission has been made un der section 66, it shall be lawful for the 
Central Government or the Director -General, when so authorised by the Central Government, to make 
provisions in respect of pay and allowances for any dependants of such persons and any such remission 
shall in that  case be deemed to apply only to the balance thereafter remaining of such pay and allowances.  
  21 
 (2) It shall be lawful for the Central Government or the Director  General, when so authorised by the 
Central Government, to make provisions for any dependants o f any person subject to this Act who is a 
prisoner of war, or is missing, in respect of his pay and allowances.  
68. Period during which a person is deemed to be a prisoner of war. –For the purposes of section 
67, a person shall be deemed to continue to be a  prisoner of war until the conclusion of any inquiry into 
his conduct such as is referred to in section 65 and if he is dismissed from the service in consequence of 
such conduct, until the date of such dismissal.  
CHAPTER VI  
ARREST AND PROCEEDINGS BEFORE TR IAL 
69. Custody of offenders. –(1) Any person subject to this Act who is  charged with any offence may 
be taken into Force custody under the order of any superior officer.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), an officer may order into Force custody 
any other officer, though such other officer may be of a higher rank, if he engages in a quarrel, affray or 
disorder.  
70. Duty of commanding officer in regard to detention. –(1) It shall  be the duty of every 
commanding officer to take care th at a person under his command when charged with an offence is not 
detained in custody for more than forty -eight hours after the committal of such person into custody is 
reported to him, without the charge being investigated, unless investigation in the pre scribed procedure, 
within that period seems to him to be impracticable having regard to the public service.  
(2) The case of every person being detained in custody beyond a period of forty -eight hours, and the 
reasons therefor, shall be reported by the comm anding officer to the next higher officer or such other 
officer to whom an application may be made to convene a Force Court for the trial of the person charged.  
(3) In reckoning the period of forty -eight hours specified in sub -section ( 1), Sundays and other public 
holidays shall be excluded.  
(4) The manner in which and the period for which any person subject to this  Act may be taken into 
and detained in Force custody, pending the trial by any  competent authority for any offence committed by 
him, shall be in such manner as may be prescribed.  
71. Interval between committal and trial. –In every case where any such person as is mentioned in 
section 69 and as is not on active duty, remains in such custody for a longer period than eight days 
without a Force Co urt for his trial being convened, a special report giving reasons for the delay shall be 
made by his commanding officer in the  manner prescribed, and a similar report shall be forwarded at 
intervals of every eight days until a Force Court is convened or su ch person is released from custody.  
72. Arrest by civil authorities. –Whenever any person, subject to this Act, who is accused of an 
offence under this Act, is within the jurisdiction of any magistrate or police officer, such magistrate or 
police officer shall aid in the apprehension and delivery to Force custody of such person upon receipt of a 
written application to that effect signed by his commanding officer or an officer authorised by the 
commanding officer in that behalf.  
73. Capture of deserters. –(1) Whenever any person subject to this  Act deserts, the commanding 
officer of the unit to which he belongs or is attached, shall give information of the desertion to such civil 
authorities as, in his opinion, may be able to afford assistance towards the cap ture of the deserter; and 
such authorities shall thereupon take steps for the apprehension of the said deserter in like manner as if he 
were a person for whose apprehension a warrant had been issued by a magistrate, and shall deliver the 
deserter, when app rehended, into Force custody.  
(2) Any police officer may arrest without warrant any person reasonably believed to be subject to this 
Act, and to be a deserter or to be travelling without authority, and shall bring him without delay before the 
nearest magis trate, to be dealt with according to law.  
74. Inquiry into absence without leave. –(1) When any person subject  to this Act has been absent 
from duty without due authority for a period of thirty days, a court of inquiry shall, as soon as practicable, 
be appointed by such authority and in such manner as may be prescribed; and such court shall, on oath or 
affirmation administered in the prescribed manner, inquire in respect of the absence of the person, and the 22 
 deficiency, if any, in the property of the Government entrusted to his care, or in any arms, ammunition, 
equipment, instruments, clothing or accessories; and if  satisfied of the fact of such absence without due 
authority or other sufficient cause, the court shall declare such absence and the period thereof and the said 
deficiency, if any, and the commanding officer of the unit to which the person belongs or is at tached, 
shall make a record thereof in the prescribed manner.  
(2) If the person declared absent does not afterwards surrender or is not apprehended, he shall, for the 
purposes of this Act, be deemed to be a deserter.  
75. Force Police Officers. –(1) The Dire ctor-General or any  prescribed officer may appoint persons 
(in this Act referred to as Force Police) for discharging the functions specified in sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3). 
(2) The duties of a person appointed under sub -section ( 1) are to take charge of persons confined for 
any offence, to preserve good order and discipline and to prevent breaches of the same by persons serving 
in, or attached to the Force.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 69, a person appointed under sub -section ( 1) may,  
at any time, arrest and detain for trial any person subject to this Act who commits, or is charged with, an 
offence, and may also carry into effect any punishment to be inflicted in pursuance of a sentence awarded 
by a Force Court or by an officer exercis ing authority under section 56 but shall not inflict any 
punishment on his own authority:  
Provided that no officer shall be so arrested or detained otherwise than on the order of another officer.  
CHAPTER VII  
FORCE  COURTS  
76. Kinds of Force Courts. –For the purposes of this Act, there shall be three kinds of Force Courts, 
namely  :– 
(a) General Force Courts;  
(b) Petty Force Courts; and  
(c) Summary Force Courts,  
which shall be convened in the manner prescribed.  
77. Power to convene a General Force Court.–A General Force Court may be convened by the 
Central Government or the Director - General or by any officer empowered in this beh alf by warrant of the 
Director -General.  
78. Power to convene a Petty Force Court. –A Petty Force Court may be convened by an officer 
having power to convene a General Force Court or by an officer empowered in this behalf by warrant of 
any such offi cer. 
79. Warrants issued under sections 77 and 78. –A warrant issued under section 77 or section 78 
may contain such restrictions, reservations or conditions as the officer issuing it may think fit.  
80. Composition of a General Force Court. –A General Force Court shall consist of not less than 
five officers.  
81. Composition of a Petty Force Court. –A Petty Force Court shall consist of not less than three 
officers.  
82.  Summary Force Court. –(1) A Summary Force Court may be held by  the commanding officer of 
any unit and he alone shall constitute the Court.  
(2) The proceedings shall be attended throughout by two other persons who shall be officers or 
subordinate officers or one of either, and who shall not as such, be sworn or affirmed.  
83. Dissolution of a Force Court. –(1) If a Force Court after the  commencement of a trial is reduced 
below the minimum number of officers required by this Ac t, it shall be dissolved.  
  23 
 (2) If, on account of the illness of the concerned Judge Attorney or, as the case may be, Deputy Judge 
Attorney -General or Additional Judge Attorney -General or of the accused before the finding, it is 
impossible to continue the trial, the Force Court shall be dissolved.  
(3) The authority or officer who convened a Force Court may dissolve the same if it appears to him 
that the exigencies of the service or necessities of discipline render it impossible or inexpedient to 
continue the said Force Court.  
(4) Where a Force Court is dissolved under this section, the  accused  may be tried again.  
84. Powers of a General Force Court.  –A General Force Court shall have the power to try any 
person subject to this Act for any offence punishabl e thereunder and to pass any sentence authorised 
thereby.  
85. Powers of a Petty Force Court. –A Petty Force Court shall have the power to try any person 
subject to this Act other than an officer or a subordinate officer for any offence made punishable 
there under and  to pass any sentence authorised by this Act other than a sentence of death or imprisonment 
for a term exceeding two years.  
86. Powers of a Summary Force Court. –(1) Subject to the provisions  of sub -section ( 2), a Summary 
Force Court may try any offence punishable under this Act.  
(2) When there is no grave reason for immediate action and reference  can without detriment to 
discipline be made to the officer empowered to convene a Petty Force Court for the trial of the alleged 
offender, an officer ho lding a Summary Force Court shall not try without such reference any offence 
punishable u nder any of the sections 16,   19 and 49, or any offender against the officer holding the Court.  
(3) A Summary Force Court may try any person subject to this Act and under the command of the 
officer holding the Court, except an officer or a subordinate officer.  
(4) A Summary Force Court may pass any sentence which may be passed under this Act, except the 
sentence of death or of imprisonment for a term exceeding the limit specified in sub -section ( 5). 
(5)  The limit referred to in sub -section ( 4) shall be, – 
(a)  one year, if the officer holding the Force Court holds the rank not below that of a 
Commandant;  
(b) three months, in any other case.  
87. Prohibition of second  trial.–(1) When any person, subject to  this Act has been acquitted or 
convicted of an offence by a Force Court or by a criminal court or has been dealt with under section 56 or 
section 58, he shall not be liable to be tried again for the same offence by a  Force Court or dealt with 
under the said sections.  
(2) When any person, subject to this Act, has been acquitted or convicted of an offence by a Force 
Court or has been dealt with under section 56 or section 58, he shall not be liable to be tried again by a 
criminal court for the same offence or on the same facts.  
88. Period of limitation for trial. –(1) Except as provided by sub -section ( 2), no trial by a Force 
Court of any person subject to this  Act for any offence shall be commenced after the expiration of a 
period of three  years from  the date of such offence.  
(2) The provisions  of sub -section ( 1) shall  not apply  to a trial  for an offence of desertion or for any of 
the offences mentioned in section 19.  
(3) In the computation of the period of time  mentioned  in sub-section  (1), any time spent  by such 
person in evading  arrest after  the commission of the offence, shall be excluded.  
89. Trial, etc., of offender who cea ses to be subject to this Act. –(1) Where an offence under this 
Act had been committed by any person while subject to this Act, and he has ceased to be so subject, he 
may be taken into and kept in Force custody and tried and punished for such offence as if he continued to 
be so subject.  
(2) No such person shall be tried for an offence, unles s his trial commences within six months after he 
had ceased to be subject to this Act:  24 
 Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to the trial of any such person for an 
offence of desertion or for any of the offences mentioned in section 19 or shall affect the jurisdiction of a 
criminal court to try any offence triable by such court as well as by a Force Court.  
90. Application of Act during term of sentence. –(1) When a person  subject to this Act is sentenced 
by a Force Court to imprisonment, this Act shall apply to him during the term of his sentence, though he 
is dismissed from the Force, or has otherwise ceased to be subject to this Act, and he may be kept, 
removed, imprisoned and punished as if he continued to be subject to th is Act.  
(2) When a person subject to this Act is sentenced by a Force Court to death, this Act shall apply to 
him till the sentence is carried out.  
91. Place of trial, etc. –(1) Any person subject to this Act who  commits any offence under this Act 
may be tr ied and punished for such offence at any place.  
(2) The persons by whom an accused may be defended in a trial and appearance of such persons 
thereat may be as prescribed.  
92. Choice between criminal court and Force Court. –When a criminal  court and a Force Court 
have each jurisdiction in respect of an offence, it shall be in the discretion of the Director -General, 
Additional Director -General or the Inspector -General or the Deputy Inspector -General or the Additional 
Deputy Inspector -General within whose comma nd the accused person is serving or such other officer as 
may be prescribed, to decide before which court the proceedings shall be instituted, a nd if that officer 
decides that they shall be  instituted before a Force Court, then he may direct that the accus ed person shall 
be detained in Force custody.  
93. Power of cri minal court to require delivery of offender. –(1) When a criminal court having 
jurisdiction is of  opinion that  proceedings shall be instituted before itself in respect of any alleged 
offence, it may, by written notice, require the officer referred to in section 92 at his option, either to 
deliver over the offender to the nearest magistrate to be proceeded against according to law, or to 
postpone proceedings, pending a reference to the Central Gove rnment.  
(2) In every such case the said officer shall either deliver over the offender in compliance with the 
requisition, or shall forthwith refer the question as to the court before which the proceedings are to be 
instituted, for the determination of the  Central Government whose order upon such reference shall be 
final.  
CHAPTER VIII  
PROCEDURE  OF FORCE  COURTS   
94. Presiding officer. –At every General Force Court or Petty Force Court, the senior member shall 
be the presiding officer.  
95. Judge Att orneys .–(1) Every General Force Court shall, and every  Petty Force Court may be 
attended by a Judge Attorney or a Deputy Judge Attorney -General or an Additional Judge Attorney -
General, or, if no such officer is available, an officer approved by the Judge Attorney - General or by any 
officer authorised in this behalf by the Judge Attorney -General.  
(2) The recruitment and conditions of service of Judge Attorney - General, Additional Judge Attorney -
General, Deputy Judge Attorney -General and Judge Attorney shall be such as may be prescribed.  
96. Objections. –(1) At all trials by a General Force Court or by a  Petty Force Court, as soon as the 
Court is assembled, the names of the presiding officer and members shall be read over to the accused, 
who shall thereupon be  asked wheth er he objects to being  tried by any  officer sitting on  the Court.  
(2) If the accused objects to such officer, his objection and also the reply thereto of the officer 
objected to shall be heard and recorded, and the remaining officers of the Court shall, in  the absence of 
the challenged officer decide on the objection.  
(3) If the objection is allowed by one -half or more of the votes of  the officers entitled to vote, the 
objection shall be allowed, and the member objected to  shall retire,  and his vacancy  may be filled in the  
prescribed manner,  by another officer subject to  the same right of the  accused to object.  
  25 
 (4) When no objection is made, or when an objection has been made and disallowed, or the vacancy 
of an officer has been filled by another officer u nder sub -section ( 3) to which no objection is made or 
allowed, the Court shall proceed with the trial.  
97. Oath of members, Judge  Attorneys and witnesses. –(1) An oath or  affirmation in the prescribed 
manner shall be administered to every member of the Force Court and to the Judge Attorney, or, as the 
case may be, the Deputy Judge Attorney -General or the Additional Judge Attorney -General or the officer 
approved under section 95, before the commencement of the trial.  
(2) Every person giving evidence befor e a Force Court shall be examined after being duly sworn or 
affirmed in the prescribed form.  
(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall not apply where the witness is a child under twelve years 
of age and the Force Court is of opinion that though the witn ess understands the duty of speaking the 
truth, he does not understand the nature of an oath or affirmation.  
98. Voting by members. –(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), every decision of a 
Force Court shall be passed by an absolute majority of votes; and where there is an equality of votes on 
either the finding or the sentence, the decision shall be in favour of the accused.  
(2) No sentence of death shall be passed by a General Force Court without the concurrence of at least 
two-thirds of the members of the Court.  
(3) In matters other than an objection or the finding or sentence, the presiding officer shall have a 
casting vote.  
99. General rule as to evidence. –The Indian Evidence Act, 1872  (1 of 18 72), shall, subject to the 
provisions  of this Act, apply to all proceedings before a Force Court.  
100. Judicial notice. –A Force Court may take judicial notice of any matter within the general 
knowledge of the members as officers of the Force.  
101. Summoning of witnesses. –(1) The convening  officer  or the presiding officer of a Force Court or 
the Judge Attorney or, as the case may be, the Deputy Judge Attorney -General or the Additional Judge 
Attorney -General or the officer approved under section 95 or the commanding officer of the accused 
person may, by summons under his hand, require the attendance, at a time and place to be mentioned in 
the summons, of any person either to give evidence or to produce any document or other thing.  
(2) In the case of a witness who is subject to this Act or any other Act relating to the armed forces of 
the Union, the summons shall be sent to his commanding officer and such officer shall serve it upon him 
accordingly.  
(3) In the case of any other witness, the summons shall be sent to the magistrate within whose 
jurisdiction he may be, or resides, and such magistrate shall give effect to the summons as if the witness 
were required in the court of such a magistrate.  
(4) When a witness is required to produce any particular or other thing in his possession or power, th e 
summons shall describe it with reasonable precision.  
102. Docu ments exempted from production. –(1) Nothing in section  101 shall be deemed to affect 
the operation of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872  (1 of 1872) , or to apply to any 
letter, postcard, telegram or other document in the custody of the postal or telegraph authorities.  
(2) If any document in such custody is, in the opinion of any District Magistrate, Chief Metropolitan 
Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate, Court of Sessio ns or High Court wanted for the purpose of any 
Force Court, such Magistrate or Court may require the postal or telegraph authorities, as the case may be, 
to deliver such document to such person as such Magistrate or Court may direct.  
(3) If any such docume nt is, in the opinion of any other magistrate or of any Commissioner of Police 
or District Superintendent of Police, wanted for any such purpose, he may require the postal or telegraph 
authorities, as the case may be, to cause such search to be made for, a nd to detain such document pending 
the orders of any such District Magistrate, Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate, 
Court of Sessions or High Court.  
  26 
 103. Commission for exami nation of witnesses. –(1) Whenever, in the  course of a trial by a Force 
Court, it appears to the Court that the examination of a witness is necessary for the ends of justice, and 
that the attendance of such witness cannot be procured without an amount of delay, expense or 
inconvenience which, in th e circumstances of the case, would be unreasonable, such Court may address 
the Judge Attorney -General in order that a commission to take the evidence of such witness may be 
issued.  
(2) The Judge Attorney -General may then, if he thinks necessary, issue a commission to any 
Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first class, within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction such witness resides, to take the evidence of such witness.  
(3) The Magistrate to whom the commission is issued, or, if he is  the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, 
or Chief Judicial Magistrate, or such Metropolitan Magistrate, or Judicial Magistrate, as he appoints in 
this behalf, shall summon the witness before him or proceed to the place where the witness is, and shall 
take down his evidence in the same manner, and may for this purpose exercise the same powers, as in the 
trials of warrant -cases under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
(4) When the witness resides in a tribal area or in any place outside India, the  commission may be 
issued in the manner specified in Chapter XXIII of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
104. Examination of a witness on commission. –(1) The prosecutor and  the accused person in any 
case in which a commission is issued under s ection 103 may respectively forward any interrogatories in 
writing which the court may think relevant to the issue, and the Magistrate executing the commission 
shall examine the witness upon such interrogatories.  
(2) The prosecutor and the accused person may appear before such Magistrate by counsel, or, except 
in the case of an accused person in custody, in person, and may examine, cross -examine and re -examine, 
as the case may be, the said witness.  
(3) After a commission issued under section 103 has been d uly executed, it shall be returned, together 
with the deposition of the witness examined thereunder to the Judge Attorney -General.  
(4) On receipt of a commission, and deposition returned under sub -section ( 3), the Judge Attorney -
General shall forward the same to the Court at whose instance the commission was issued or, if such 
Court has been dissolved, to any other Court convened for the trial of the accused person; and the 
commission, the return thereto and the deposition shall be open to inspection by th e prosecutor and the 
accused person, and may, subject to all just exceptions, be read in evidence in the case by either the 
prosecutor or the accused, and shall form part of the proceedings of the Court.  
(5) In every case in which a commission is issued under section 103, the trial may be adjourned for 
specified time reasonably sufficient for the execution and return of the commission.  
105. Conviction for offences not charged. –A person ch arged before a Force Court with –– 
(a) desertion may be found guilty of attempting to desert or of being absent without leave;  
(b) attempting to desert may be found guilty of being absent without leave;  
(c) using criminal force may be found guilty of assault;  
(d) using threatening language may be found guilty of using insub ordinate language;  
(e) any one of the offences specified in clauses ( a), (b), (c) and (d) of section 33 may be found 
guilty of any other of these offences with which he might have been charged;  
(f) an offence punishable under section 49 may be found guilty  of any other offence of which he 
might have been found guilty, if the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  
were applicable.  
(g) any offence under this Act may, on failure of proof of an offence having been committed in 
circumstan ces involving a more severe punishment, be found guilty of the same offence as having 
been committed in circumstances involving a less severe punishment;  
(h) any offence under this Act may be found guilty of having attempted or abetted the 
commission of th at offence, although the attempt or abetment is not separately charged.  27 
 106. Presumption as to signatures. –In any proceeding under this Act, any application, certificate, 
warrant, reply or other document purporting to be signed by an officer in the service  of the Government 
shall, on production, be presumed to have been duly signed by the person by whom and in the character in 
which it purports to have been signed, until the contrary is shown.  
107. Enrolment paper. –(1) Any enrolment paper purporting to be  signed by an enrolling officer 
shall, in proceedings under this Act, be evidence of the person enrolling having given the answers to 
questions which he is therein represented as having given.  
(2) The enrolment of such person may be proved by the production of the original or a copy of this 
enrolment paper purporting to be certified to be a true copy by the office having the custody of the 
enrolment paper or service record.  
108. Presumption as to certain documents. –(1) A letter, return or  other document respecting the 
service of any person in, or the dismissal, removal or discharge of any person from, any unit of the Force, 
or respecting the circumstances of any person not having served in, or belonged to, any unit of the Force, 
if purporting to be signed  by or on behalf of the Central Government or the Director -General, or by any 
prescribed officer, shall be evidence of the facts stated in such letter, return or other document.  
(2) A Force List or Gazette purporting to be published by authority shall be e vidence of the status and 
rank of the officers, subordinate officers therein mentioned, and of any appointment held by them and of 
the battalion, unit, or branch of the Force to which they belong.  
(3) Where a record is made in any battalion book in pursuance of this Act or of any rules made 
thereunder or otherwise in the discharge of official duties, and purports to be signed by the commanding 
officer or by the officers whose duty it is to make such record, such record shall be evidence of the facts 
therein stated.  
(4) A copy of any record in any office of the Force purporting to be  certified to be true  copy by the 
officer  having  custody  of such book  shall be evidence of  such record.  
(5) Where any person  subject to this Act  is being tried  on a charge of desertion or of absence without 
leave, and such  person has  surrendered  himself into the custody of any officer or other person, subject to 
this Act, or any unit of the Force, or has been apprehended by such officer or person, a certificate 
purporting to  be signed by such officer, or by the commanding officer of the unit to which such person 
belongs or is attached, as the case may be, and stating the fact, date and place of such surrender or 
apprehension, and the manner in which he was dressed shall be ev idence of the matters so stated.  
(6) Where any person subject to this Act is being tried on a charge of desertion or of absence without 
leave and such person has surrendered himself into the custody of, or has been apprehended by, a police 
officer not belo w the rank of an officer in charge of a police station, a certificate purporting to be signed 
by such police officer and stating the fact, date and place of such surrender or apprehension and the 
manner in which he was dressed shall be evidence of the matt ers so stated.  
(7) (a) Any document purporting to be a report under the hand of a Government scientific expert to 
whom this sub -section applies, upon any matter or thing duly submitted to him for examination or 
analysis and report in the course of any proc eeding under this Act, may be used as evidence in any 
inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Act.  
(b) The Force Court may, if it thinks fit, summon and examine any such expert as to the subject 
matter of his report.  
(c) Where any such expert is summ oned by a Force Court and he is unable to attend personally, he 
may, unless the Court has expressly directed him to appear personally, depute an officer who is 
conversant with the facts of the case to depose in the Court on his behalf.  
(d) This sub -section  applies to the Government scientific expert,  for the time being specified in sub -
section  (4) of section 293  of the Code  of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
109. Reference by accused to Government  officer.–(1) If at any trial for desertion or absence 
without leave,  over-staying leave  or not rejoining when warned for service, the accused person states in 
his defence any sufficient or reasonable excuse for his unauthorised absence, and refers in support thereof 
to any officer in the service of the Govern ment, or if it appears that any such officer is likely to prove or 28 
 disprove the said statement in the defence, the Court shall address such officer and adjourn the 
proceedings until his reply is received.  
(2) The written reply of any officer so referred to  shall, if signed by him, be received in evidence and 
have the same effect as if made on oath before the Court.  
(3) If the Court is dissolved before the receipt of such reply or if the Court omits to comply with the 
provisions of this section, the convenin g officer may, at his discretion, annul the proceedings and order a 
fresh trial.  
110. Evidence of previous convictions and general character. –(1) When any person subject to this 
Act has been convicted by a Force Court of any offence, such Force Court may i nquire into, and receive, 
and record evidence of any previous convictions of such person, either by a Force Court or by a criminal 
court, or any previous award of punishment under section 56 or section 58, and may further inquire into 
and record the genera l character of such person and such other matters as may be prescribed.  
(2) Evidence received under this section may be either oral, or in the shape of entries in, or certified 
extracts from, books of Force Courts or other official record; and it shall not  be necessary to give notice 
before trial to the person tried that evidence as to his previous convictions or character will be received.  
(3) At a Summary Force Court, the officer holding the trial may, if he thinks fit, record any previous 
convictions aga inst the offender, his general character, and such other matters as may be prescribed, as of 
his own knowledge, instead of requiring them to be proved under the foregoing provisions of this section.  
111. Lunacy of accused. –(1) Whenever, in the course of a trial by a  Force Court, it appears to the 
Court that the person charged is by reason of unsoundness of mind incapable of making his defence, or 
that he committed the act alleged but was by reason of unsoundness of mind incapable of knowing the 
nature of th e act or knowing that it was wrong or contrary to law, the Court shall record a finding 
accordingly.  
(2) The presiding officer of the Court, or, in the case of a Summary Force Court, the officer holding 
the trial, shall forthwith report the case to the con firming officer, or to the authority empowered to deal 
with its finding under section 129, as the case may be.  
(3) The confirming officer to whom the case is reported under sub -section ( 2) may, if he does not 
confirm the finding, take steps to have the accused person tried by the same or another Force Court for the 
offence with which he was charged.  
(4) The authority to whom the finding of a Summary For ce Court is reported under sub -section ( 2) 
and a confirming officer confirming the finding in any case so reported to him shall order the accused 
person to be kept in custody in the prescribed manner and shall report the case for the orders of the 
Central Government.  
(5) On receipt of a report under sub -section ( 4), the Central Government may order the accu sed 
person to be detained in a lunatic asylum or other suitable place of safe custody.  
112. Subsequent fitness of lunatic accused for trial. –Where any accused person, having been found 
by reason of unsoundness of mind to be incapable of making his defence,  is in custody or under detention 
under  section 111, any officer  prescribed in this behalf, may – 
(a) if such person is in custody under sub -section ( 4) of section 111, on the report of a medical 
officer that he is capable of making his defence, or  
(b) if such person is detained in a jail under sub -section ( 5) of section 111, on a certificate of the 
Inspector -General of Prisons, and if such person is detained in a lunatic asylum under the said sub -
section, on a certificate of any two or more of the visitors of such asylum and if he is detained in any 
other place under that sub -section, on a certificate of the prescribed authority, that he is capable of 
making his defence, take steps to have such person tried by the same or another Force Court for  the 
offence with which he was originally charged or, if the offence is a civil offence, by a criminal court.  
113. Transmission to Central Go vernment of order under section  112.–A copy of every order 
made by an officer under section 112 for the trial of the accused shall forthwith be sent to the Central 
Government.  29 
 114. Release of lunatic accused. –Where any person is in custody under sub -section ( 4) of section 
111 or under detention under sub -section ( 5) of that section, – 
(a) if such person is in custody under the said sub -section ( 4), on the report of a medical officer, 
or 
(b) if such person is detained under the said sub -section ( 5), on a certificate from any of the 
authorities mentioned in clause ( b) of section 112 that in the judgment of such officer or authorit y 
such person may be released without danger of his causing injury to himself or to any other person,  
the Central Government may order that such person be released or detained in custody or transferred to a 
public lunatic asylum if he has not already been sent to such an asylum.  
115. Delivery of lunatic accused to relatives. –Where any relative or friend of any person who is in 
custody under sub -section ( 4) of section  111 or under detention under sub -section ( 5) of that section 
desires  that he should be delivered to his care and custody, the Central Government may, upon application 
by such relative or friend and, on his giving security to the satisfaction of that Government that the person 
delivered shall be properly taken care of, and, prevented from doi ng injury to himself or to any other 
person, and be produced for the inspection of such officer, and at such times and places, as the Central 
Government may direct, order such person to be delivered to such relative or friend.  
116. Order for custody and di sposal of property pending trial. –When any property regarding 
which any offence appears to have been committed, or which appears to have been used for the 
commission of any offence, is produced before a Force Court during a trial, the Court may make such 
order as it thinks fit for the proper custody of such property pending the conclusion of the trial, and if the 
property is subject to speedy or natural decay may, after recording such evidence as it thinks necessary, 
order it to be sold or otherwise dispose d of. 
117. Order for disposal of property regarding which offence is  committed. –(1) After the 
conclusion of a trial before any Force  Court, the Court or the office confirming the finding or sentences of 
such Force Court, or any authority superior to such o fficer, or, in the case of Summary Force Court whose 
finding or sentences does not require confirmation, an officer not below the rank of Additional Deputy 
Inspector -General within whose command the trial was held, may make such order as it or he thinks fi t 
for the disposal by destruction, confiscation, delivery to any person claiming to be entitled to possession 
thereof, or otherwise, of any property or document produced before the Court or in its custody, or 
regarding which any offence appears to have bee n committed or which has been used for the commission 
of any offence.  
(2) Where any order has been made under sub -section ( 1) in respect of property regarding which an 
offence appears to have been committed, a copy of such order signed and certified by the  authority 
making the same may, whether the trial was held within  India or not, be sent to a magistrate within whose 
jurisdiction such property for the time being is situated, and such magistrate shall thereupon cause the 
order to be carried into effect as  if it were an order passed by him under the provisions of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
(3) In this section the term "property" includes, in the case of property regarding which an offence 
appears to have been committed, not only such property as has been originally in the possession or under 
the control of any person, but also any property into or for which the same may have been converted or 
exchanged, and anything acquired by such conversion or exchange whether immediately or otherwi se. 
118. Powers of Force Court in relation to proceedings under this Act. –Any trial by a Force Court 
under the provisions of this Act shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of 
sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 186 0) and the Force Court shall be deemed to be a 
Court within the meaning of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
119. Tender of pardon to accomplices. –(1) With a view to obtaining the evidence of any person 
supposed to have been directly or indirectly concerned in or privy to an offence triable by a Force Court 
other than a Summary Force Court under this Act, the commanding officer, the convening officer or the 
Force Court, at any stage of investigation or inquiry into o r the trial of, the offence, may tender a pardon 
to such person on condition of his making a full and true disclosure of the whole of the circumstances 
within his knowledge relating to the offence and to every other person concerned, whether as principal o r 
abettor, in the commission thereof.  30 
 (2) The commanding officer or the convening officer who tenders pardon under  sub-section ( 1) shall 
record,– 
(a) his reasons for so doing;  
(b) whether the tender was or was not accepted by the person to whom it was made, and shall, on 
application made by accused, furnish him with a copy of such record free of cost.  
(3) Every person accepting a tender of pardon made under sub -section  (1)– 
(a) shall be examined as a witness by the commanding officer of the accused and in the 
subsequent trial, if any;  
(b) may be detained in Force custody until the termination of the trial.  
120. Trial of person not complying with conditions of pardon. –(1) Where, in regard to a person 
who has accepted a tender of pardon made under section 119, the Judge Attorney, or as the case may be, 
the Deputy Judge Attorney -General, or  the Additional Judge Attorney -General, or the officer approved 
under section 95, certifies that in his opinion such person has, either by wilfully concealing anything 
essential or by giving false evidence, not complied with the conditions on which the tender was made, 
such person may be tried for the offence in respect of which the pardon was so tendered or for any other 
offence of which he appears to have been guilty in c onnection with the same matter, and also for the 
offence of giving false evidence:  
Provided that such person shall not be tried jointly with any of the other accused.  
(2) Any statement made by such person accepting the tender of pardon and recorded by his 
commanding officer or Force Court may be given in evidence against him at such trial.  
(3) At such trial, the accused shall be entitled to plead that he has complied with the condition upon 
which such tender was made; in which case it shall be for the prose cution to prove that the condition has 
not been complied with.  
(4) At such trial, the Force Court shall, before arraignment, ask the accused whether he pleads that he 
has complied with the conditions on which the tender of pardon was made.  
(5) If the accused does so plead, the Court shall record the plea and proceed with the trial and it shall, 
before giving its finding on the charge, find whether or not the accused has complied with the conditions 
of the pardon, and, if it finds that he has so complie d, it shall give a verdict of not guilty.  
CHAPTER IX  
CONFIRMATI ON AND REVISION OF PROCEEDINGS  
121. Finding and sentence not valid unless confirmed. –No finding or sentence of a General Force 
Court or a Petty Force Court shall be valid except so far as it ma y be confirmed as provided by this Act.  
122. Power to confirm finding and sentence of General Force Court. –The findings and sentences 
of General Force Courts may be confirmed by the Central Government or by any officer empowered in 
this behalf by warr ant of the Central Government.  
123. Power to confirm finding and sentence of Petty Force Court. – The findings and sentences of 
a Petty Force Court may be confirmed by an officer having power to convene a General Force Court or by 
any officer empowered in this  behalf by warrant of such officer.  
124. Limitation of powers of confirming authority. – A warrant issued under section 122 or section 
123 may contain such restrictions, reservations or condition as the authority issuing it may think fit.  
125. Power of confirming authority to mitigate, remit or commute sentences. –Subject to such 
restrictions, reservations or conditions, as may be contained in any warrant issued under section 122 or 
section 123, a confirming authority may, when confirming the sentence of a Force Court, mitigate or 
remit the punishment thereby awarded or commute that punishment for any punishment or punishments 
lower in the scale laid down in section 51.  
  31 
 126. Confirming of findings and sentences on board a ship. –When any person subject to  this Act 
is tried and sentenced by a Force Court while on board a ship, the finding and sentence so far as not 
confirmed and executed on board the ship, may be confirmed and executed in like manner as if such 
person had been tried at the port of disembark ation.  
127. Revision of finding or sentence. –(1) Any finding or sentence of  a Force Court which requires 
confirmation may be once revised by order of the confirming authority and on such revision, the Court, if 
so directed by the confirming authority, may take additional evidence.  
(2) The Court on revision, shall consist of the same officers as were present when the original 
decision was passed unless any of those officers are unavoidably absent.  
(3) In case of such unavoidable absence the cause thereof shall be duly certified in the proceedings 
and the Court shall proceed with the revision provided that, in the case of a General Force Court it 
consists of five officers and in the case of a Petty Force Court, of three officers.  
128. Finding and sentence o f a Summary Force Court. –The finding and sentence of a Summary 
Force Court shall not require to be confirmed, but may be carried out forthwith.  
129. Transmission of proceedings of Summary Force Court. –The proceedings of every Summary 
Force Court shall be f orwarded without delay to the officer not below the rank of Additional Deputy 
Inspector -General within whose command the trial  was held, or to the prescribed officer, and such officer, 
or the Director -General or any officer empowered by him in this behalf may, for reasons based on the 
merits of the case, but not on merely technical grounds, set aside the proceedings, or reduce the sentence 
to any other sentence which the Court might have passed.  
130. Alteration of finding or sentence in  certain cases. –(1) Where  a finding of guilty by a Force 
Court,  which  has been confirmed or  which  does not require confirmation, is found for any reason to 
be invalid or cannot be supported by the evidence, the authority which would have had power under 
section 142 to commute  the punishment awarded by the sentence, if the finding had been valid may 
substitute a new finding and pass a sentence for the offence specified or involved in such finding:  
Provided that no such substitution shall be made unless such finding could have b een validly made by 
the Force Court on the charge and unless it appears that the Force Court must have been satisfied of the 
facts establishing the said offence.  
(2) Where a sentence passed by a Force Court which has been confirmed, or which does not requi re 
confirmation, not being a sentence passed in pursuance of a new finding substituted under sub -section ( 1), 
is found for any reason to be invalid, the authority referred to in sub -section ( 1) may pass a valid 
sentence.  
(3) The punishment awarded by a sentence passed under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall not 
be higher in the scale of punishments than, or in excess of, the punishment awarded by, the sentence for 
which a new sentence is substituted  under  this section.  
(4) Any finding substituted,  or any  sentence passed, under  this section  shall, for the purposes of this 
Act and the rules, have effect as if it were a finding or sentence, as the case may be, of a Force Court.  
131. Petition against order, finding or sentence of Force Court. –(1) Any p erson subject to this Act 
who considers himself aggrieved by any order passed by any Force Court may present a petition to the 
officer or authority empowered to confirm any finding or sentence of such Force Court, and the 
confirming authority may take such  steps as may be considered necessary to satisfy itself as to the 
correctness, legality or propriety of the order passed or as to the regularity of any proceeding to which the 
order relates.  
(2) Any person subject to this Act who considers himself aggrieve d by a finding or sentence of any 
Force court which has been confirmed, may present a petition to the Central Government, the Director -
General or any prescribed officer superior in command to the one who confirmed such finding or 
sentence, and the Ce ntral Government, the Director -General, or the prescribed officer, as the case may be, 
may pass such order thereon as it or he thinks fit.  
132. Annulment of proceedings. –The Central Government, the Director - General or any prescribed 
officer may annul the proceedings of any Force Court on the ground that they are illegal or unjust.  32 
 CHAPTER X  
EXECUTION OF SENTE NCES, PARDONS, REMISSIONS, ETC . 
133. Execution of sentence of death. –In executing a sentence of death, a Force Court shall, in its 
discretion direct that the offender shall suffer death by being hanged by the neck until he be dead, or shall 
suffer death by being shot to death.  
134. Commencement of sentence of imprisonment. –Whenever any person is sentenced by a Force 
Court under this Act to imprisonment , the term of his sentence shall, whether it has been revised or not, 
be reckoned to commence on the day on which the original proceedings were signed by the presiding 
officer, or in the case of a Summary Force Court, by the Court:  
Provided that if for any  reason beyond the control of the commanding officer or superior officer, the 
sentence of imprisonment cannot be executed in full or in part, the convict shall be liable to undergo the 
whole or unexpired portion of sentence, as the case may be, when it bec omes possible to carry out the 
same:  
Provided further that the period of detention or confinement, if any, undergone by an accused person 
during the investigation, inquiry or trial of the case in which he is sentenced and before the date of which 
the origi nal proceedings were signed shall be set off against the term of his sentence and the liability of 
such person to undergo imprisonment shall be restricted to the remainder, if any of the term of his 
sentence.  
135. Execution of sentence of imprisonment. –(1) Whenever any sentence of imprisonment is 
passed under this Act by a Force Court or whenever any sentence of death is commuted to imprisonment, 
the confirming officer or in case of a Summary Force Court the officer holding the Court or such other 
officer a s may be prescribed shall, save as otherwise provided in sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4), direct that the 
sentence shall be carried out by confinement in a civil prison.  
(2) When a direction has been made under sub -section ( 1), the commanding officer of the person 
under sentence or such other officer as may be prescribed shall forward a warrant in the prescribed form 
to the officer in charge of the prison in which such person is to be confined and shall arrange for his 
despatch to such prison with the warrant . 
(3) In the case of a sentence of imprisonment for a period not exceeding three months and passed 
under this Act by a Force Court, the appropriate officer under sub -section ( 1) may direct that the sentence 
shall be carried out by confinement in Force cust ody instead of in a civil prison.  
(4) On active duty, a sentence of imprisonment may be carried out by confinement in such place as 
the officer not below the rank of Additional Deputy Inspector -General within whose command the person 
sentenced is serving o r any prescribed officer may from time to time appoint.  
136. Temporary custody of convict. –Where a sentence of imprisonment is directed to be undergone 
in a civil prison, the convict may be kept in Force custody or in any other fit place till such time as it is 
possible to send him to a civil prison.  
137. Execution of sentence of imprisonment in special cases. –Whenever, in the opinion of an 
officer not below the rank of Additional Deputy Inspector -General within whose command the trial is 
held, any sentence  or portion of a sentence of imprisonment cannot for special reasons conveniently be 
carried out in Force custody in accordance with the provisions of section 135, such officer may direct that 
such sentence or portion of sentence shall be carried out by co nfinement in any civil prison or other fit 
place.  
138. Conveyance of prisoner from place to place. –A person under sentence of imprisonment may 
during his conveyance from place to place or when on board a ship, aircraft, or otherwise, be subjected to 
such r estraint as is necessary for his safe conduct and removal.  
139. Communication of certain orders to prison officers. –Whenever an order is duly made under 
this Act setting aside or varying any sentence, order or warrant under which any person is confined in a 
civil prison, a warrant in accordance with such order shall be forwarded by the officer making the order or 
his staff officer or such other person as may be prescribed, to the officer in charge of the prison in which 
such person is confined.  33 
 140. Recovery of fine. –When a sentence of fine is imposed by a Force Court under section 49, a copy 
of such sentence signed and certified by the confirming officer, or where no confirmation is required, by 
the officer holding the trial may be sent to any magistrate in India, and such magistrate shall thereupon 
cause the fine to be recovered in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  
(2 of 1974) , as if it were a sentence of fine imposed by such magistrate.  
141. Informality or error in order or warrant. –Whenever any person is sentenced to imprisonment 
under this Act, and is undergoing the sentence in any place or manner in which he might be confined 
under a lawful order or warrant in pursuance of this Act, the confinement of suc h person shall not be 
deemed to be illegal only by reason of informality or error in, or as respects the order, warrant or other 
document, or the authority by which, or in pursuance whereof such person was brought into, or, is 
confined in any such place, a nd any such order, warrant or document may be amended accordingly.  
142. Pardon and remission. –When any person subject to this Act has been convicted by a Force 
Court of any offence, the Central Government or the Director -General or, in the case of a senten ce, which 
he could have confirmed or which did not require confirmation, an officer not below the rank of 
Additional Deputy Inspector -General within whose command such person at the time of conviction was 
serving,  or the prescribed officer may, – 
(a) either  with or without conditions which the person sentenced accepts, pardon the person or 
remit the whole or any part of the punishments awarded; or  
(b) mitigate the punishment awarded; or  
(c) commute such punishment for any less punishment or punishments  menti oned in this Act; or  
(d) either with or without conditions which the person sentenced accepts, release the person on 
parole.  
143. Cancellation of conditional pardons, release on parole or remission. –(1) If any condition on 
which a person has been pardoned or released on parole or a punishment has been remitted is, in the 
opinion of the authority which granted the pardon, release or remission, not fulfilled, such authority may 
cancel the pardon, release or remission, and thereupon the sentence of the Court s hall be carried into 
effect as if such pardon, release or remission had not been granted.  
(2) A person whose sentence of imprisonment is carried into effect under the provisions of sub -
section ( 1) shall undergo such imprisonment only for the unexpired portion of his sentence.  
144. Suspension of sentence of imprisonment. –(1) Where a person  subject to this Act is sentenced 
by a Force Court to imprisonment, the Central Government, the Director -General or any officer 
empowered to convene a General Force Court may suspend the sentence whether or not the offender has 
already been committed to prison or to Force custody.  
(2) The authority or officer specified in sub -section ( 1) may, in the case of an offender so sentenced 
direct that until the orders of such  authority or officer have been obtained, the offender shall not be 
committed to prison or to Force custody.  
(3) The powers conferred by sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) may be exercised in the case of any such 
sentence which has been confirmed, reduced or commuted.  
145. Orders pending suspension of sentence. –(1) Where the sentence  referred to in section 144 is 
imposed by a Force Court other than a Summary Force Court, the confirming officer may, when 
confirming the sentence, direct that the offender be not committed to prison or to Force custody until the 
orders of the authority or officer specified in section 144 have been obtained.  
(2) Where a sentence of imprisonment is imposed by a Summary Force Court, the officer holding the 
trial may make the direction  referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
146. Release on suspension of sentence. –Where a sentence is suspended under section 144, the 
offender shall forthwith be released from custody.  
147. Computation of period of sentence. –Any period during which the sentence is  under suspension 
shall be reckoned as part of the term of such sentence.  
  34 
 148. Order after suspension of sentence. –The authority or officer specified in section 144 may, at 
any time while a sentence is suspended , order– 
(a) that the offender be committed  to undergo the unexpired portion of the sentence; or  
(b) that the sentence be remitted.  
149. Reconsideration of case after suspension of sentence. –(1) Where  a sentence has been 
suspended, the case may at any time, and shall at intervals of not more than f our months, be reconsidered 
by the authority or officer not below the rank of an Additional Deputy Inspector -General duly authorised 
by the authority or officer specified in section 144.  
(2) Where on such reconsideration by the officer so authorised, it ap pears to him that the conduct of 
offender since his conviction has been such as to justify a remission of sentence, he shall refer the matter 
to the authority or officer specified in section 144.  
150. Fresh sentence after suspension. –Where an offender, while a sentence on him is suspended 
under this Act, is senten ced for any other offence, then – 
(a) if the further sentence is also suspended under this Act, the two sentences shall run 
concurrently;  
(b) If the further sentence is for a period of three mont hs or more and  is not suspended und er this 
Act, the offender shall also be committed to prison or Force custody for the unexpired portion of the 
previous sentence, but both s entences shall run concurrently;  and  
(c) If the further sentence is for a period of less than three months  and is not suspended under this 
Act, the offender shall be so committed  on that sentence only, and the previous sentence shall, subject 
to any order which may be passed under section 148 or section 149, continue to be suspended.  
151. Scope of power of suspension of sentence. –The powers conferred by sections 144 and 148 
shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the power of mitigation, remission and commutation.  
152. Effect of suspension and remission of sentence on dismiss al.–(1) Where in addition to any 
other sentence the punishment of dismissal has been awarded by a Force Court, and such other sentence is 
suspended under section 144, then, such dismissal shall not take effect until so ordered by the authority or 
officer s pecified in section 144.  
(2) If such other sentence is remitted under section 148, the punishment of dismissal shall also be 
remitted.  
CHAPTER XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
153. Powers and duties conferrable and imposable on members of the Force. –(1) The Central 
Government may, by general or special order  published in the Official Gazette, direct that subject to such 
conditions and limitations as may be specified in the order, any member of the Force may exercise or 
discharge such of the powers or duties  under any  Central Act as  may be  specified in the said order, being 
the powers and duties which, in the opinion of the Central Government, an officer of the corresponding or 
lower rank is by such Central Act empowered to exercise or discharge for the said purposes.  
(2) The Central Government may, by general or special order published  in the Official Gazette, confer 
or impose, with the concurrence of the State Government concerned, any of the powers or duties which 
may be exercised or discharged under a  State Act by a  police officer upon  a member of the Force who,  in 
the opinion of the  Central Government,  holds a corresponding or higher rank.  
(3) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Hou ses agree in making any modification 
in the order or both Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order.  35 
 154. Protection for acts of members of the Force. –(1) In any suit  or proceeding against any 
member of the Force for any act done by him in pursuance of a warr ant or order of a competent authority, 
it shall be lawful for him to plead that such act was done by him under the authority of such warrant or 
order.  
(2) Any such plea may be proved by the production of the warrant or order directing the act, and if it 
is so proved, the member of the Force shall thereupon be discharged from liability in respect of the act so 
done by him, notwithstanding any defect in the jurisdiction of the authority which issued such warrant or 
order.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything containe d in any other law for the time being in force, any legal 
proceeding (whether civil or criminal) which may lawfully be brought against any member of the Force 
for anything done or intended to be done under the powers conferred by, or in pursuance of any pr ovision 
of this Act or the rules, shall be commenced within three months after the act complained of was 
committed and not otherwise, and notice in writing of such proceeding and of the cause thereof shall be 
given to the defendant or his superior officer at least one month before the commencement of such 
proceeding.  
155. Power to make rules. –(1) The Central  Government  may,  by notification, make rules for the 
purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the  generality of the foregoing po wer, such rules may 
provide for – 
(a) the manner of constitution of the Force and conditions of service of its members under section 
4; 
(b) superintendence, direction and control of the Force under section 5;  
(c) the persons t o be enrolled to the Force, mode of enrolment and procedure thereof under 
section 6;  
(d) the authority, to whom resignation to be submitted and the permission for withdrawal from 
duty to be obtained from, under section 8;  
(e) the dismissal, removal and reduction in rank of persons under section 11;  
(f) the authority and other matters required to be prescribed under section 13;  
(g) the amount and the incidence of fine to be imposed under section 60;  
(h) the manner and extent of deductions from pay and all owances and the authority therefor under 
section 66;  
(i) the procedure of investigation of an offence and the manner and period of detention of persons 
under section 70;  
(j) the manner of making the report by the commanding officer in respect of delay in c onvening 
Force Court under section 71;  
(k) the authority to appoint the court of inquiry and the manner of appointment thereof under 
section 74;  
(l) the manner of convening Force Courts under section 76;  
(m) the persons by whom an accused may be defended in a trial and appearance of such persons 
under section 91;  
(n) the recruitment and conditions of service of the Judge Attorney - General, Deputy Judge 
Attorney -Gene ral, Additional Judge Attorney -General and Judge Attorney under section 95;  
(o) the officer to annul proceedings of the Force Court under section 132; and  
(p) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to 
be, or may be, made by the rules.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if , before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect  only 36 
 in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
156. Provisions as to existing Sashastra Seema Bal.–(1) The Sashastra Seema Bal in existence at 
the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be the Force constituted under this Act.  
(2) The members of the Sashastra Seema Bal in existence at the commencement of this Act shall be 
deemed to have been a ppointed or, as the case may be, enrolled as such under this Act.  
(3) Anything done or any action taken before the commencement of this Act in relation to the 
constitution of the Sashastra Seema Bal referred to in sub -section ( 1), in relation to any person  appointed 
or enrolled, as the case may be, thereto, shall be as valid and as effective in law as if such thing or action 
was done or taken under this Act:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall render any person guilty of any offence in respect o f 
anything done or omitted to be done by him before the commencement of this Act.  
––––––  
--------------------------The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006--------------------------
1 
 THE SCHEDULED TRIBES AND OTHER TRADITIONAL FOREST DWELLERS 
(RECOGNITION OF FOREST RIGHTS) ACT, 2006  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER 1  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
FOREST  RIGHTS  
3. Forest rights of Forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes and other tradional forest dwellers . 
CHAPTER III  
RECOGNITION, RESTORATION AND VESTING OF FOREST RIGHTS AND RELATED MATTERS  
4. Recognition of, and vesting of, forest rights in forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes and other 
traditional forest dwellers.  
 
5. Duties of holders of forest rights.  
CHAPTER IV  
AUTHORITIES AND PROCEDURE FOR VESTING OF FOREST RIGHTS  
6. Authorities to vest forest rights in forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest 
dwellers and procedure thereof . 
CHAPTER V  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
7. Offences by members or officers of authorities and Committees under this Act.  
8. Cognizance of offences . 
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
9. Members of authorities, etc., to be public servants.  
10. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
11. Nodal agency . 
12. Power of Central Government to issue directions . 
13. Act not in derogation of any other law . 
14. Power to make rules . 
 
  2 
 THE SCHEDULED TRIBES AND OTHER TRADITIONAL  FOREST DWELLERS 
(RECOGNITION OF FOREST RIGHTS) ACT, 2006  
ACT NO. 2 OF 2007  
[29th December,  2006 .]  
An Act to recognise and vest the forest rights and occupation in forest land in forest dwelling 
Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest dwellers who h ave been residing in such forests 
for generations but whose rights could not be recorded; to provide for a framework for 
recording the forest rights so vested and the nature of evidence required for such recognition 
and vesting in respect of forest land.  
WHEREAS  the recognised rights of the forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest 
dwellers include the responsibilities and authority for sustainable use, conservation of biodiversity and 
maintenance of ecological balance and thereby streng thening the conservation regime of the forests while 
ensuring livelihood and food security of the forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes and oth er traditional forest 
dwellers;  
AND WHEREAS  the forest rights on ancestral lands and their habitat were not adequately  recognised in 
the consolidation of State forests during the colonial period as well as in independent India resulting in 
historical injustice to the forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest dwellers who are 
integral to the very surviv al and sustaina bility of the forest ecosystem;  
AND WHEREAS  it has become necessary to address the long standing insecurity of tenurial and access 
rights of forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest dwellers including those who were 
forced to relocate their dwelling due to State developmen t interventions.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -seventh Year of the  Republic of India as follows: – 
CHAPTER 1  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title , extent  and commencement. –(1) This Act may be called the Scheduled Tribes and 
Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recogniti on of Forest Rights) Act, 2006.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notifi cation in  the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions. –In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, – 
(a) “community forest resource ” means customary common forest land within the traditional or 
customary boundaries of the village or seasonal use of landscape in the case of pastoral communities, 
including reserved forests, protected forests and protected areas such as Sanctuaries and Na tional 
Parks to which the co mmunity had traditional access;  
(b) “critical wildlife habitat ” means such areas of National Parks and Sanctuaries where it has 
been specifically and clearly established, case by case, on the basis of scientific and objective criteria, 
that such areas are required to be kept as inviolate for the purposes of wildlife c onservation as may be 
determined and notified by the Central Government in the Ministry of Environment and Forests after 
open process of consultation by an Expert Committee, which includes experts from the locality 
appointed by that Government wherein a re presentative of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs shall also be 
included, in determining such areas according to the procedural requirements arising from sub -
sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 4;  
(c) “forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes ” means the members or commun ity of the Scheduled 
Tribes who primarily reside in and who depend on the forests or forest lands for bona fide  livelihood 
needs and includes the Scheduled  Tribe pastoralist communities;  
                     
1. 31st December, 2007, vide notification No. S. O . 2224(E), dated 31st December, 2007, see Gazette of India Extra ordinary,  
Part II, sec 3( ii)  3 
 (d) “forest land ” means land of any description falling within any fo rest area and includes 
unclassified forests, undemarcated forests, existing or deemed forests, protected forests, reserved 
forests, Sanctuaries and National Parks;  
(e) “forest rights ” means the forest r ights referred to in section 3;  
(f) “forest villages ” means the settlements which have been established inside the forests by the 
forest department of any State Government for forestry operations or which were converted into 
forest villages through the forest reservation process and includes forest settlemen t villages, fixed 
demand holdings, all types of taungya  settlements, by whatever name called, for such villages and 
includes lands for cultivation and other us es permitted by the Government;  
(g) “Gram Sabha ” means a village assembly which shall consist of all adult members of a village 
and in case of States having no Panchayats, Padas, Tolas and other traditional village institutions and 
elected village committees, with full and unres tricted participation of women;  
(h) “habitat ” includes the area comprising  the customary habitat and such other habitats in 
reserved forests and protected forests of primitive tribal groups and pre -agricultural communities and 
other fo rest dwelling Scheduled Tribes;  
(i) “minor forest produce ” includes all non -timber forest produ ce of plant origin including 
bamboo, brush wood, stumps, cane, tussar, cocoons, honey, wax, lac, tendu or kendu leaves, 
medicinal plants and her bs, roots, tubers and the like;  
(j) “nodal agency ” means the nodal agency specified in section 11;  
(k) “notification ” means a notification pub lished in the Official Gazette;  
(l) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(m) “Scheduled Areas ” means the Scheduled Areas referred to in clause (1) of article 244 of the 
Constitution;  
(n) “sustain able use ” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( o) of section 2 of 
the Biological Diversity Act, 2002  (18 of 2003) ; 
(o) “other traditional forest dweller ” means any member or community who has for at least three 
generations prior to the 13th day of December, 2005 primarily resided in and who depend on the 
forest or forests land for bona fide  livelihood needs.  
Explanation. –For the purpose of this clause, ““generation ”“ means a period c omprising of 
twenty -five years;  
(p) “village ” means – 
(i) a village referred to in clause ( b) of section 4 of the Provisions of the Panchayats 
(Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996  (40 of 1996) ; or 
(ii) any area referred t o as a village in any State law relating to Panchayats oth er than the 
Scheduled Areas; or  
(iii) forest villages, old habitation or settlements and unsurveyed villages, whether notified as 
village or not; or  
(iv) in the case of States where there are no Panchayats, the traditional village, by whatever 
name called;  
(q) “wild animal ” means any species of animal specified in Schedules I to IV of the Wild Life 
(Protection) Act,  1972  (53 of 1972)  and found wild in nature.  
 
  4 
 CHAPTER II  
FOREST  RIGHTS  
3. Forest rights of Forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes and other tradional forest dwellers .–(1) For 
the purposes of this Act, the following rights, which secure individual or community tenure or both, shall 
be the forest rights of forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest dweller s on all forest 
lands, namely: – 
(a) right to hold and live in the forest land under the individual or common occupation for 
habitation or for self -cultivation for livelihood by a member or members of a forest dwelling 
Schedu led Tribe or oth er traditional forest dwellers;  
(b) community rights such as nistar, by whatever name called, including those used in erstwhile 
Princely States, Zamindar i or such intermediary regimes;  
(c) right of ownership, access to collect, use, and dispose of minor forest produce which has been 
traditionally collected within  or outside village boundaries;  
(d) other community rights of uses or entitlements such as fish and other products of water 
bodies, grazing (both settled or transhumant) and tradi tional seasonal resource access of noma dic or 
pastoralist communities;  
(e) rights including community tenures of habitat and habitation for primitive tribal groups an d 
pre-agricultural communities;  
(f) rights in or over disputed lands under any nomenclatur e in any S tate where claims are 
disputed;  
(g) rights for conversion of Pattas  or leases or grants issued by any local authority or any State 
Govern ment on forest lands to titles;  
(h) rights of settlement and conversion of all forest villages, old habitatio n, unsurveyed villages 
and other villages in forests, whether recorded, notifie d or not into revenue villages;  
(i) right to protect, regenerate or conserve or manage any community forest resource which they 
have been traditionally protecting and conserving  for sustainable use;  
(j) rights which are recognised under any State law or laws of any Autonomous District Council 
or Autonomous Regional Council or which are accepted as rights of tribals under any traditional or 
customary law of the concerned tribes of  any State;  
(k) right of access to biodiversity and community right to intellectual property and traditional 
knowledge related to biodi versity and cultural diversity;  
(l) any other traditional right customarily enjoyed by the forest dwelling Scheduled Trib es or 
other traditional forest dwellers, as the case may be, which are not mentioned in clauses ( a) to ( k) but 
excluding the traditional right of hunting or trapping or extracting a part of the body  of any species of 
wild animal;  
(m) right to in situ  rehab ilitation including alternative land in cases where the Scheduled Tribes 
and other traditional forest dwellers have been illegally evicted or displaced from forest land of any 
description without receiving their legal entitlement to rehabilitation prior to  the 13th day of 
December, 2005.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980  (69 of 1980) , the 
Central Government shall provide for diversion of forest land for the following facilities managed by the 
Government which involve felling of trees not exceeding seventy -five trees per hectare, nemely: – 
(a) schools;  
(b) dispensary or hospital;  
(c) anganwadis ; 5 
 (d) fair price shops;  
(e) electr ic and telecommunication lines;  
(f) tank s and other minor water bodies;  
(g) drinking wa ter supply and water pipelines;  
(h) water or ra in water harvesting structures;  
(i) minor irrigation canals;  
(j) non -conve ntional source of energy;  
(k) skill upgradation or vocational training centres;  
(l) roads; and  
(m) community centres:  
Provided that suc h diversion of forest land shall be allowed only if, – 
(i) the forest land to be diverted for the purposes mentioned in this sub -section is less tha n 
one hectare in each case; and  
(ii) the clearance of such developmental projects shall be subject to the condition that the 
same is recommended by the Gram Sabha.  
CHAPTER III  
RECOGNITION, RESTORATION AND VESTING OF FOREST RIGHTS AND RELATED MATTERS  
4. Recognition of, and vesting of, forest rig hts in forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes and other 
traditional forest dwellers. –(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being 
in force, and subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government hereby recogni ses and vest s 
forest rights in – 
(a) the forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes in States or areas in States where they are declared as 
Scheduled Tribes in respect of all forest  rights mentioned in section 3;  
(b) the other traditional forest dwellers in respect of all forest  rights mentioned in section 3.  
(2) The forest rights recognised under this Act in critical wildlife habitats of National Parks and 
Sanctuaries may subsequently be modified or resettled, provided that no forest rights holders shall be 
resettled or have the ir rights in any manner affected for the purposes of creating inviolate areas for 
wildlife conservation except in case all the following con ditions are satisfied, namely: – 
(a) the process of recognition and vesting of rights as specified in section 6 is co mplete in all  the 
areas under consideration;  
(b) it has been established by the concerned agencies of the State Government, in exercise of their 
powers under the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972  (53 of 1972)  that the activities or impact of the 
presence of holders of rights upon wild animals is sufficient to cause irreversible damage and threaten 
the existence of said species and their habitat;  
(c) the State Government has concluded that other reasonable opti ons, such as, co-existence are 
not available;  
(d) a resettlement or alternatives package has been prepared and communicated that provides a 
secure livelihood for the affected individuals and communities and fulfils the requirements of such 
affected individ uals and communities given in the relevant laws and the po licy of the Central 
Government;  
(e) the free informed consent of the Gram Sabhas in the areas concerned to the proposed 
resettlement and to the packag e has been obtained in writing;  6 
 (f) no resettlem ent shall take place until facilities and land allocation at the resettlement location 
are comple te as per the promised package:  
Provided that the critical wildlife habitats from which rights holders are thus relocated for purposes of 
wildlife conservation  shall not be subsequently diverted by the State Government or the Central 
Government or a ny other entity for other uses.  
(3) The recognition and vesting of forest rights under this Act to the forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes 
and to other traditional fores t dwellers in relation to any State or Union territory in respect of forest land 
and their habitat shall be subject to the condition that such Scheduled Tribes or tribal communities or 
other traditional forest dwellers had occupied forest land before the 1 3th day of December, 2005.  
(4) A right conferred by sub -section ( 1) shall be heritable but not alienable or transferable and shall be 
registered jointly in the name of both the spouses in case of married persons and in the name of the single 
head in the ca se of a household headed by a single person and in the absence of a direct heir, the heritable 
right sha ll pass on to the next -of-kin. 
(5) Save as otherwise provided, no member of a forest dwelling Scheduled Tribe or other traditional 
forest dweller shall be evicted or removed from forest land under his occupation till the recognition and 
verification procedure is complete.  
(6) Where the forest rights recognised and vested by sub -section ( 1) are in respect of land mentioned 
in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3 such land shall be under the occupation of an individual or 
family or community on the date of commencement of this Act and shall be restricted to the area under 
actual occupation and shall in no case e xceed an area of four hectares.  
(7) The f orest rights shall be conferred free of all encumbrances and procedural requirements, 
including clearance under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980  (69 of 1980) , requirement of paying the 
'net present value' and 'compensatory afforestation' for diversion o f forest land, exce pt those specified in 
this Act.  
(8) The forest rights recognised and vested under this Act shall include the right of land to forest 
dwelling Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest dwellers who can establish that they were displac ed 
from their dwelling and cultivation without land compensation due to State development interventions, 
and where the land has not been used for the purpose for which it was acquired within five years of the 
said acquisition.  
5. Duties of holders of fore st rights. –The holders of any forest right, Gram Sabha and village level 
institutions in areas where there are holders of any forest right u nder this Act are empowered to – 
(a) protect the wild  life, forest and biodiversity;  
(b) ensure  that adjoining catchments area, water sources and other ecological sensitive areas are 
adequately protected;  
(c) ensure that the habitat of forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest dwellers 
is preserved from any form of destructive pr actices affecting their  cultural and natural heritage;  
(d) ensure that the decisions taken in the Gram Sabha to regulate access to community forest 
resources and stop any activity which adversely affects the wild animals, forest and the biodiversity 
are co mplied with.  
CHAPTER IV  
AUTHORITIES AND PROCEDURE FOR VESTING OF FOREST RIGHTS  
6. Authorities to vest forest rights in forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes and other traditional 
forest dwellers and procedure thereof. –(1) The Gram Sabha shall be the authority to initiate the process 
for determining the nature and extent of individual or community forest rights or both that may be given 
to the forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest dwellers within the local limits of its 
jurisdiction under  this Act by receiving claims, consolidating and verifying them and preparing a map 
delineating the area of each recommended claim in such manner as may be prescribed for exercise of such 7 
 rights and the Gram Sabha shall, then, pass a resolution to that eff ect and thereafter forward a copy of the 
same to the Sub -Divisional Level Comm ittee.  
(2) Any person aggrieved by the resolution of the Gram Sabha may prefer a petition to the                 
Sub-Divisional Level Committee constituted under sub -section ( 3) and the Sub -Divisional Level 
Committee shall conside r and dispose of such petition:  
Provided that every such petition shall be preferred within sixty days from the date of passing of th e 
resolution by the Gram Sabha:  
Provided further that no such petition shall be disposed of against the aggrieved person, unless he has 
been given a reasonable op portunity to present his case.  
(3) The State Government shall constitute a Sub -Divisional Level Committee to examine the 
resolution passed by the Gram Sabha and prep are the record of forest rights and forward it through the 
Sub-Divisional Officer to the District Level Committee for a final decision.  
(4) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Sub -Divisional Level Committee may prefer a 
petition to the District Lev el Committee within sixty days from the date of decision of the Sub -Divisional 
Level Committee and the District Level Committee shall conside r and dispose of such petition:  
Provided that no petition shall be preferred directly before the District Level Com mittee against the 
resolution of the Gram Sabha unless the same has been preferred before and considered by the Sub-
Divisional Level Committee:  
Provided further that no such petition shall be disposed of against the aggrieved person, unless he has 
been giv en a reasonable opportunity to present his case.  
(5) The State Government shall constitute a District Level Committee to consider and finally approve 
the record of forest rights prepared by the Sub-Divisional Level Committee.  
(6) The decision of the Distri ct Level Committee on the record of forest rig hts shall be final and 
binding.  
(7) The State Government shall constitute a State Level Monitoring Committee to monitor the process 
of recognition and vesting of forest rights and to submit to the nodal agency such returns and reports as 
may be called for by that agency.  
(8) The Sub -Divisional Level Committee, the District Level Committee and the State Level 
Monitoring Committee shall consist of officers of the departments of Revenue, Forest and Tribal Affairs 
of the State Government and three members of the Panchayati Raj I nstitutions at the appropriate level, 
appointed by the respective Panchayati Raj Institutions, of whom two shall be the Scheduled Tribe 
members and at least one shall be  a woman, as may be prescribed.  
(9) The composition and functions of the Sub -Divisional  Level Committee, the District Level 
Committee and the State Level Monitoring Committee and the procedure to be followed by them in the 
discharge of their functions shall be such as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER V  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
7. Offences by member s or officers of authorities and Committees under this Act. –Where any 
authority or Committee or officer or member of such authority or Committee contravenes any provision 
of this Act or any rule made thereunder concerning recognition of forest rights, it, or they, shall be 
deemed to be guilty of an offence under this Act and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any member of t he authority or 
Committee or head of the department or any person referred to in this section liable to any punishment if 
he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of  such offence.  8 
 8. Cognizance of offences. –No court shall take cognizance of any offence under section 7 unless any 
forest dwelling Scheduled Tribe in case of a dispute relating to a resolution of a Gram Sabha or the Gram 
Sabha  through a resolution against any higher authority gives a notice of not less than sixty days to the 
State Level Monitoring Committee and the State Level Monitoring Committee has not proceeded against 
such authority.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
9. Members of  authorities, etc., to be public servants. –Every member of the authorities referred to 
in Chapter IV and every other officer exercising any of the powers conferred by or under this Act shall be 
deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21  of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) .  
10. Protection of action taken in good faith. –(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against any officer or other employee of the Central Government or the State Government for anything 
which i s in good faith done or intended to be done by or under this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or the State 
Government or any of its officers or other employees for any damage caused or likely to be caused by 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
(3) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any authority as referred to in Chapter IV 
including its Chairperson, members, member -secretary, officers and other emplo yees for anything which 
is in good faith done or inte nded to be done under this Act.  
11. Nodal agency. –The Ministry of the Central Government dealing with Tribal Affairs or any 
officer or authority authorised by the Central Government in this behalf shall be the nodal agency for the 
implementation  of the provisions of this Act.  
12. Power of Central Government to issue directions. –In the performance of its duties and exercise 
of its powers by or under this Act, every authority referred to in Chapter IV shall  be subject to such 
general or special directions, as the Central Government may, from  time to time, give in writing.  
13. Act not in derogation of any other law. –Save as otherwise provided in this Act and the 
Provisions of the Panchayats  (Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996  (40 of 1996) , the provisions 
of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the provisions of any other law fo r the time 
being in force.  
14. Power to make rules. –(1) The Central Government may, by  notification, and subject to the 
condition of previous publication, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the fo llowing matters, namely: – 
(a) procedural details for implementation of the pr ocedure specified in section 6;  
(b) the procedure for receiving claims, consolidating and verifying them and preparing a map 
delineating the area of each recommended claim for exe rcise of forest rights under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 6 and the manner of preferring a petition to the Sub -Divisional Committee under sub -section 
(2) of that section;  
(c) the level of officers of the departments of Revenue, Forest and Tribal Affairs of the State 
Government to be appointed as members of the Sub -Divisional Level Committee, the District Level 
Committee and the State Level Monitoring Committee under sub -section ( 8) of section 6;  
(d) the composition and functions of the Sub -Divisional Level C ommittee, the District Level 
Committee and the State Level Monitoring Committee and the procedure to be followed by them in 
the discharge of their functions under sub -section ( 9) of section 6;  
(e) any other matter which is require d to be, or may be, prescr ibed.  
  9 
 (3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in t wo or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made,  the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything p reviously done 
under that rule.  
_____  
--------------------------The Sikkim University Act, 2006--------------------------
1 
 THE SIKKIM UNIVERSITY ACT, 2006  
__________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Establishment of the University.  
4. Objects of the University.  
5. Powers of the University.  
6. Jurisdiction.  
7. University open to all classes, castes and creed.  
8. The Visitor.  
9. The Chief Rector.  
10. Officers of the University.  
11. The Chancellor.  
12. The Vice -Chancellor.  
13. The Pro -Vice Chancellor.  
14. The Deans of Schools.  
15. The Registrar.  
16. The Finance Officer.  
17. The Controller of Examinations.  
18. The Librarian.  
19. Other officers.  
20. Authorities of the University.  
21. The Court.  
22. The Executive Council.  
23. The Academic Council.  
24. The College Development Council.  
25. The Board of Studies.  
26. The Finance Committee.  
27. Other authorities of the University.  
28. Powers to  make Statutes.  
29. Statutes how to be made.  
30. Power to make Ordinances.  
31. Regulations.  
32. Annual report.  
33. Annual accounts.  
34. Returns and information.  
35. Conditions of service of employees.  
36. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students.  
37. Right to appeal.  
38. Provident and pension funds.  
39. Disputes as to constitution of authorities and bodies.  
40. Filling of casual vacancies.  
41. Proceedings of authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.  2 
 SECTIONS  
42. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
43. Mode of proof of University record.  
44. Power to remove difficulties.  
45. Statutes , Ordinances and Regulation s to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before 
Parliament.  
46. Transitional provisions.  
THE SCHEDULE.   3 
 THE SIKKIM UNIVERSITY ACT, 2006  
ACT NO. 10 OF 2007  
[10th January , 2007.]  
An Act to establish and incorporate a teaching and affiliating University in the State of Sikkim 
and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -seventh Year of th e Republ ic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Sikkim University Act, 2006.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. De finitions .—In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless the context otherwise 
requires, — 
(a) "Academic Council" means the Academic Council of the University;  
(b) "academic staff" means such categories of staff as are designated as academic staff by the 
Ordinances;  
(c) "Affiliated College" means a college admitted to the privileges of the University;  
(d) "Board of Studies" means the Board of Studies of the University;  
(e) "Chancellor", "Vice -Chancellor", and "Pro -Vice -Chancellor" mean, respectively, the 
Chancellor, Vice -Chancellor and Pro -Vice -Chancellor of the University;  
(f) "College Development Council" means the College Development Council of the University;  
(g) "Constituent College" means a college maintained by the University;  
(h) "Court" means the C ourt of the University;  
(i) "Department" means a Department of Studies and includes a Centre of Studies;  
(j) "distance education system" means the system of imparting education through any means of 
communication, such as broadcasting, telecasting, correspo ndence courses, seminars, contact 
programmes or the combination of any two or more such means;  
(k) "employee" means any person appointed by the University and includes teachers and other 
staff of the University;  
(l) "Executive Council" means the Executive Council of the University;  
(m) "Hall" means a unit of residence or of corporate life for the students of the University, or of a 
College or an Institution, maintained by the University;  
(n) "Institution" means an academic institution, not being a College, maintained by, or admitted 
to the privileges of, the University;  
(o) "Principal" means the Head of a College or an Institution maintained by the University and 
includes, where there is no Principal, the person for the time being duly appointed to act as Principal, 
and in the absence of the Principal, or the acting Principal, a Vice -Principal duly appointed as such;  
                                                           
1. 2nd July  2007 , vide notification No. S.O. 1053(E), dated 29th  June, 2007 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,  Part II, s ec. 
3(ii). 
 4 
 (p) "recognised teachers" means such persons as may be recognised by the University for the 
purpose of imparting instructions in a College or an Institution admitted to the privileges of the 
University;  
(q) "Regulations" means the Regulations made by any authority of the University under this Act 
for the time being in force;  
(r) "School" means a School of Studies of the University;  
(s) "Statutes" and "Ordinances" mean, respectively, the Statutes and the Ordinances of the 
University for the time being in force;  
(t) "teachers of the University" means Professors, Readers, Lecturers and such other persons as 
may be appointed for imparting in struction or conducting research in the University or in any College 
or Institution maintained by the University and are designated as teachers by the Ordinances;  
(u) "University" means the Sikkim University established and incorporated as a University und er 
this Act.  
3. Establ ishment of the University .—(1) There shall be established, in the State of Sikkim, a 
University by the name of "Sikkim University".  
(2) The headquarters of the University shall be at Gangtok.  
(3) The first Chancellor, the first Vice -Chancellor and the first members of the Court, the Executive 
Council and the Academic Council, and all persons who may hereafter become such officers or members, 
so long as they continue to hold such office or membership, are hereby constituted a body  corporate by 
the name of "Sikkim University".  
(4) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal, and shall sue and be sued by 
the said name.  
4. Objects of the University .—The objects of the University shall be to disseminate and advance  
knowledge by providing instructional and research facilities in such branches of learning as it may deem 
fit; to make provisions for integrated courses in humanities, natural and physical sciences, social sciences, 
forestry and other allied disciplines in  the educational programmes of the University; to take appropriate 
measures for promoting innovations in teaching -learning process, inter -disciplinary studies and research; 
to educate and train manpower for the development of the State of Sikkim; and to pa y special attention to 
the improvement of the social and economic conditions and welfare of the people of that State, their 
intellectual, academic and cultural development.  
5. Powers of the University .—The University shall hav e the following powers, namely :— 
(i) to provide for instructions in such branches of learning as the University may, from time to 
time, determine and to make provisions for research and for the advancement and dissemination of 
knowledge;  
(ii) to grant, subject to such conditions as the  University may determine, diplomas or certificates 
to, and confer degrees or other academic distinctions on the basis of examinations, evaluation or any 
other method of testing, on persons, and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or other  
academic distinctions for good and sufficient cause;  
(iii) to organise and to undertake extramural studies, training and extension services;  
(iv) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner prescribed by the Statutes;  5 
 (v) to provide fac ilities through the distance education system to such persons as it may 
determine;  
(vi) to institute Principalships, Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships and other teaching or 
academic positions, required by the University and to appoint persons to s uch Principalships, 
Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships or other teaching or academic positions;  
(vii) to recognise an Institution of higher learning for such purposes as the University may 
determine and to withdraw such recognition;  
(viii) to recognise persons for imparting instructions in any College or Institution admitted to the 
privileges of the University;  
(ix) to appoint persons working in any other University or educational institution as teachers of 
the University for a specified period ; 
(x) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make appointments thereto;  
(xi) to co -operate or collaborate or associate with any other University or authority or Institution 
of higher learning in such manner and for such purposes as th e University may determine;  
(xii) to establish, with the prior approval of the Central Government, such Centres and specialised 
laboratories or other units for research and instruction as are, in the opinion of the University, 
necessary for the furtherance  of its objects;  
(xiii) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(xiv) to establish and maintain Colleges, Institutions and Halls;  
(xv) to make provision for research and advisory services and for that purpose to e nter into such 
arrangements with other institutions, industrial or other organisations, as the University may deem 
necessary;  
(xvi) to organise and conduct refresher courses, workshops, seminars and other programmes for 
teachers, evaluators and other acade mic staff;  
(xvii) to admit to its privileges Colleges and Institutions within the State of Sikkim not maintained 
by the University; to withdraw all or any of those privileges in accordance with such conditions as 
may be prescribed by the Statutes; to recog nise, guide, supervise, and control Halls not maintained by 
the University and other accommodation for students, and to withdraw any such recognition;  
(xviii) to appoint on contract or otherwise visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors, Consultants, 
Schola rs and such other persons who may contribute to the advancement of the objects of the 
University;  
(xix) to confer autonomous status on a College or an Institution or a Department, as the case may 
be, in accordance with the Statutes;  
(xx) to determine standards of admission to the University, which may include examination, 
evaluation or any other method of testing;  
(xxi) to demand and receive payment of fees and other charges;  
(xxii) to supervise the residences of the students of the University and to m ake arrangements for 
promoting their health and general welfare;  
(xxiii) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, including their code of 
conduct;  6 
 (xxiv) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the employees, and to take such 
disciplinary measures in this regard as may be deemed by the University to be necessary;  
(xxv) to make arrangements for promoting the health and general welfare of the employees;  
(xxvi) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acqui re, hold and manage, and to 
dispose of, with the previous approval of the Central Government, any property, movable or 
immovable, including trust and endowment properties for the purposes of the University;  
(xxvii ) to borrow, with the approval of the Centr al Government, on the security of the property of 
the University, money for the purposes of the University;  
(xxviii ) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the 
attainment of all or any of its objects.  
6. Jurisd iction .—(1) The jurisdiction of the University shall extend to the whole of the State of 
Sikkim.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force, no educational institution 
within the State of Sikkim shall be associated in any way  with or be admitted to any privileges of any 
other University incorporated by law in India, and any such privileges granted by any such other 
University to an educational institution within the State of Sikkim prior to the commencement of this Act 
shall b e deemed to be withdrawn on the commencement of this Act:  
Provided that the Central Government may, by order in writing, direct that the provisions of this sub -
section shall not apply in case of any educational inst itution specified in the order.  
7. Univer sity open to a ll classes, castes and creed .—The University shall be open to persons of 
either sex and of whatever caste, creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt 
or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be 
appointed as a teacher of the University or to hold any other office therein or be admitted as a student in 
the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof:  
Provided tha t nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University from making special 
provisions for the employment or admission of women, persons with disabilities or of persons belonging 
to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.  
8. The Vi sitor .—(1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University.  
(2) The Visitor may, from time to time, appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress 
of the University, including Colleges and Institutions maintained by it, and to submit a report thereon; and 
upon receipt of that report, the Visitor may, after obtaining the views of the Executive Council thereon 
through the Vice -Chancellor, take such action and issue such directions  as he considers necessary in 
respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report and the University shall be bound to comply with 
such directions.  
(3) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made by such person or persons as he 
may direct, of the University, its buildings, libraries, laboratories and equipment, and of any College or 
Institution maintained by the University or admitted to its privileges; and also of the examinations, 
teaching and other work conducted or done by the University and to cause an inquiry to be made in like 
manner in respect of any matter connected with the administration or finances of the University, Colleges 
or Institutions.   7 
 (4) The Visitor shall, in every matter referred to in sub -section ( 3), give no tice of his intention to 
cause an inspection or inquiry  to be made, — 
(a) to the University, if such inspection or inquiry is to be made in respect of the University or 
any College or Institution maintained by it, or  
(b) to the management of the College or Institution, if the inspection or inquiry is to be made in 
respect of College or Institution admitted to the privileges of the University, and the University or the 
management, as the case may be, shall have the right to make such representations to the Vi sitor, as it 
may consider necessary.  
(5) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University or the management, as the 
case may be, the Visitor may cause to be made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in sub -section 
(3). 
(6) Wher e any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the University or the 
management shall be entitled to appoint a representative, who shall have the right to be present and be 
heard at such inspection or inquiry.  
(7) The Visitor may, i f the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of the University or any College or 
Institution maintained by it, address the Vice -Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or 
inquiry together with such views and advice with regard to the a ction to be taken thereon, as the Visitor 
may be pleased to offer, and on receipt of address made by the Visitor, the Vice -Chancellor shall 
communicate, to the Executive Council, the views of the Visitor with such advice as the Visitor may offer 
upon the a ction to be taken thereon.  
(8) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of any College or Institution 
admitted to the privileges of the University, address the management concerned through the Vice -
Chancellor with reference to the r esult of such inspection or inquiry, his views thereon and such advice as 
he may be pleased to offer upon the action to be taken thereon.  
(9) The Executive Council or the management, as the case may be, shall communicate, through the 
Vice -Chancellor to the  Visitor such action, if any, as it proposes to take or has been taken upon the result 
of such inspection or inquiry.  
(10) Where, the Executive Council or the management, does not, within a reasonable time, take action 
to the satisfaction of the Visitor, t he Visitor may, after considering any explanation furnished or 
representation made by the Executive Council or the management, issue such directions as he may think 
fit and the Executive Council or the management, as the case may be, shall comply with such  directions.  
(11) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Visitor may, by order in 
writing, annul any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with the Act, the Statutes or 
the Ordinances:  
Provided that before maki ng any such order, he shall call upon the Registrar to show cause why such 
an order should not be made, and, if any cause is shown within a reasonable time, he shall consider the 
same.  
(12) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
9. The Chief Rector .—The Governor of the State of Sikkim shall be the Chief Rector of the 
University.   8 
 10. Officers of the University .—The following shall be the officers of the University: — 
(1) the Chancellor;  
(2) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(3) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(4) the Deans of Schools;  
(5) the Registrar;  
(6) the Finance Officer;  
(7) the Controller of Examinations;  
(8) the Librarian; and  
(9) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be officers of the University.  
11. The C hancellor .—(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the head of the University and shall, if present, 
preside at the Convocations of the University held for conferring degrees and meetings of the Court.  
12. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of the University and 
shall exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of the University and give effect to the 
decisions of all the authorities of the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may, if he is of the o pinion that immediate action is necessary on any matter, 
exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under this Act and shall report to 
such authority at its next meeting the action taken by him on such matter:  
Provided that if th e authority concerned is of the opinion that such action ought not to have been 
taken, it may refer the matter to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final:  
Provided further that any person in the service of the University who is aggrieved by the action taken 
by the Vice -Chancellor under this sub -section shall have the right to represent against such action to the 
Executive Council within three months from the date on which decision on such action is communicated 
to him and thereupon the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the action taken by the Vice -
Chancellor.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that any decision of any authority of the University is 
beyond the powers of the authority conferred by the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances 
or that any decision taken is not in the interest of the University, may ask the authority concerned to 
review its decision within sixty days of such decision and if the authority refuses to review the decision 
either in  whole or in part or no decision is taken by it within the said period of sixty days, the matter shall 
be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
13. The Pro -Vice-Chancel lor.—The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed in such manner and on 
such terms and conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  9 
 14. The Deans of Schools .—Every Dean of School shall be appointed in such manner and shall 
exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
15. The Registrar .—(1) The Registrar shall be appointe d in such manner and on such terms and 
conditions of service as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreements, sign documents and authenticate 
records on behalf of the University and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
16. The Finance Officer .—The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
17. Th e Controller of Examinations .—The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed in such 
manner and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
18. The Librarian .—The Librarian shall be appointed in such manner an d on such terms and 
conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by 
the Statutes.  
19. Other officers .—The manner of appointment and powers and duties of other officers of the 
University shall be prescr ibed by the Statutes.  
20. A uthorities of the University .—The following shall be the  authorities of the University: — 
(1) the Court;  
(2) the Executive Council;  
(3) the Academic Council;  
(4) the College Development Council;  
(5) the Board of Studies;  
(6) the Finance Committee; and  
(7) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the 
University.  
21. The Court .—(1) The constitution of the Court and the term of office of its members shall be 
prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provid ed that such number of members as may be prescribed by the Statutes shall be elected from 
among the teachers, employees and students of the University.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall have the followin g powers and functions, 
namely: — 
(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of the University and to 
suggest measures for the improvement and development of the University;  
(b) to consider and pass resolutions on the annual report and the annual accounts of the University 
and the audit report on such accounts;  
(c) to advise the Visitor in respect of any matter which may be referred to it for advice; and  
(d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
22. The Executive Council .—(1) The Executive Council shall be the principal executive body of the 
University.  10 
 (2) The constitution of the Executive Council, the term of office of its members and its powers and 
functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that such number of members as may be prescribed by the Statutes shall be from among the 
elected members of the Court.  
23. The Academic Council .—(1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the 
University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, t he Statutes and the Ordinances, co -ordinate 
and exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University.  
(2) The constitution of the Academic Council, the term of office of its members and its powers and 
functions shall be prescribed by t he Statutes:  
Provided that such number of members as may be prescribed by the Statutes shall be from among the 
elected members of the Court who are teachers of the University.  
24. The  College Development Council .—(1) The College Development Council shall be responsible 
for admitting Colleges to the privileges of the University.  
(2) The constitution of the College Development Council, the term of office of its members and its 
powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
25. The Board of Studies .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Studies shall be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
26. The Finance Committee .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
27. Other a uthorities of the University .—The constitution, powers and functions of other 
authorities, as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the University, shall be prescribed 
by the Statutes.  
28. Power to make Statutes .—Subject to the provisions of this Act,  the Statutes may provide for all 
or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of authorities and other bodies of the University, as 
may be constituted from time to time;  
(b) the appointment and continuance in office  of the members of the said authorities and bodies, 
the filling up of vacancies of members, and all other matters relating to those authorities and other 
bodies for which it may be necessary or desirable to provide;  
(c) the appointment, powers and duties o f the officers of the University and their emoluments;  
(d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees of the University, their 
emoluments and conditions of service;  
(e) the recognition of persons as recognised teachers;  
(f) the appointment of teachers, academic staff working in any other University or organisation 
for a specific period for undertaking a joint project;  
(g) the conditions of service of employees including provisions for pension, insurance, provident 
fund, the manne r of termination of service and disciplinary action;  
(h) the principles governing the seniority of service of the employees of the University;  
(i) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or students and the 
University;  11 
 (j) the p rocedure for appeal to the Executive Council by any employee or student against the 
action of any officer or authority of the University;  
(k) the conferment of autonomous status on a College or an Institution or a Department;  
(l) the establishment and abolition of Schools, Departments, Centres, Halls, Colleges and 
Institutions;  
(m) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(n) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions;  
(o) the conditions under which Colleges and Institu tions may be admitted to the privileges of the 
University and the withdrawal of such privileges;  
(p) the management of Colleges and Institutions established by the University;  
(q) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the Univer sity; 
(r) the maintenance of discipline among the employees and students; and  
(s) all other matters which by this Act are to be or may be provided for by the Statutes.  
29. Statutes how to be made .—(1) The first Statutes are those set out in the Schedule.  
(2) The Executive Council may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend or 
repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that the Executive Council shall not make, amend or repeal any Statutes affecting the status, 
powe rs or constitution of any authority of the University until such authority has been given an 
opportunity of expressing an opinion in writing on the proposed changes, and any opinion so expressed 
shall be considered by the Executive Council.  
(3) Every new S tatute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require 
the assent of the Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold assent or remit to the Executive Council for 
re-consideration.  
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless 
it has been assented to by the Visitor.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may make new or 
additional Statutes or amend or repeal the Statutes referr ed to in sub -section ( 1), during the period of three 
years immediately after the commencement of this Act:  
Provided that the Visitor may, on the expiry of the said period of three years, make, within one year 
from the date of such expiry, such detailed Sta tutes as he may consider necessary and such detailed 
Statutes shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may direct the 
University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by him and if the 
Executive Council is unable to implement such direction within sixty days of its receipt, the Visitor may, 
after considering the reasons, if any, communicated by the Executive Council for its inability to c omply 
with such direction, make or amend the Statutes suitably.   12 
 30. Power to make Ordinances .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the 
Ordinances may provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of the 
University;  
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;  
(d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions, the qualifications 
for the same and the means to be taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the same;  
(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission to the 
examinations, degrees and diplomas of the University;  
(f) the conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(g) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and manner of appointment and the 
duties of examining bodies, examiner s and moderators;  
(h) the conditions of residence of the students of the University;  
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence and teaching of women 
students and the prescribing of special courses of studies for them;  
(j) the establishment of Centres of Studies, Boards of Studies, Specialised Laboratories and other 
Committees;  
(k) the manner of co -operation and collaboration with other Universities, institutions and other 
agencies not involving the carrying on of any activity  for profit including learned bodies or 
associations;  
(l) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is considered necessary for 
improving the academic life of the University;  
(m) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentsh ips, medals and prizes;  
(n) the supervision of management of Colleges and Institutions admitted to the privileges of the 
University;  
(o) the setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances of employees; and  
(p) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes, are to be or may be, provided for by the 
Ordinances.  
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice -Chancellor with the previous approval of the 
Central Government and the Ordinances so made may be amended, repealed or added to at any tim e by 
the Executive Council in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.  
31. Regulations .—The authorities of the University may make Regulations, consistent with this Act, 
the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business and that of the Co mmittees, if any, 
appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances, in the manner 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
32. Annual report  .—(1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of 
the Executive Council, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the University 
towards the fulfilment of its objects and shall be submitted to the Court on or after such date as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes and the Court shall consider  the report in its annual meeting.  13 
 (2) The Court shall submit the annual report to the Visitor along with its comments, if any.  
(3) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub -section ( 1), shall also be submitted to the 
Central Government, which sha ll, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of 
Parliament.  
33. Annual accounts .—(1) The annual accounts and balance -sheet of the University shall be 
prepared under the directions of the Executive Council and shall, once at least eve ry year and at intervals 
of not more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or by such 
persons as he may authorise in this behalf.  
(2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report thereon shall be submitted to the 
Court and the Visitor along with the observations of the Executive Council.  
(3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall be brought to the notice of the 
Court and the observations of the Court, if any, shall, after  being considered by the Executive Council, be 
submitted to the Visitor.  
(4) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report as submitted to the Visitor, shall also 
be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before 
both Houses of Parliament.  
(5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before both Houses of Parliament shall be 
published in the Official Gazette.  
34. Returns and information .—The University shall furnish to the Central Government such returns 
or other information with respect to its property or activities as the Central Government may, from time to 
time, require.  
35. Condit ions of service of employees .—(1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed 
under  a written contract, which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be furnished 
to the employee concerned.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any employee shall, at the 
request of the employee, be r eferred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by 
the Executive Council, one member nominated by the employee concerned and an umpire appointed by 
the Visitor.  
(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final, and no suit shall lie in any civil court in respect of the 
matters decided by the Tribunal:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall preclude the employee from availing of the judicial 
remedies available under articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution.  
(4) Every request ma de by the employee under sub -section ( 2), shall be deemed to be a submission to 
arbitration upon the terms of this section within the meaning of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996  
(26 of 1996) . 
(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribu nal shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
36. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in discipl inary cases against students .—(1) Any student 
or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed from the rolls of the University by the 
orders or resolutio n of the Vice -Chancellor, Discipline Committee or Examination Committee, as the case 
may be, and who has been debarred from appearing at the examinations of the University for more than 
one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt of such orders o r copy of such resolution by him, 14 
 appeal to the Executive Council and the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the decision 
of the Vice -Chancellor or the Committee, as the case may be.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action take n by the University against a student shall, 
at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of sub -sections 
(2), (3), (4) and ( 5) of section 35 shall, as far as may be, apply to a reference made under this sub -section.  
37. Right to appeal .—Every employee or student of the University or of a College or Institution 
maintained by the University or admitted to its privileges shall, notwithstanding anything contained in 
this Act, have a right to appeal within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes, to the Executive 
Council against the decision of any officer or authority of the University or of the Principal or the 
management of any College or an Institution, as the case may be, and thereupon the Executive C ouncil 
may confirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed against.  
38. Provident and pension funds .—(1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its 
employees such provident or pension fund or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit i n such 
manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Where such provident fund or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central Government may 
declare that the provisions o f the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925) , shall apply to such fund, as if it 
were a Government provident fund.  
39. Disputes as to constituti on of authorities and bodies .—If any question arises as to whether any 
person has been duly elected or appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority or other body 
of the University, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.  
40. Filling of casual vacancies .—All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio  
members) of any authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the 
person or body who appoints, elects or co -opts the member whose place has become vacant and person 
appointed, elected or co -opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority or b ody for the 
residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member.  
41. Proceedings of authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies .—No act or proceedings of 
any authority or other body of the University shall be invalid merely by reason of the existence of a 
vacancy or vacancies among its members.  
42. Protection o f action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any 
officer or other employee of the University for anything which is i n good faith done or intended to be 
done in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
43. Mode o f proof of University record .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872  (1 of 1872) or in any other law for the time being in force, a copy of any receipt, 
application, notice, order, proceeding or resolution of any authority or other body of the University, or 
any other document in possession of the University, or any entry in any regist er duly maintained by the 
University, if certified by the Registrar, shall be received as prima facie  evidence of such receipt, 
application, notice, order, proceeding, resolution or document or the existence of entry in the register and 
shall be admitted a s evidence of the matters and transactions therein where the original thereof would, if 
produced, have been admissible in evidence.   15 
 44. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under th is section after the expiry of three years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty  days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the order or  both Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order.  
45. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid 
before Parliament .—(1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be published 
in the Offici al Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session o r in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree  that the Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation should not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall b e without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that Statute, Ordinance or Regulation.  
(3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shall include the power to give 
retrospective effect, from a date not earlier than the da te of commencement of this Act, to the Statutes, 
Ordinances or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation may be applicable.  
46. Transitional provisions .—Notwithstanding anything containe d in this Act and the Statutes, — 
(a) the first Chancellor and first Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner 
and on such conditions as may be deemed fit and each of the said officer shall hold office for such 
term, not exceeding five years as may be specified by the Visitor;  
(b) the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Visitor and each of 
the said officers shall hold office for a term of three years;  
(c) the first Court and the first Executive Council shall consist of not more than thirty -one 
members and eleven members, respectively, who shall be nominated by the Visitor and shall hold 
office for a term of three years;  
(d) the first College Development Council shall consist of not more than eleven members, who 
shall be nominated by the Visitor and they shall hold office for a term of three years;  
(e) the first Academic Council shall cons ist of not more than twenty -one members, who shall be 
nominated by the Visitor and they shall hold office for a term of three years:  16 
 Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or authorities, the same shall be filled by 
appointment or nominat ion, as the case may be, by the Visitor, and the person so appointed or 
nominated shall hold office for so long as the officer or member in whose place he is appointed or 
nominated would have held office, if such vacancy had not occurred.   17 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 29)  
THE STATUTES OF THE UNIVERSITY  
1. The Chancellor .—(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less 
than three persons recommended by the Executive Council from amongst persons of eminence in the 
academic or public  life of the country:  
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons so recommended, he may call for 
fresh recommendations from the Executive Council.  
(2) The Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years and shall not be eligi ble for re -
appointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office, the Chancellor shall continue to hold 
office until his successor enters upon his office.  
2. The Vice -Chancellor .— (1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of 
not less than three persons who shall be recommended by a Committee as constituted under clause ( 2): 
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons included in the panel, he may call 
for an extended fresh panel.  
(2) The Committee referred to in clause ( 1) shall consist of three persons, out of whom two shall be 
nominated by the Executive Council and one by the Visitor and the nominee of the Visitor shall be the 
convener of the Committee:  
Provided that none of th e members of the Committee shall be an employee of the University or an 
Institution maintained by, or admitted to the privileges of, the University or a member of any authority of 
the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor shall be a whole -time salaried offi cer of the University.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters 
upon his office, or until he attains the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier, and he shall not be 
eligible for re -appointme nt: 
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of five years, he shall continue in office 
until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office:  
Provided further that the Visitor may direct any Vice -Chancellor after his term has expi red, to 
continue in office for such period, not exceeding a total period of one year, as may be specified by him.  
(5) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Vice -Chancellor shall be as follows: — 
(i) The Vice -Chancellor shall be paid a monthly salary and allowances, other than house rent 
allowance, at the rates fixed by the Central Government from time to time and he shall be entitled, 
without payment of rent, to use a furnished residence throughout his term of office and no charge 
shall  fall on the Vice -Chancellor in respect of the maintenance of such residence.  
(ii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to such terminal benefits and allowances as may be 
fixed by the Centra l Government from time to time:  
Provided that where an employee o f the University, or a College or an Institution maintained by, 
or admitted to the privileges of, the University, or of any other University or any College or 
Institution maintained by or admitted to the privileges of, such other University, is appointed a s the 18 
 Vice -Chancellor, he may be allowed to continue to contribute to any provident fund of which he is a 
member and the University shall contribute to the account of such person in that provident fund at the 
same rate at which the person had been contribu ting immediately before his appointment as the Vice -
Chancellor:  
Provided further that where such employee had been member of any pension scheme, the 
University shall make the necessary contribution to such scheme.  
(iii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitle d to travelling allowance at such rates as may be fixed by 
the Executive Council.  
(iv) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full pay at the rate of thirty days in a 
calendar year and the leave shall be credited to his account in advance in two  half-yearly instalments 
of fifteen days each on the first day of January and July every year:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor assumes or relinquishes charge of the office of the Vice -
Chancellor during the currency of a half year, the leave shall be c redited proportionately at the rate of 
two and -a-half days for each completed month of service.  
(v) In addition to the leave referred to in sub -clause ( iv), the Vice -Chancellor shall also be entitled 
to half -pay leave at the rate of twenty days for each co mpleted year of service, and half -pay leave 
may also be availed of as commuted leave on f ull pay on medical certificate:  
Provided that when such commuted leave is availed of, twice the amount of half -pay leave shall 
be debited against half -pay leave due.  
(6) If the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or otherwise, or 
if he is unable to perform his duties due to ill -health or any other cause, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall 
perform the duties of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the Pro -Vice -Chancellor is not available, the senior -most Professor shall perform 
the duties of the Vice -Chancellor until a new Vice -Chancellor assumes office or the existing Vice -
Chancellor resumes the duties of his office, as the case may be.  
3. Powers and d uties of the Vice -Chancellor .— (1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be ex officio  
Chairman of the Executive Council, the Academic Council and the Finance Committee and shall, in the 
absence of the Chancellor, preside at the Convocations held for conferring degrees and at meetings of the 
Court.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and address, any meeting of any authority 
or other body of the University, but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he is a member of such 
authority or body.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice -Chancellor to see that this Act, th e Statutes, the Ordinances and the 
Regulations are duly observed, and he shall have all the powers necessary to ensure such observance.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall have all the powers necessary for the proper maintenance of discipline 
in the University a nd he may delegate any such powers to such person or persons as he deems fit.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall have the power to convene or cause to be convened the meetings of the 
Executive Council, the Academic Council and the Finance Committee.  
4. Pro -Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Executive Council 
on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor:  19 
 Provided that where the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor is not accepted by the Executive 
Council, the matter shall be r eferred to the Visitor who may either appoint the person recommended by 
the Vice -Chancellor or ask the Vice -Chancellor to recommend another person to the Executive Council:  
Provided further that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor, 
appoint a Professor to discharge the duties of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor in addition to his own duties as a 
Professor.  
(2) The term of office of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be such as may be decided by the Executive 
Council but it shall not in any case exceed five years or until the expiration of the term of office of the 
Vice -Chancellor, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that a Pro -Vice -Chancellor whose term of office has expired shall be eligible for re -
appointment:  
Provided further that, in any case , a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall retire on attaining the age of sixty -five 
years:  
Provided also that a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall, while discharging the duties of the Vice -Chancellor 
under clause ( 6) of Statute 2, continue in office notwithstanding the expirat ion of his term of office as 
Pro-Vice -Chancellor, until the Vice -Chancellor resumes office or a new Vice -Chancellor assumes office, 
as the case may be.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be such 
as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall assist the Vice -Chancellor in respect of such matters as may be 
specified by the Vice -Chancellor in this behalf, from time to time, and shall also exercise such powers 
and perform such duties as may be assigned or delegated to him by the Vice -Chancellor.  
5. Deans of Schools .—(1) Every Dean of School shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor from 
amongst the Professors in the School by rotation in the order of seniority for a period of three years:  
Provided that in case there is only one Professor or no Professor in a School, the Dean shall be 
appointed, for the time being, from amongst the Professor, if any, and the Readers in the School by 
rotation in the order of seniority:  
Provided f urther that a Dean on attaining the age of sixty -two years shall cease to hold office as such.  
(2) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness, absence or any 
other cause, unable to perform duties of his office, the duti es of the office shall be performed by the 
senior -most Professor or Reader, as the case may be, in the School.  
(3) The Dean shall be the Head of the School and shall be responsible for the conduct and 
maintenance of the standards of teaching and research i n the School and shall have such other functions 
as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at any meeting of the Boards of Studies 
or Committees of the School, as the case may be, but shall not hav e the right to vote thereat unless he is a 
member thereof.  
6. The Registrar .—(1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the 
recommendation of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and shall be a whole -time salaried 
officer  of the University.  
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for re -appointment.  20 
 (3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Registrar shall be such as may 
be prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time:  
Provided that the Registrar shall retire on attaining the age of sixty -two years:  
Provided further that a Registrar shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty -two years, 
continue in office until his successor is appointed and enter s upon his office or until the expiry of a period 
of one year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar is, by reason of illness, absence or 
any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by 
such person as the Vice -Chancell or may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) (a) The Registrar shall have power to take disciplinary action against such of the employees, 
excluding teachers and other academic staff, as may  be specified in the order of the Executive Council 
and to suspend them pending inquiry, to administer warnings to them or to impose on them the penalty of 
censure or the withholding of increment:  
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the p erson has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him.  
(b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice -Chancellor against any order of the Registrar imposing any of the 
penalties specified in sub -clause  (a). 
(c) In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the power of the Registrar is called 
for, the Registrar shall, upon the conclusion of the inquiry, make a report to the Vice -Chancellor along 
with his recommendations:  
Provided that a n appeal shall lie to the Executive Council against an order of the Vice -Chancellor 
imposing any penalty.  
(6) The Registrar shall be ex officio  Secretary of the Executive Council, the Academic Council and 
the College Development Council, but shall not be d eemed to be a member of any of these authorities and 
he shall be ex officio  Member -Secretary of the Court.  
(7) It sha ll be the duty of the Registrar — 
(a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such other property of the University 
as the Executive Council shall commit to his charge;  
(b) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council, the College Development Council and of any Committees appointed by those authorities;  
(c) to keep the minut es of all the meetings of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council, the College Development Council and of any Committees appointed by those authorities;  
(d) to conduct the official correspondence of the Court, the Executive Council, the Acad emic 
Council and the College Development Council;  
(e) to supply to the Visitor, copies of the agenda of the meetings of the authorities of the 
University as soon as they are issued and the minutes of such meetings;  
(f) to represent the University in suits or proceedings by or against the University, sign powers of 
attorney and verify pleadings or depute his representative for the purpose; and  
(g) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances or the 
Regulations or as may be  required from time to time, by the Executive Council or the Vice -
Chancellor.  21 
 7. The Finance Officer .—(1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Executive Council on 
the recommendations of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time 
salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The Finance Officer shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for re -
appointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Finance Officer shal l be such as 
may be prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time:  
Provided that the Finance Officer shall retire on attain ing the age of sixty -two years:  
Provided further that the Finance Officer shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of six ty-two 
years, continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office or until the expiry of a 
period of one year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Finance Officer is vacant or when the Finance Officer is, by reason o f 
illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall 
be performed by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) The Finance Officer shall be ex officio  Secretary of the F inance Committee, but shall not be 
deemed to be a member of such Committee.  
(6) The Finance Officer shall — 
(a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the University and shall advise it as regards its 
financial policy; and  
(b) perform such other fin ancial functions as may be assigned to him by the Executive Council or 
as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(7) Subject to the control of the Executive Cou ncil, the Finance Officer shall — 
(a) hold and manage the property and investments of the University including trust and endowed 
property;  
(b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Executive Council for recurring and non -recurring 
expenditure for a year are not exceeded and that all moneys are expended on the purpose for which 
they are gra nted or allotted;  
(c) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget of the University and for 
their presentation to the Executive Council;  
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank balances and on the state of 
inves tments;  
(e) watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advise on the methods of collection 
employed;  
(f) ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture and equipment are maintained up -to-date 
and that stock -checking is conducted, of equip ment and other consumable materials in all offices, 
Departments, University, Institutes, Centres and Specialised Laboratories;  
(g) bring to the notice of the Vice -Chancellor unauthorised expenditure and other financial 
irregularities and suggest disciplinary action against persons at fault; and  22 
 (h) call for from any office, Department, Centre, Laboratory, College or Institution maintained by 
the University any information or returns that he may consider necessary for the performance of his 
duties.  
(8) Any receipt given by the Finance Officer or the person or persons duly authorised in this behalf by 
the Executive Council for any money payable to the University shall be sufficient discharge for payment 
of such money.  
8. Th e Controller of Examination s.—(1) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed by the 
Executive Council on the recommendations of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he 
shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for 
re-appointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Controller of Examinations shall 
be such as may be prescribed by the Executive Council fr om time to time:  
Provided that the Controller of Examinations shall retire on attaining the age of sixty -two years:  
Provided further that the Controller of Examinations shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of 
sixty -two years, continue in office unt il his successor is appointed and enters upon his office or until the 
expiry of a period of one year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Controller of Examinations is vacant or when the Controller of 
Examinations is, by reason of illness, abs ence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his 
office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for 
the purpose.  
(5) The Controller of Examinations shall arrange for and superintend the exa minations of the 
University in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances.  
9. The Librarian .—(1) The Librarian shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the 
recommendations of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time 
salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to him by 
the Executive Council.  
10. Meetings of the Court .—(1) An annual meeting of the Court shall be held on a date to be fixed 
by the Executive Council unless some other date has been fixed by the Court in respect of any year.  
(2) At an annual meeting of the Court, a report on the working of the University during the previous 
year, together with a statement of the receipt s and expenditure, the balance -sheet as audited, and the 
financial estimates for the next year shall be presented.  
(3) A copy of the statement of receipts and expenditure, the balance -sheet and the financial estimates 
referred to in clause ( 2) shall be sent t o every member of the Court at least seven days before the date of 
the annual meeting.  
(4) Special meetings of the Court may be convened by the Executive Council or the Vice -Chancellor 
or if there is no Vice -Chancellor, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor or if there is no Pro -Vice -Chancellor, by the 
Registrar.  
(5) Eleven members of the Court shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Court.  23 
 11. Quorum for mee ting of the Executive Council .—Seven members of the Executive Council 
shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Executive Council.  
12. Powers and functi ons of the Executive Council .—(1) The Executive Council shall have the 
power of management and administration of the revenues and property of the University and the conduct 
of all administrative affairs of the Univer sity not otherwise provided for.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Executive Council shall, 
in addition to all other powers vested in it, have  the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to create teaching and other aca demic posts, to determine the number and emoluments of such 
posts and to define the duties and conditions of service of Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other 
academic staff:  
Provided that no action shall be taken by the Executive Council in respect of t he number and 
qualifications of teachers and other academic staff otherwise than after consideration of the 
recommendations of the Academic Council;  
(ii) to appoint such Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other academic staff, as may be necessary, 
on the recommendation of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and to fill -up 
temporary vacancies therein;  
(iii) to recognise persons as University recognised teachers in the manner prescribed by the 
Ordinances;  
(iv) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts (including Chairs) and to make 
appointments thereto in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(v) to grant leave of absence to any officer of the University other than the Chancellor and the 
Vice -Chancellor, and to m ake necessary arrangements for the discharge of the functions of such 
officer during his absence;  
(vi) to regulate and enforce discipline among employees in accordance with the Statutes and the 
Ordinances;  
(vii) to manage and regulate the finances, account s, investments, property, business and all other 
administrative affairs of the University and for that purpose to appoint such agents as it may think fit;  
(viii) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non -recurring expenditure for a year on the  
recommendation of the Finance Committee;  
(ix) to invest any money belonging to the University, including any unapplied income, in such 
stocks, funds, shares or securities, from time to time as it may think fit or in the purchase of 
immovable property in I ndia, with the like powers of varying such investment from time to time;  
(x) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immovable property on behalf of the 
University;  
(xi) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus and other means need ed for carrying 
on the work of the University;  
(xii) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on behalf of the University;  
(xiii) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and if thought fit, to redress any grievances of the employees 
and students of the U niversity who may, for any reason, feel aggrieved;  
(xiv) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if necessary, to remove them, and to fix their fees, 
emoluments and travelling and other allowances, after consulting the Academic Council;  24 
 (xv) to select a c ommon seal for the University and provide for the custody and use of such seal;  
(xvi) to make such special arrangements as may be necessary for the residence of women 
students;  
(xvii) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(xviii) to provide for the appointment of Visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors, Consultants and 
Scholars and determine the terms and conditions of such appointments; and  
(xix) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be confe rred or imposed 
on it by the Ordinances or the Statutes.  
13. Quorum for mee tings of the Academic Council .—Nine members of the Academic Council 
shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Academic Council.  
14. Powers and func tions of the Academic Council .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the 
Statutes and the Ordinances, the Academic Council shall, in addition to all other powers vested in it, have  
the following powers, namely: — 
(a) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the Univ ersity and to give 
directions regarding methods of instruction, co -ordination of teaching among the Colleges and the 
Institutions, evaluation of research and improvement of academic standards;  
(b) to bring about and promote inter -School co -ordination and t o establish or appoint such 
committees or boards as may be deemed necessary for the purpose;  
(c) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own initiative, or on a reference 
by a School or the Executive Council, and to take appropriate action thereon; and  
(d) to frame such Regulations and rules consistent with the Statutes and the Ordinances regarding 
the academic functioning of the University, discipline, residence, admissions, award of fellowships 
and studentships, fees, concessions, c orporate life and attendance.  
15. School s of Studies and Departments .—(1) The University shall have such Schools of Studies as 
may be specified in the Statutes.  
(2) Every School shall have a School Board and the members of the first School Board shall be 
nominated by the Executive Council for a period of three years.  
(3) The composition, powers and functions of a School Board shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The conduct of the meetings of a School Board and the quorum required for such meetings s hall 
be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(5) (a) Every School shall consist of such Departments as may be assigned to it by the Ordinances:  
Provided that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic Council, establish 
Centres of Studies to  which may be assigned such teachers of the University as the Executive Council 
may consider necessary.  
(b) Each Department shall consist of  the following members, namely: — 
(i) Teachers of the Department;  
(ii) Persons conducting research in the Department;  
(iii) Dean of the School;  
(iv) Honorary Professors, if any, attached to the Department; and  25 
 (v) Such other persons as may be members of the Department in accordance with the provisions 
of the Ordinances.  
16. Board of Studies .—(1) Each Department shall hav e a Board of Studies.  
(2) The constitution of the Board of Studies and the term of office of its members shall be prescribed 
by the Ordinances.  
(3) Subject to the overall control and supervision of the Academic Council, the functions of a Board 
of Studies shall be to approve subjects for research for various degrees and other requirements of research 
degrees and to recommend to the concerned School Board in the mann er prescribed by the Ordinances — 
(a) courses of studies and appointment of examiners for cour ses, but excluding research degrees;  
(b) appointment of supervisors for research; and  
(c) measures for the improvement of the standard of teaching and research:  
Provided that the above functions of a Board of Studies shall, during the period of three years  
immediately after the commencement of the Act, be performed by the Department.  
17. The Finance Committee .— (1) The Finance Committee shall consist of  the following members, 
namely: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(ii) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(iii) one person to be nominated by the Court;  
(iv) three persons to be nominated by the Executive Council, out of whom at least one shall be a 
member of the Executive Council; and  
(v) three persons to be nominated by the Visitor.  
(2) Five members of the Finance Committee shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Finance 
Committee.  
(3) All the members of the Finance Committee, other than ex officio  members, shall hold office for a 
term of three years.  
(4) A member of the Finance Committee shall have the right to record a minute of dissent if he does 
not agree with any decision of the Finance Committee.  
(5) The Finance Committee shall meet at least thrice every year to examine the accounts and to 
scrutinise proposals for expenditure.  
(6) All proposals relating to creation o f posts, and those items which have not been included in the 
Budget, shall be examined by the Finance Committee before they are considered by the Executive 
Council.  
(7) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University prepared by the Finan ce Officer 
shall be laid before the Finance Committee for consideration and comments and thereafter submitted to 
the Executive Council for approval.  
(8) The Finance Committee shall recommend limits for the total recurring expenditure and the total 
non-recurring expenditure for the year, based on the income and resources of the University (which, in the 
case of productive works, may include the proceeds of loans).  26 
 18. Selection Committees .—(1) There shall be Selection Committees for making recommendations 
to the Executive Council for appointment to the posts of Professor, Reader, Lecturer, Registrar, Finance 
Officer, Librarian and Principals of Colleges and Institution s maintained by the University.  
(2) The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts spe cified in Column 1 of the Table below 
shall consist of the Vice -Chancellor, a nominee of the Visitor and the persons specified in the 
corresponding entry in Column 2 of the said Table:  
TABLE  
1 2 
Professor  (i) The Dean of the School.  
 (ii) The Head of the  Department if he is a Professor.  
 (iii) Three persons not in the service of the University, nominated by 
the Executive Council, out of a panel of names recommended by the 
Academic Council  for their special knowledge of, or interest in, the 
subject with which the Professor will be concerned.  
Reader/Lecturer  (i) The Head of the Department.  
 (ii) One Professor nominated by the Vice -Chancellor.  
 (iii) Two persons not in the service of the University, nominated by 
the Executive Council, out of a panel of n ames recommended by the 
Academic Council for their special knowledge of, or interest in, the 
subject with which the Reader/Lecturer will be concerned.  
Registrar/ Finance Off icer (i) Two members of the Executive Council  nominated by  it. 
 (ii) One person n ot in the service of the University nominated by the 
Executive Council . 
Librarian  (i) Two persons not in the service of the University who have special 
knowledge of the subject of the Library Science/Library 
Administration nominated by the Executive Council.  
 (ii) One person not in the service of the University nominated by the 
Executive Council.  
Principal of College or 
Institution maintained by the 
University.  Three persons not in the service of the University. University of 
whom two shall be nomin ated by the Executive Council and one by 
the Academic Council for their special knowledge of, or interest in, a 
subject in which instruction is being provided by the College or 
Institution.  
Note 1. Where the appointment is being made for an inter -discipli nary project, the head of the project 
shall be deemed to be the Head of the Department concerned.  
Note 2. The Professor to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor shall be a Professor concerned with 
the speciality for which the selection is being made and the Vice -Chancellor shall consult the Head of the 
Department and the Dean of School before nominat ing the Professor.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor, or in his absence the Pro -Vice -Chancellor, shall convene and preside at the 
meeting of the Selection Committee:  
Provided that the meeting of the Selection Committee shall be fixed after prior consultation with, and 
subject to the convenience of Visitor's nominee and the experts nominated by the Executive Council:   27 
 Provided further that the proceedings of the Selecti on Commi ttee shall not be valid unless, — 
(a) where the number of Visitor's nominee and the persons nominated by the Executive Council is 
four in all, at least three of them attend the meeting; and  
(b) where the number of Visitor's nominee and the persons n ominated by the Executive Council is 
three in all, at least two of them attend the meeting.  
(4) The procedure to be followed by the Selection Committee shall be laid down in the Ordinances.  
(5) If the Executive Council is unable to accept the recommendatio ns made by the Selection 
Committee, it shall record its reasons and submit the case to the Visitor for final orders.  
(6) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made  in the manner indicated below: — 
(i) If the temporary vacancy is for duration longer than one academic session, it shall be filled on 
the advice of the Selection Committee in accordance with the procedure indicated in the foregoing 
clauses:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor is satisfied that in the interests of work it is necessary to fill 
the vacancy, the appointment may be made on a purely temporary basis on the advice of a local 
Selection Committee referred to i n sub -clause  (ii) for a period not exceeding six months.  
(ii) If the temporary vacancy is for a period less than a year, an appoin tment to such vacancy shall 
be made on the recommendation of a local Selection Committee consisting of the Dean of the School 
concerned, the Head of the Department and a nominee of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and the Head of the Department, 
the Selection Committee may contain two nominees of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that in the case of sudden casual vacancies of teaching posts caused by death or 
any other reason, the Dean may, in consultat ion with the Head of the Department concerned, make a 
temporary appointment for a month and report to the Vice -Chancellor and the Registrar about such 
appointment.  
(iii) No teacher appointed temporarily shall, if he is not recommended by a regular Selectio n 
Committee for appointment under the Statutes, be continued in service on such temporary employment, 
unless he is subsequently selected by a local Selection Committee or a regular Selection Committee, for a 
temporary or permanent appointment, as the case may be.  
19. Special mode of appointment .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 18, the 
Executive Council may invite a person of high academic distinction and professional attainments to 
accept a post of Professor or any other equivalent academi c post in the University on such terms and 
conditions as it deems fit and on the person agreeing to do so appoint him to the post.  
(2) The Executive Council may appoint a teacher or any other academic staff working in any other 
University or organisation f or undertaking a joint project in accordance with the manner laid down in the 
Ordinances.  
20. A ppointment for a fixed tenure .—The Executive Council may appoint a person selected in 
accordance with the procedure laid down in Statute 18 for a fixed tenure on  such terms and conditions as 
it deems fit.  
21. Recognised teachers .—(1) The qualifications of recognised teachers shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the Ordinances.  28 
 (2) All applications for the recognition of teachers shall be made in such manner as ma y be laid down 
by the Ordinances.  
(3) No teacher shall be recognised as a teacher except on the recommendation of a Selection 
Committee constituted for the purpose in the manner laid down in the Ordinances.  
(4) The period of recognition of a teacher shall be determined by the Ordinances made in that behalf.  
(5) The Academic Council may, by a special resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -
thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw recognition from a teacher:  
Provided that no such resolu tion shall be passed until notice in writing has been given to the person 
concerned calling upon him to show cause, within such time as may be specified in the notice, why such 
resolution should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and any evide nce he may produce in 
support of them have been considered by the Academic Council.  
22. Committees .—(1) An authority of the University may appoint as many standing or special 
Committees as it may deem fit, and may appoint to such Committees persons who are  not members of 
such authority.  
(2) A Committee appointed under clause ( 1) may deal with any subject delegated to it subject to 
subsequent confirmation by the authority appointing it.  
23. Terms and conditions of service and code of  conduct of the teachers , etc.—(1) All the 
teachers and other academic staff of the University shall, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, 
be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as are specified in the Statutes, 
the Ordinances and the Re gulations.  
(2) The emoluments of members of the academic staff shall be such as may be prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(3) Every teacher and member of the academic staff of the University shall be appointed on a written 
contract, the form of which shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) A copy of every contract referred to in clause ( 3) shall be deposited with the Registrar.  
24. Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of other employees .—(1) All the 
employees of the University, other than the teachers and other academic staff shall, in the absence of any 
contract to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as are 
specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations.  
(2) The manner of appointm ent and emoluments of employees, other than the teachers and other 
academic staff, shall be such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
25. Seniority list .—(1) Whenever, in accordance with the Statutes, any person is to hold an office or 
be a member of an  authority of the University by rotation according to seniority, such seniority shall be 
determined according to the length of continuous service of such person in his grade and in accordance 
with such other principles as the Executive Council may, from ti me to time, prescribe.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain in respect of each class of persons to 
whom the provisions of these Statutes apply, a complete and up -to-date seniority list in accordance with 
the provisions of claus e (1). 
(3) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous service in a particular grade or the relative 
seniority of any person or persons is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar may, on his own motion and shall, 29 
 at the request of any such person, submit the matter to the Executive Council whose decision thereon shall 
be final.  
26. Removal of  employees of the University .—(1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct 
against a teacher, a member of the academic staff or other employee of the Universi ty, the Vice -
Chancellor, in the case of the teacher or a member of the academic staff, and the authority competent to 
appoint (hereinafter referred to as the appointing authority) in the case of other employee may, by order in 
writing, place such teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee, as the case may be, under 
suspension and shall forthwith report to the Executive Council the circumstances in which the order was 
made:  
Provided that the Executive Council may, if it is of the opinion, that t he circumstances of the case do 
not warrant the suspension of the teacher or a member of the academic staff, revoke such order.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of the contract of appointment or of any other 
terms and conditions of service of the employees, the Executive Council in respect of teachers and other 
academic staff, and the appointing authority in respect of other employees, shall have the power to 
remove a teacher or a member of the academic staff or other employee, as th e case may be, on grounds of 
misconduct.  
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Executive Council, or as the case may be, the appointing authority, shall not 
be entitled to remove any teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee except for a good 
cause and after giving three months' notice or on payment of three months' salary in lieu thereof.  
(4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall be removed under clause ( 2) or 
clause ( 3) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of sho wing cause against the action proposed 
to be taken in regard to him.  
(5) The removal of a teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall take effect from 
the date on which the order of removal is made:  
Provided that where the teacher, member  of the academic staff or other employee is under suspension 
at the time of his removal, such removal shall take effect from the date on which he was placed under 
suspension.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Statut e, a teacher, member 
of the academic staff  or other employee may resign, — 
(a) if he is a permanent employee, only after giving three months' notice in writing to the 
Executive Council or the appointing authority, as the case may be, or by paying three mont hs' salary 
in lieu thereof;  
(b) if he is not a permanent employee, only after giving one month's notice in writing to the 
Executive Council or, as the case may be, the appointing authority or by paying one month's salary in 
lieu thereof:  
Provided that such  resignation shall take effect only on the date on which the resignation is 
accepted by the Executive Council or the appointing authority, as the case may be.  
27. Honorary degrees .—(1) The Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic 
Council and by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and 
voting, make proposals to the Visitor for the conferment of honorary degrees:  
Provide d that in case of emergency, the Executive Council may, on its own motion, make such 
proposals.  30 
 (2) The Executive Council may, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the 
members present and voting, withdraw, with the previous s anction of the Visitor, any honorary degree 
conferred by the University.  
28. Withdrawal of degrees, etc .—The Executive Council may, by a special resolution passed by a 
majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw any deg ree or academic 
distinction conferred on, or any certificate or diploma granted to, any person by the University for good 
and sufficient cause:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been given to that person 
calling  upon him to show cause within such time as may be specified in the notice why such a resolution 
should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in support of 
them, have been considered by the Executive Council.  
29. M aintenance of discipline amon g students of the University .—(1) All powers relating to the 
maintenance of discipline and disciplinary action in relation to the students of the University shall vest in 
the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) There shall be a Proctor of the  University to assist the Vice -Chancellor in the exercise of the 
powers referred to in clause ( 1), who shall be appointed by the Executive Council from amongst the 
Professors and Readers in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor m ay delegate all or any of the powers referred to in clause ( 1), as he deems 
proper, to the Proctor and to such other officers as he may specify in this behalf.  
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to the maintenance of discipline and 
taking such action, as may seem to him appropriate for the maintenance of discipline, the Vice -Chancellor 
may, in exercise of such powers, by order, direct that any student or students be expelled or rusticated, for 
a specified period, or be not admitt ed to a course or courses of study in a College, Institution or 
Department or a School of the University for a stated period, or be punished with fine for an amount to be 
specified in the order, or be debarred from taking an examination or examinations con ducted by the 
University, College, Institution or Department or a School for one or more years, or that the results of the 
student or students concerned in the examination or examinations in which he or they have appeared be 
cancelled.  
(5) The Principals o f Colleges, Institutions, Deans of Schools of Studies and Heads of teaching 
Departments in the University shall have the authority to exercise all such disciplinary powers over the 
students in their respective Colleges, Institutions, Schools and teaching D epartments in the University, as 
may be necessary for the proper conduct of such Colleges, Institutions, Schools and teaching 
Departments.  
(6) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice -Chancellor and the Principal and other persons 
specified in clause ( 5), detailed rules of discipline and proper conduct shall be made by the University. 
The Principals of Colleges, Institutions, Deans of Schools of Studies and Heads of teaching Departments 
in the University may also make such supplementary rules as they dee m necessary for the purposes stated 
therein.  
(7) At the time of admission, every student shall be required to sign a declaration to the effect that he 
submits himself to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Vice -Chancellor and other authorities of the 
University.  
30. Maintenance of discipline among students of College, or an Institution  not maintained by 
University .—All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in relation to students of a College 31 
 or an Institution not maintained by the Univ ersity, shall vest in the Principal of the College or Institution, 
as the case may be, in accordance with the procedure prescribed by the Ordinances.  
31. Admission of Colleges, etc., to the privileges of the University .—(1) Colleges and other 
Institutions situated within the jurisdiction of the University may be admitted to such privileges of the 
University as the Executive Council and the College Development Council may decide on th e following 
conditions, namely: — 
(i) Every such College or Institution shal l have a regularly constituted Governing Body, 
consisting of not more than fifteen persons approved by the Executive Council and including among 
others, two teachers of the University to be nominated by the Executive Council and three 
representatives of th e teaching staff of whom the Principal of the College or Institution shall be one. 
The procedure for appointment of members of the Governing Body and other matters affecting the 
management of a College or an Institution shall be prescribed by the Ordinance s: 
Provided that the said condition shall not apply in the case of Colleges and Institutions 
maintained by Government which shall, however, have an Advisory Committee consisting of not 
more than fifteen persons which shall consist of among others, three te achers including the Principal 
of the College or Institution, and two teachers of the University nominated by the Executive Council.  
(ii) Every such College or Institution shall satisfy the Executive Council and the College 
Development Council on  the follo wing matters, namely: — 
(a) the suitability and adequacy of its accommodation and equipment for teaching;  
(b) the qualifications and adequacy of its teaching staff and the conditions of their service;  
(c) the arrangements for the residence, welfare, discipl ine and supervision of students;  
(d) the adequacy of financial provision made for the continued maintenance of the College or 
Institution; and  
(e) such other matters as are essential for the maintenance of the standards of University 
education.  
(iii) No College or Institution shall be admitted to any privileges of the University except on the 
recommendation of the Academic Council made after considering the report of a Committee of 
Inspection appointed for the purpose by the Academic Council.  
(iv) Colleges and Institutions desirous of admission to any privileges of the University shall be 
required to intimate their intention to do so in writing so as to reach the Registrar not later than the 
15th August, preceding the year from which permission appl ied for is to have effect.  
(v) A College or an Institution shall not, without the previous permission of the Executive 
Council, College Development Council and the Academic Council, suspend  instruction in any subject 
or course of study which it is authoris ed to teach and teaches.  
(2) Appointment to the teaching staff and Principal of Colleges or Institutions admitted to the 
privileges of the University shall be made in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply  to Colleges and Institutions maintained by 
Government.  
(3) The service conditions of the administrative and other non -academic staff of every College or 
Institution referred to in clause ( 2) shall be such as may be laid down in the Ordinances:  32 
 Provided th at nothing in this clause shall apply to Colleges and Institutions maintained by 
Government.  
(4) Every College or Institution admitted to the privileges of the University shall be inspected at least 
once in every two academic years by a Committee appointed  by the Academic Council, and the report of 
the Committee shall be submitted to the Academic Council, which shall forward the same to the College 
Development Council and Executive Council with such recommendations as it may deem fit to make.  
(5) The Colleg e Development Council and the Executive Council, after considering the report and the 
recommendations, if any, of the Academic Council, shall forward a copy of the report to the Governing 
Body of the College or Institution with such remarks, if any, as the y may deem fit for suitable action.  
(6) The Executive Council may, after consulting the College Development Council and Academic 
Council, withdraw any privileges granted to a College or an Institution, at any time it considers that the 
College or Instituti on does not satisfy any of the conditions on the fulfilment of which the College or 
Institution was admitted to such privileges:  
Provided that before any privileges are so withdrawn, the Governing Body of the College or 
Institution concerned shall be given  an opportunity to represent to the Executive Council as to why such 
action should not be taken.  
(7) Subject to the conditions set forth in clause ( 1), the Ordinances may prescribe — 
(i) such other conditions as may be considered necessary; and  
(ii) the procedure for the admission of Colleges and Institutions to the privileges of the University 
and for the withdrawal of those privileges.  
32. Convocations .—Convocations of the University for the conferring of degrees or for other 
purposes shall be held in s uch manner as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
33. Acting Chairman of meetings .—Where no provision is made for a President or Chairman to 
preside over a meeting of any authority of the University or any Committee of such authority or when the 
President  or Chairman so provided for is absent, the members present shall elect one from among 
themselves to preside at such meeting.  
34. Resignation .—Any member, other than an ex officio  member of the Court, the Executive 
Council, the Academic Council or any other authority of the University or any Committee of such 
authority may resign by letter addressed to the Registrar and the resignation shall take effect as soon as 
such letter is re ceived by the Registrar.  
35. Disqualifications .—(1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a 
member of any of th e authorities of the University — 
(i) if he is of unsound mind;  
(ii) if he is an undischarged insolvent;  
(iii) if he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving moral turpitude and 
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of the 
disqualific ations mentioned in clause ( 1), the question shall be referred to the Visitor and his decision 
shall be final and no suit or other proceeding shall lie in any civil court against such decision.  33 
 36. Residence condit ion for membership and office .—Notwithstan ding anything contained in the 
Statutes, a person who is not ordinarily resident in India shall not be eligible to be an officer of the 
University or a member of any authority of the University.  
37. Membership of authorities by virtue of membership of othe r bodies .—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Statutes, a person who holds any post in the University or is a member of any 
authority or body of the University in his capacity as a member of a particular authority or body or as the 
holder of a partic ular appointment shall hold such office or membership only for so long as he continues 
to be a member of that particular authority or body or the holder of that particular appointment, as the 
case may be.  
38. Alumni  Association .—(1) There shall be an Alumni  Association for the University.  
(2) The subscription for membership of the Alumni  Association shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(3) No member of the Alumni  Association shall be entitled to vote or stand for election unless he has 
been a member of the Association for at least one year prior to the date of election and is a degree holder 
of the University of at least five years standing:  
Provided that the condition relatin g to the completion of one year’ s membership shall not apply in the 
case of the first election.  
39. Students ’ Council .—(1) There shall be constitute d in the University, a Students’ Council for 
every academic year, consisting of — 
(i) the Dean of Students' Welfare who shall b e the Chairman of the Students’ Council;  
(ii) twenty students to be nominated by the Academic Council on the basis of merit in studies, 
sports and extra -curricular activities; and  
(iii) such number of elected representatives of students as may be specified by the Academic 
Council:  
Provided that any student o f the University shall have the right to bring up any matter concerning 
the University before the Students' Council if so permitted by the Chairman, and he shall have the 
right to participate in the discussions at any meeting when the matter is taken up fo r consideration.  
(2) The functions of the Students' Council shall be to make suggestions to the appropriate 
authorities of the University in regard to the programmes of studies, students' welfare and other 
matters of importance, in regard to the working of  the University in general and such suggestions 
shall be made on the basis of consensus of opinion.  
(3) The Students' Council shall meet at least once in an academic year preferably in the beginning 
of that year.  
40. Ordinances, how made .—(1) The first Ordinances made under sub -section ( 2) of section 30 may 
be amended, repealed or added to at any time by the Executive Council in the manner specified in the 
following clauses.  
(2) No Ordinance in respect of the matters enumerated in sub -section ( 1) of sect ion 30 shall be made 
by the Executive Council unless a draft of such Ordinance has been proposed by the Academic Council.  
(3) The Executive Council shall not have power to amend any draft of any Ordinance proposed by the 
Academic Council under clause ( 2), but may reject the proposal or return the draft to the Academic 
Council for re -consideration, either in whole or in part, together with any amendment which the 
Executive Council may suggest.  34 
 (4) Where the Executive Council has rejected or returned the draf t of an Ordinance proposed by the 
Academic Council, the Academic Council may consider the question afresh and in case the original draft 
is reaffirmed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting and more than 
half the total number of members of the Academic Council, the draft may be sent back to the Executive 
Council which shall either adopt it or refer it to the Visitor whose decision shall be final.  
(5) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall come into effect im mediately.  
(6) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall be submitted to the Visitor within two 
weeks from the date of its adoption.  
(7) The Visitor shall have the power to direct the University to suspend the operation of any 
Ordinance.  
(8) The Visitor shall inform the Executive Council about his objection to the Ordinance referred to in 
clause ( 7) and may, after receiving the comments of the University, either withdraw the order suspending 
the Ordinance or disallow the Ordinance, and his decisio n shall be final.  
41. Regulations .—(1) The authorities of the University may make Regulations consistent with the 
Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for  the following matters, namely: — 
(i) laying down the procedure to be observed at their meetings and the number of members 
required to form a quorum;  
(ii) providing for all matters which are required by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances to be 
prescribed by Regulations;  
(iii) providing for all other matters solely concerning such authorities or commi ttees appointed by 
them and not provided for by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the giving of notice to the 
members of such authority of the dates of meetings and of the bu siness to be considered at meetings and 
for the keeping of a record of the proceedings of meetings.  
(3) The Executive Council may direct the amendment in such manner as it may specify of any 
Regulation made under the Statutes or the annulment of any such R egulation . 
42. Delegation of Powers .—Subject to the provisions of the Act and the Statutes, any officer or 
authority of the University may delegate his or its powers to any other officer or authority or person under 
his or its respective control and subject to the condition that overall responsibility for the exercise of the 
powers so delegated shall continue to vest in the officer or authority delegating such powers . 
--------------------------The Sports Broadcasting Signals (Mandatory Sharing with Prasar Bharati) Act, 2007--------------------------
1 
 THE SPORTS BROADCASTING SIGNALS (MANDATORY SHARING WITH PRASAR  
BHARATI) ACT, 2007  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
MANDATORY SHARING OF SPORTS BROADCASTING SIGNALS WITH  PRASAR  BHARATI  
3. Mandatory sharing of certain sports broadcasting signals . 
4. Penalties.  
CHAPTER III  
POWERS OF THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT TO ISSUE  GUIDELINES  
5. Power of the Central Government to issue Guidelines . 
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
6. Validation . 
7. Power of the Central Government to make rules . 
8. Rules and Guidelines to be laid before Parliament . 
9. Saving.  
10. Repeal and saving . 
 
  2 
 THE SPORTS BROADCASTING SIGNALS (MANDATORY SHARING WITH PRASAR  
BHARATI) ACT, 2007  
ACT NO. 11 OF 2007  
[19th March, 2007 .] 
An Act to provide access to the largest number of listeners and viewers, on a free to air basis, of 
sporting events of national importance through mandatory sharing of sports broadcasting signals 
with Prasar  Bharati and for matters connected therew ith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -eighth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: – 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. –(1) This Act may be called the Sports Broadcasting 
Signals (Mandatory Sha ring with Prasar  Bharati) Act, 2007.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided, it shall be deemed to have come into force on the 11th day of 
November, 2005.  
2. Definitions. –(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requ ires,– 
(a) “broadcaster” means any person who provides a content broadcasting service and includes a 
broadcasting network service provider when he manages and operates his own telev ision or radio 
channel service;  
(b) “broadcasting” means assembling and pro gramming any form of communication content, like 
signs, signals, writing, pictures, images and sounds, and either placing it in the electronic form on 
electro -magnetic waves on specified frequencies and transmitting it through space or cables to make 
it continuously available on the carrier waves, or continuously streaming it in digital data form on the 
computer networks, so as to be accessible to single or multiple users through receiving devices either 
directly or indirectly; and all its grammatical vari ations and cognate expressions;  
(c) “broadcasting service” means assembling, programming and placing communication content 
in electronic form on the electro -magnetic waves on specified frequencies and transmitting it 
continuously through broadcasting networ k or networks so as to enable all or any of the multiple 
users to access it  by connecting their receiver devices to their respective broadcasting networks and 
includes the content broadcasting services and the broadcasting netw ork services;  
(d) “broadcasti ng networks service” means a service, which provides a network of infrastructure 
of cables or transmitting devices for carrying broadcasting content in electronic form on specified 
frequencies by means of guided or unguided electro -magnetic waves to multip le users, and includes 
the management and ope ration of any of the following:  
(i) Teleport/Hub/Earth Station,  
(ii) Direct -to-Home (DTH) Broadcasting Network,  
(iii) Multi -system Cable Television Network,  
(iv) Local Cable Tele vision Network,  
(v) Satell ite Radio Broadcasting Network,  
(vi) any other network service as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government;  
(e) “cable television channel service” means the assembly,  programming and transmission by 
cables of any broadcasting television content on a given set of frequ encies to multiple subscribers;  3 
 (f) “cable television network” means any system consisting of closed transmission paths and 
associated signal generation, control and distribution equipme nt, designed to receive and re -transmit 
television channel s or programmes for rec eption by multiple subscribers;  
(g) “community radio service” means terrestrial radio broadcasting intended and restricted only to 
a specific community and within specified territory;  
(h) “content” means any sound, text, data, pictur e (still or moving), other audio -visual 
representation, signal or intelligence of any nature or any combination thereof which is capable of 
being created, processed, stored, retrieved or communicated electronically;  
(i) “content broadcasting service” means  the assembling, programming and placing content in 
electronic form and transmitting or retransmitting the same on electromagnetic waves on specified  
frequencies, on a broadcasting network so as to make it available for access by multiple users by 
connecti ng their receiving devices to the network, and includes the management and ope ration of any 
of the following:  
(i) terrestrial television service,  
(ii) terrestrial radio service,  
(iii) satellite television service,  
(iv) satellite radio service,  
(v) cable television channel service,  
(vi) community radio service,  
(vii) any other content broadcasting services as may be prescri bed by the Central 
Government;  
(j) “Direct -to-Home (DTH) broadcasting service” means a service for multi -channel distribu tion 
of progr ammes direct to a subscriber’s premises without passing through an intermediary such as a 
cable operator by up  linking to a satellite system;  
(k) “Guidelines” means the Guidelines issued under secti on 5;  
(l) “multi -system cable television network” means a system for multi -channel downlinking and 
distribution of television programmes by a land -based transmission system using wired cable or 
wireless cable or a combination of both for simultaneous reception eithe r by multiple subscribers 
directly or through one  or more local cable operators;  
(m) “Prasar  Bharati” means the Corporation known as the Prasar  Bharati (Broadcasting 
Corporation of India) established under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Prasar  Bharati  
(Broadcasting Corporation of  India) Act, 1990 (25 of 1990);  
(n) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(o) “satellite television service” means a television broadcasting service provided by using a 
satellite, and received with or with out the help of a local delivery system but does not include D irect-
to-Home delivery service;  
(p) “satellite radio service” means a radio broadcasting service provided by using a satellite and 
directly receivable through receiver sets by mul tiple subscribe rs in India;  
(q) “service provider” means prov ider of a broadcasting service;  
(r) “specified” means specified under the Gui delines issued under section 5;  
(s) “sporting events of national importance” means such national o r international sporting events,  
held in India or abroad, as may be notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazett e to be of 
national importance;  
(t) “terrestrial television service” means a television broadcasting service provided over the air by 
using a land -based transmitte r and directly received throu gh receiver sets by the public;  4 
 (u) “terrestrial radio service” means a radio broadcasting service provided over the air by using a 
land-based transmitter and directly received throu gh receiver sets by the public.  
(2) Words and  expressions used and not defined in this Act and defined in the Cable Television 
Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 (7 of 1995), the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act , 1997 (24 
of 1997), the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 (13 of 1885), the Indian Wireles s Telegraphy Act, 1933 (17 of 
1933) shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts.  
CHAPTER II  
MANDATORY SHARING OF SPORTS BROADCASTING SIGNALS WITH  PRASAR  BHARATI  
3. Mandatory sharing of certain sports broadcasting signal s.–(1) No content rights owner or 
holder and no television or radio broadcasting service provider shall carry a live television broadcast on 
any cable or Direct -to-Home network or radio commentary broadcast in India of sporting events of 
national importance, unl ess it simultaneously shares the live broadcasting signal, without its 
advertisements, with the Prasar  Bharati to enable them to re -transmit the same on its terr estrial networks 
and Direct -to-Home networks in such manner and on such terms and conditions as  may be specified.  
(2) The terms and conditions under sub -section ( 1) shall also provide that the advertisement revenue 
sharing between the content rights owner or holder and the Prasar  Bharati shall be in the ratio of not less 
than 75:25 in case of televi sion coverage and 5 0:50 in case of radio coverage.  
(3) The Central Government may specify a percentage of the revenue received by the Prasar  Bharati 
under sub -section ( 2), which shall be utilised by the Prasar  Bharati for broa dcasting other sporting events . 
4. Penalties. –The Central Government may specify penalties to be imposed, including susp ension or 
revocation of licence , permission or registration, for violation of various terms and conditions as may be 
specified under section 3, subject to the condition that amount of a pecuniary penalty sha ll not exceed one 
crore rupees:  
Provided  that no penalty shall be imposed without giving a reasonable oppor tunity to the service 
provider:  
Provided  further that no act or omission on the part of any person af ter the 11th November, 2005 and 
before the date of promulgation of the Sports Broadcasting Signals (Mandatory Sharing with Prasar   
Bharati) Ordinance, 2007(Ord . 4 of 2007), shall be subjected to penalties.  
CHAPTER III  
POWERS OF THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT TO ISSUE  GUIDELINES  
5. Power of the Central Government to issue Guidelines. –The Central Government shall take all 
such measures, as it deems fit or expedient, by way of issuing Guidelines for mandatory sharing of 
broadcasting signals with Prasar  Bharati  relating to sporting ev ents of national importance:  
Provided  that the Guidelines issued before the promulgation of the Sports Broadcasting Signals 
(Mandatory Sharing with P rasar  Bharati) Ordinance, 2007( Ord. 4 of 2007), shall be deemed to have been 
issued  validly under the provisions of this section.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
6.Validation .–(1) The provisions of the Guidelines issued by the Central Government for  
Downlinking of Television Channels on the 11 th November, 2005 and for Uplinking  from India on the 
2nd December, 2005 for mandatory sharing of the sports broadcasting signals shall be deemed to be valid 
as if they have been issued under this Act.  
(2) Notwithstanding anyt hing contained in any judgement , decree or order of any court, t ribunal or 
other authority, any action taken by the Central Government or the Prasar  Bharati in pursuance of the 
Guidelines referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be and to have always been for all purposes in 
accordance with the law, as if the Guidelines had been validly in force at all material times and 
notwithstanding anything as aforesaid and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, 5 
 no legal proceeding shall be maintained or continued in any court for the enforcement of any direction 
given by any court or any decree or order which would not have been so given had the Guidelines been 
validly in  force at all material times.  
7. Power of the Central Government to make rules. –The Central Government may, by  
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of th is Act.  
8. Rules and Guidelines to be laid before Parliament .–Every rule and Guidelines made and 
issued, as the case may be, under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is m ade or issued, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session  or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or Guidelines, or both Houses agree that the rule or Guidelines should not be made, the rule or 
Guidelines shall thereafter have effect only in such modified fo rm or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule or Guidelines.  
9. Saving .–The relevant provisions under the Guidelines f or Downlinking of Television Channels 
issued on the 11 th November,  2005 and the Guidelines for Up  linking from India issued on the 2nd 
December, 2005 for mandatory sharing of sports broadcasting signals with Prasar  Bharati, shall continue 
to remain in forc e till fresh Guidel ines are issued under this Act.  
10. Repeal and s aving .–(1) The Sports Broadcasting Signals (Mandatory Sharing with Prasar  
Bharati) Ordinance, 2007 (Ord. 4 of 2007) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Sports Broadcasting Signals (Mandatory Sharing with Prasar  
Bharati) Or dinance, 2007 ( Ord. 4 of 2007), anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corres ponding provisions of this Act.  
________  
--------------------------The Tripura University Act, 2006--------------------------
1 
 THE TRIPURA UNIVERSITY ACT, 2006  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Establishment of the University.  
4. Effect of establishment of the University.  
5. Objects of the University.  
6. Powers of University.  
7. Jurisdiction.  
8. University open to all classes, castes and creed.  
9. The Visitor.  
10. The Chief Rector.  
11. Officers of the University.  
12. The Chancellor.  
13. The Vice -Chancellor.  
14. The Pro -Vice -Chancellor.  
15. The Dean s of Faculties.  
16. The Registrar.  
17. The Finance Officer.  
18. The Controller of Examination s. 
19. The Librarian.  
20. Other officers.  
21. Authorities of the University.  
22. The Court.  
23. The Executive Council.  
24. The Academic Council.  
25. The College Development Council.  
26. The Board of Studies.  
27. The Finance Committee.  
28. Other authorities of the University.  
29. Power to make Statutes.  
30. Statutes how to be made.  
31. Power to make Ordinances.  
32. Regulations.  
33. Annual report.  
34. Annual accounts.  
35. Returns and information.  
36. Conditions of service of employees.  
37. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases again st students.  
38. Right to appeal.  
39. Provident and pension funds.  
40. Disputes as to constitution of authorities and bodies.  
41. Filling of casual vacancies.  
42. Proceedings of authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.  
43. Protection of action taken in good faith.  2 
 SECTIONS  
44. Mode of proof of University record.  
45. Power to remove difficulties.  
46. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before 
Parliament.  
47. Transitional provisions.  
48. Repeal of Tripura Act 11 of 1987.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
  3 
 THE TRIPURA UNIVERSITY ACT, 2006  
ACT NO. 9 OF 2007  
[10th January, 2007. ] 
An Act to establish and incorporate a teaching and affiliating University in the State of Tripura 
and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called th e Tripura University Act, 2006.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless the context otherwise 
requires, — 
(a) “Academic Council” means the Acad emic Council of the University;  
(b) “academic staff” means such categories of staff as are designated as academic staff by the 
Ordinances ; 
(c) “Affiliated College” means a college admitted to th e privileges of the University;  
(d) “Board of Studies” means the Boar d of Studies of the Univ ersity;  
(e) “Chancellor”, “Vice -Chancellor”, and “Pro -Vice -Chancellor” mean, respectively, the 
Chancellor, Vice -Chancellor and Pro -Vice-Chancellor of the University;  
(f) “College Development Council” means the College Develop ment Council of the University;  
(g) “Constituent College” means a colleg e maintained by the University;  
(h) “Court” means the Court  of the University;  
(i) “Department” means a Department of Studies an d includes a Centre of Studies;  
(j) “distance education system” means the system of imp arting education through any means of 
communication, such as broadcasting, telecasting, correspondence courses, seminars, contact 
programmes or the combination  of any two or more such means;  
(k) “employee” means any person appointed by the University and i ncludes teachers and  other 
staff of the University;  
(l) “Executive Council” means the Executive Council of the University;  
(m) “Hall” means a unit of residence or of corporate life for the students of the University, or of a 
College or an Institution , main tained by the University;  
(n) “Institution” means an academic institution, not being a College, maintained by, or admitted 
to the privileges of the University;  
(o) “Principal” means the Head of a College or an Institution maintained by the University and 
includes, where there is no Principal, the person for the time being duly appointed to act as Principal, 
and in the absence of the Principal, or the acting Principal, a Vice -Principal duly appointed as such;  
                                                           
1. 2nd July, 2007, vide notification N o. S.O. 1054(E), dated 29th June, 2007, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,             
sec. 3( ii).  4 
 (p) “re cognis ed teachers” means such persons as m ay be recogni sed by the University for the 
purpose of imparting instructions in a College or an Institution admitted to th e privileges of the 
University;  
(q) "Regulations" means the Regulations made by any authority of the University under this A ct 
for the  time being in force;  
(r) "Faculty" mea ns a Faculty of the University;  
(s) “Statutes” and “Ordinances” mean, respectively, the Statutes and the Ordinances of the 
Universi ty for the time being in force;  
(t) “teachers of the University” means Professors, Readers, Lecturers and such other persons as 
may be appointed for imparting instruction or conducting research in the University or in any College 
or Institution maintained by the University and are designated  as teachers by the Ordinances;  
(u) “University ” means the Tripura University established and incorporated as a University under 
this Act.  
3. Establishment of the University .—(1) The Tripura University in the State of Tripura, established 
under the Tripura University Act, 1987, (Tripura Act 11 of 1987)  shall be established as a body corporate 
under this Act by the sam e name of “Tripura University”.  
(2) The first Chancellor, the first Vice -Chancellor and the first members of the Court, the Executive 
Council and the Academic Council, and all persons who m ay hereafter become such officers or members, 
so long as they continue to hold such office or membership, s hall constitute the University.  
(3) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall su e and be sued by 
the said name.  
(4) The headquarters of the Universit y shall be at Agartala.  
4. Effect of establishment of the University .—On and from the dat e of commencement of this 
Act,— 
(a) any reference to the Tripura University in any contract or other instrument shall be deemed as  
a reference to the University;  
(b) all property, movable and immovable, of or belonging to the Tripura Universit y shall vest in 
the University;  
(c) all rights and liabilities of the Tripura University shall be transferred to, and be the rights and 
liabilities  of, the University;  
(d) every person employed by the Tripura University immediately before the commencement of 
this Act shall hold his office or service in the University by the same tenure, at the same remuneration 
and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension, leave, 
gratuity, provident fund and other matters as he would have held the same if this Act had not been 
enacted, and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment is terminated or until suc h 
tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions ar e duly altered by the Statutes:  
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee, his employment may 
be terminated by the University in accordance with the term of the contract wit h the employee or, if 
no provision is made therein in this behalf, on payment to him by the University of compensation 
equivalent to three months’ remuneration in case of permanent employees and one month’s 
remuneration in the case of other employees:  5 
 Prov ided further that every person employed before the commencement of this Act, pending the 
execution of a contract under section 36, shall be deemed to have been appointed in accordance with 
the provisions of a contract consistent with the provision s of this  Act and the Statutes:  
Provided also that any reference, by whatever form of words, to the Vice -Chancellor and Pro -
Vice -Chancellor of the Tripura University in any law for the time being in force, or in any instrument 
or other document, shall be construed as a reference respectively to the Vice -Chancellor and the Pro -
Vice-Chancellor of the University;  
(e) the Vice -Chancellor of the Tripura University, appointed under the provisions of the Tripura 
University Act, 1987 (Tripura Act 11 of 1987) shall be deemed  to have been appointed as the Vice -
Chancellor under this Act, and shall hold office for a period of three months or till such time the first 
Vice -Chancellor is appointed under section 47 of the  Act, whichever is earlier; and  
(f) all Colleges, Institutions , Faculties and Departments affiliated to, or admitted to the privileges 
of, or maintained by, the Tripura University shall stand affiliated to, or admitted to the privilege of, or  
maintained by, the University.  
5. Objects of the University .—The objects of  the University shall be to disseminate and advance 
knowledge by providing instructional and research facilities in such branches of learning as it may deem 
fit; to make provisions for integrated courses in humanities, natural and physical sciences, social  sciences, 
forestry and other allied disciplines in the educational programmes of the University; to make special 
provisions for studies in tribal life and culture; to take appropriate measures for promoting innovations in 
teaching -learning process, inter -disciplinary studies and research; to educate and train manpower for the 
development of the State of Tripura; and to pay special attention to the improvement of the social and 
economic conditions and welfare of the people of that State, their intellectual,  academic and cultural 
development.  
6. Powers of University .—The University shall have  the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to provide for instructions in such branches of learning as the University may, from time to 
time, determine and to make provisions fo r research and for the advancement and dissemination of 
knowledge;  
(ii) to grant, subject to such conditions as the University may determine, diplomas or certificates 
to, and confer degrees or other academic distinctions on the basis of examinations, evaluation or any 
other method of testing, on persons, and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or other 
academic distinctions  for good and sufficient cause;  
(iii) to organi se and to undertake extramural studies, training and extension serv ices; 
(iv) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the man ner prescribed by the Statutes;  
(v) to provide facilities through the distance education system to su ch persons as it may 
determine;  
(vi) to institute Principalships, Professorships, Rea derships, Lecturerships and other teaching or 
academic positions, required by the University and to appoint persons to such Principalships, 
Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships or other teaching or academic positions;  
(vii) to recognise an Institution of higher learning for such purposes as the University may 
determine an d to withdraw such recognition;  
(viii) to recognise persons for imparting instructions in any College or Institution admitted to the 
privileges of the Universi ty; 
(ix) to appoint persons working in any other University or educational institution as teachers of 
the Uni versity for a specified period;  6 
 (x) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts an d to make appointments thereto;  
(xi) to co -operate or c ollaborate or associate with any other University or authority or Institution 
of higher learning in such manner and for such purposes a s the University may determine;  
(xii) to establish, with the prior approval of the Central Government, such Centres and s pecialised 
laboratories or other units for research and instruction as are, in the opinion of the University, 
necessary for the furtherance of its objects;  
(xiii) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, s tudentships, medals and prizes;  
(xiv) to e stablish and maintain Co lleges, Institutions and Halls;  
(xv) to make provision for research and advisory services and for that purpose to enter into such 
arrangements with other institutions, industrial or other organisations, as the University may deem 
necessary;  
(xvi) to organise and conduct refresher courses, workshops, seminars and other programmes for 
teachers, evalu ators and other academic staff;  
(xvii) to admit to its privileges Colleges and Institutions within the State of Tripura not 
maintained by the University; to withdraw all or any of those privileges in accordance with such 
conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes; to rec ognise, guide,  supervise, and control Halls not 
maintained by the University and other accommodation for students, and  to withdraw any such 
recognition;  
(xviii) to appoint on contract or otherwise visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors,  Consultants, 
Scholars and such other persons who may contribute to the advancement of  the objects of the 
University;  
(xix) to confer autonomous status on a College or an Institution or a Department, as the case may 
be, in accordance with the Statutes;  
(xx) to determine standards of admission to the University, which may include examination, 
evaluation or any other method of te sting; 
(xxi) to demand and receive pay ment of fees and other charges;  
(xxii) to supervise the residences of the students of the University and to make arrangements for 
promoting th eir health and general welfare;  
(xxiii) to lay down conditions of service of a ll categories of employees, including their code of 
conduct;  
(xxiv) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the employees, and to take such 
disciplinary measures in this regard as may be deemed by the University to be necessary;  
(xxv) to make arrangements for promoting the health and ge neral welfare of the employees;  
(xxvi) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold and manage, and to 
dispose of, with the previous approval of the Central Government, any property, mov able or 
immovable, including trust and endowment properties for the purposes of the University;  
(xxvii ) to borrow, with the approval of the Central Government, on the security of the property of 
the University, money for the purposes of the Univ ersity;  
(xxviii) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the 
attainmen t of all or any of its objects.  
7. Jurisdiction .—(1) The jurisdiction of the University shall extend to the whole of the State of 
Tripura.  7 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force, no educational institution 
within the State of Tripura shall be associated in any way with or be admitted to any privileges of any 
other University incorporated by law in India, and any  such privileges granted by any such other 
University to an educational institution within the State of Tripura prior to the commencement of this Act 
shall be deemed to be withdrawn o n the commencement of this Act:  
Provided that the Central Government may,  by order in writing, direct that the provisions of this sub -
section shall not apply in case of any educational inst itution specified in the order.  
8. University open to all classes, castes and creed .—The University shall be open to persons of 
either sex a nd of whatever caste, creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt 
or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be 
appointed as a teacher of the University or to h old any other office therein or be admitted as a student in 
the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University from making special 
provisions for the employment or admission of women, persons with disabilities or of persons belonging 
to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled C astes and the Scheduled Tribes.  
9. The Visitor .—(1) The President of India shall be  the Visitor of the University.  
(2) The Visitor may from time to time, appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress 
of the University, including Colleges and Institutions maintained by it, and to submit a report thereon; and 
upon receipt of that report, the Visitor may, after obtaining the views of the Executive Council thereon 
through the Vice -Chancellor, take such action and issue such directions as he considers necessary in 
respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report and the Uni versity shall be bound to comply with 
such directions.  
(3) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made by such person or persons as he 
may direct, of the University, its buildings, libraries, laboratories and equipment, and of any Co llege or 
Institution maintained by the University or admitted to its privileges; and also of the examinations, 
teaching and other work conducted or done by the University and to cause an inquiry to be made in like 
manner in respect of any matter connected with the administration or finances of the Univer sity, Colleges 
or Institutions.  
(4) The Visitor shall, in every matter referred to in sub -section ( 3), give notice of his intention to 
cause an inspection or inquiry to be made, — 
(a) to the University, if su ch inspection or inquiry is to be made in respect of the University or 
any College or I nstitution maintained by it, or  
(b) to the management of the College or Institution, if the inspection or inquiry is to be made in 
respect of College or Institution admi tted to the privileges of the University, and the University or the 
management, as the case may be, shall have the right to make such representations to the Visitor , as it 
may consider necessary.  
(5) After considering the representations, if any, made by t he University or the management, as the 
case may be, the Visitor may cause to be made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in sub -section 
(3). 
(6) Where any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the University or the 
mana gement shall be entitled to appoint a representative, who shall have the right to be present and be 
heard  at such inspection or inquiry.  
(7) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of the University or any College or 
Institution ma intained by it, address the Vice -Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or 
inquiry together with such views and advice with regard to the action to be taken thereon, as the Visitor  8 
 may be pleased to offer, and on receipt of address made  by the Visitor, the Vice -Chancellor shall 
communicate, to the Executive Council, the views of the Visitor with such advice as the Visitor may offer 
upon the action to be taken thereon.  
(8) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect o f any College or Institution 
admitted to the privileges of the University, address the management concerned through the Vice -
Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or inquiry, his views thereon and such advice as 
he may be pleased to of fer upon t he action to be taken thereon.  
(9) The Executive Council or the management, as the case may be, shall communicate, through the 
Vice -Chancellor to the Visitor such action, if any, as it proposes to take or has been taken upon the resul t 
of such in spection or inquiry.  
(10) Where, the Executive Council or the management , does not , within a reasonable time, take action 
to the satisfaction of the Visitor, the Visitor may, after considering any explanation furnished or 
representation made by the Executi ve Council or the management, issue such directions as he may think 
fit and the Executive Council or the management, as the case may be, sha ll comply with such directions.  
(11) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section , the Visitor may , by order in 
writing , annul any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with the Act, the Statutes or 
the Ordinances:  
Provided that before making any such order, he shall call upon the Registrar to show cause why such 
an order should not be  made, and, if any cause is shown within a reasonable time, he shall consider the 
same.  
(12) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
10. The Chief Rector .—The Governor of the State of Tripura shall be the Chief Rector  of the 
University.  
11. Officers of the University .—The following shall be t he officers of the University: — 
(1) the Chancellor;  
(2) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(3) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(4) the Deans of Faculties;  
(5) the Registrar;  
(6) the Finance Officer;  
(7) the Controller of Examinations;  
(8) the Librarian; and  
(9) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to  be officers of the University.  
12. The Chancellor .—(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner as may  be 
prescrib ed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the head of the University and shall, if present, 
preside at the Convocations of the University held for conferring deg rees and meetings of the Court.  
13. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) Th e Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such 
manner as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  9 
 (2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of the University and 
shall exercise general supervision and control over  the affairs of the University and give effect to the 
decisions of all the  authorities of the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may, if he is of opinion that immediate action is necessary on any matter, 
exercise any power conferred on any authority of th e University by or under this Act and shall report to 
such authority at its next meeting the acti on taken by him on such matter:  
Provided that if the authority concerned is of the opinion that such action ought not to have been 
taken, it may refer the matt er to the Visitor whose d ecision thereon shall be final:  
Provided further that any person in the service of the University who is aggrieved by the action taken 
by the Vice -Chancellor under this sub -section shall have the right to represent against such act ion to the 
Executive Council within three months from the date on which decision on such action is communicated 
to him and thereupon the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the actio n taken by the Vice -
Chancellor.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that any decision of any authority of the University is 
beyond the powers of the authority conferred by the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances 
or that any decision taken is not in the interest of the University, may  ask the authority concerned to 
review its decision within sixty days of such decision and if the authority refuses to review the decision 
either in whole or in part or no decision is taken by it within the said period of sixty days, the matter shall 
be re ferred to the Visitor whose d ecision thereon shall be final.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
14. The Pro -Vice-Chancellor .—The Pro -Vice -Chancellor  shall be appointed in such manner and on 
such terms and conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be 
prescribed by the S tatutes.  
15. The Deans of Faculties .—Every Dean of Faculty shall be appointed in such manne r and shall 
exercise such powers and perform such duties as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
16. The Registrar .—(1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and 
conditions of service as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreements, sign documents and authenticate 
records on behalf of the University and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may  be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
17. The Finance Officer .—The Finance O fficer shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties, as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
18. The Controller of Examinations .—The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed in such 
manner and shall exercise s uch powers and perform such duties, as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
19. The Librarian .—The Librarian shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and 
conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may  be pres cribed by 
the Statutes.  
20. Other officers .—The manner of appointment and powers and duties of other officers of the 
University shall  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
21. Authorities of the University .—The following shall be the authorities of the University: — 
(1) the Court;  
(2) the Executive Council;  10 
 (3) the Academic Council;  
(4) the Colleg e Development Council;  
(5) the Board of Studies;  
(6) the Finance Committee; and  
(7) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the  authorities of the 
University.  
22. The Court .—(1) The constitution of the Court and the term of office of its members shall  be 
prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that such number of members as may be prescribed by the Statutes shall be elected from 
amon g the teachers, employees and students of the University.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall have the following  powers and functions, 
namely: — 
(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of the University and  to 
suggest measures for the improvement and  development of the University;  
(b) to consider and pass resolutions on the annual report and the annual accounts of the University 
and the  audit report on such accounts;  
(c) to advise the Visitor in respect of a ny matter which may be  referred to it for advice; and  
(d) to perform such other functions as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
23. The Executive Council .—(1) The Executive Council shall be the principal ex ecutive body of the 
University.  
(2) The constituti on of the Executive Council, the term of office of its members and its powers and 
functions shall  be prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that such number of members as may be prescribed by the Statutes shall be from among th e 
elected members of the Court.  
24. The Academic Council .—(1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the 
University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, co -ordinate 
and exercise general supervision over the acade mic policies of the University.  
(2) The constitution of the Academic Council, the term of office of its members and its powers and 
functions shall  be prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that such number of members as may be prescribed by the Statutes shall be  from among the 
elected members of the Court who are teachers of the University.  
25. The College Development Council .—(1) The College Development Council shall be responsible 
for admitting Colleges to th e privileges of the University.  
(2) The constitution of the College Development Council, the term of office of its members and its 
powers and functions shall  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
26. The Board of Studies .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Studies shall  be 
prescribed by the Stat utes. 
27. The Finance Committee .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee 
shall  be prescribed by the Statutes.  11 
 28. Other authorities of the University .—The constitution, powers and functions of other 
authorities, as may be declared b y the Statutes to be the authorities of the University, shall be prescribed 
by the Statutes.  
29. Power to make Statutes .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all 
or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the constitution,  powers and functions of authorities and other bodies of the University, as 
may be  constituted from time to time;  
(b) the appointment and continuance in office of the members of the said authorities and bodies, 
the filling up of vacancies of members, and a ll other matters relating to those authorities and other 
bodies for which it may be nec essary or desirable to provide;  
(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the U niversity and their emoluments;  
(d) the  appointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees of the University, their 
emolum ents and conditions of service;  
(e) the recognition of persons as University recognised teachers;  
(f) the appointment of teachers, academic staff working in any oth er University or organisation 
for a specific period f or undertaking a joint project;  
(g) the conditions of service of employees including provisions for pension, insurance, provident 
fund, the manner of termination of s ervice and disciplinary action;  
(h) the principles governing the seniority of service of t he employees of the University;  
(i) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or students and the 
University;  
(j) the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council by any employ ee or student against the 
action of any officer or authority of the University;  
(k) the conferment of autonomous status on a College or an institution or a Department;  
(l) the establishment and abolition of Faculties, Departments, Centres, Ha lls, Colleges and 
Institutions;  
(m) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(n) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and  other academic distinctions;  
(o) the conditions under which Colleges and Institutions may be admitted to the privileges of the 
University an d the w ithdrawal of such privileges;  
(p) the management of Colleges and Institutions  established by the University;  
(q) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities  or officers of the University;  
(r) the maintenance of discipline among the employees and students; and  
(s) all other matters which by this Act are to be or may b e provided for by the Statutes.  
30. Statutes how to be made .—(1) The first Statutes are  those set out in the Schedule.  
(2) The Executive Council may, from time to time, make new or  additional Statutes or may amend or 
repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that the Executive Council shall not make, amend or repeal any Statutes affecting the status, 
powers or constitution of any authority of the University until such authority has been given an 12 
 opportunity of expressing an opinion in writing on the proposed changes, and any opinion so expressed 
shall be consi dered by the Executive Council.  
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repea l of a Statute shall require 
the assent of the Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold assent or remit to the Executiv e Council for 
re-consideration.  
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless 
it has been  assented to by the Visitor.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may make new or 
additional Statutes or amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1), during the period of three 
years i mmediately afte r the commencement of this Act:  
Provided that the Visitor may, on the expiry of the said period of three years, make, within one year 
from the date of such expiry, such detailed Statutes as he may consider necessary and such detailed 
Statute s shall be laid be fore both Houses of Parliament.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may direct the 
University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by him and if the 
Executive Council is unable to implement such direction within sixty days of its receipt, the Visitor may, 
after considering the reasons, if any, communicated by the Executive Council for its inability to comply 
with such direction, make or amend the Statutes suitab ly. 
31. Power to make Ordinances .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the 
Ordinances may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of students to the Universi ty and their enrolment as such;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of the 
University;  
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;  
(d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions, the qualifications 
for the same and the means to be taken relating to the gran ting and obtaining of the same;  
(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission to the 
examinations, degrees an d diplomas of the University;  
(f) the conditions for award of f ellowships, scholarships, s tudentships, medals and prizes;  
(g) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and manner of appointment and the 
duties of examining bo dies, examiners and moderators;  
(h) the conditions of residence of the stud ents of the University;  
(i) the special arrangements, if  any, which may be made  for the residence and teaching of women 
students and the prescribing of special  courses of studies for them;  
(j) the establishment of Centres of Studies, Boards of Studies, Specialised Labor atories and other 
Committees;  
(k) the manner of co -operation and collaboration with other Universities, institutions and other 
agencies not involving the carrying on of any activity for profit including learned bodies or 
associations;  
(l) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is considered necessary for 
improving the a cademic life of the University;  
(m) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, s tudentships, medals and prizes;  13 
 (n) the  supervision of management of Colleges and Institutions admitted to the privil eges of the 
University;  
(o) the setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances of employees; and  
(p) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes, are to be or may be, provided for by the 
Ordinances.  
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice -Chancellor with the previous approval of the 
Central Government and the Ordinances so made may be amended, repealed or added to at any time by 
the Executive Council in t he man ner prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that till such time as the first Ordinances are not so made by the Vice -Chancellor, in respect 
of the matters that are to be provided for by the Ordinances under this Act and Statutes, the relevant 
provisions of the Statutes and the Ordinances of the Tripura University in force immediately before the 
commencement of this Act shall be applicable insofar as they are not inconsistent with the provision s of 
this Act and the Statutes.  
32. Regulations .—The authoritie s of the University may make Regulations, consistent with this Act, 
the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business and that of the Committees, if any, 
appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances , in the man ner 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
33. Annual report .—(1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of 
the Executive Council, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the University 
towards the f ulfilment of its objects and shall be submitted to the Court on or after such date as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes and the Court shall consider th e report in its annual meeting.  
(2) The Court shall submit the annual report to the Visitor a long with it s comments, if any.  
(3) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub -section ( 1), shall also be submitted to the 
Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid be fore both Houses of 
Parliament.  
34. Annual accounts .—(1) The annual accounts and balance -sheet of the University shall be prepared 
under the directions of the Executive Council and shall, once at least every year and at intervals of not 
more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or by such persons 
as he may authorise in this behalf.  
(2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report thereon shall be submitted to the 
Court and the Visitor along with the observa tions of the Executive Council.  
(3) Any observati ons made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall be brought to the notice of the 
Court and the observations of the Court, if any, shall, after being considered by the Executive Counci l, be 
submitted to the Visitor.  
(4) A copy of the annual accounts tog ether with the audit report as submitted to the Visitor, shall also 
be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid be fore 
both Houses of Parliament.  
(5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid b efore both Houses of Parliament shall be 
published in the Offi cial Gazette.  
35. Returns and information .—The University shall furnish to the Central Government such returns 
or other information with respect to its property or activities as the Central Gove rnment may, from time to 
time,  require.  14 
 36. Conditions of service of employees .—(1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed 
under a written contract, which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be furni shed 
to the employ ee concerned.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any employee shall, at the 
request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by 
the Executive Council, one member nomina ted by the employee concerned and an u mpire appointed by 
the Visitor.  
(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final, and no suit shall lie in any civil court in respect of the 
matters decided by the Tribunal:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section sha ll preclude the employee from availing of the judicial 
remedies available under articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution.  
(4) Every request made by the employee under sub -section ( 2), shall be deemed to be a submission to 
arbitration upon the terms of this section within the meaning of the Arbitra tion and Conciliation Act, 1996 
(26 of 1996).  
(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
37. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students .—(1) Any student 
or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed from the rolls of the University by the 
orders or resolution of the Vice -Chancellor, Discipline Committee or Examination Committee, as the case 
may be, and who has been debarred from appearing at the examinations of the University for more than 
one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt of such orders or copy of such resolution by him, 
appeal to the Executive Council and the Executive Council may confirm, modif y or reverse the decision 
of the Vice -Chancellor or the  Committee, as the case may be.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against a student shall, 
at the request of such student , be referred to a Tribunal of Arbi tration and the provisions of sub -sections 
(2), (3), (4) and ( 5) of section 36 shall, as far as may be, apply to a referen ce made under this sub -section.  
38. Right to appeal .—Every employee or student of the University or of a College or Institution 
mainta ined by the University or admitted to its privileges shall, notwithstanding anything contained in 
this Act, have a right to appeal within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes , to the Executive 
Council against the decision of any officer  or author ity of the University or of the Principal or the 
management of any College or an Institution , as the case may be , and thereupon the Executive Council 
may confirm, modify or reverse  the decision appealed against.  
39. Provident and pension funds .—(1) The Uni versity shall constitute for the benefit of its 
employees such provident or pension fund or provide su ch insurance schemes as it may deem fit in such 
manner and subject to such conditions as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Where such provident fund or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central Government may 
declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925) , shall apply to such fund, as if it 
were a Government provident fund.  
40. Disputes as to constitution of authoriti es and bodies .—If any question arises as to whether any 
person has been duly elected or appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority or other body 
of the University, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose d ecision thereon shall be final.  
41. Filling of casual vacancies .—All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio  
members) of any authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the 
person or body who appoints, elects or co -opts the member whose place has become vacant and person 
appointed, elected or co -opted to a casual vacancy shal l be a member of such authority or body for the 
residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member.  15 
 42. Proceedings of authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies .—No act or proceedings of 
any authority or other b ody of the University shall be invalid merely by reason of the existence of a 
vacancy or vacancies among its members.  
43. Protectio n of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any 
officer or other employee of the Uni versity for anything which is in good  faith done or intended to be 
done in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
44. Mode of proof of University record .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian 
Evidence Act , 1872 (1 of 1872) or in any other law for the time being in force, a copy of any receipt, 
application, notice, order, proceeding or resolution of any authority or other body of the University, or 
any other document in possession of the University, or any entry in any register duly maintained by the 
University, if certified by the Registrar, shall be received as prima facie  evidence of such receipt, 
application, notice, order, proceeding, resolution or document or the existence of entry in the register and 
shall be admitted as evidence of the matters and transactions therein where the original thereof would, if 
produced, ha ve been admissible in evidence.  
45. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedie nt for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shal l be made under this section after the expiry of three years fro m the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a tota l period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modificati on 
in the order or both Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudic e to the validity of anything pr eviously done under that order.  
46. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be l aid 
before Parliament .—(1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be pub lished 
in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprise d in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation or  both Houses agree that the Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation should not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or  annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that St atute, Ordinance or Regulation.  
(3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shall include the power to give 
retrospective effect, from a date not e arlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the Statutes, 
Ordinances or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom  such Statute, 
Ordinance o r Regulation may be applicable.  
  16 
 47. Transitional Provisions .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the Statutes, — 
(a) the first Chancellor and first Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Central Government in 
such manner and on such conditions as may be deemed fit and each of the said officers shall hold 
office for such term, not exceeding five years as may be speci fied by the Central Government;  
(b) the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer shall be ap pointed by the Central Government 
and each of the said officers shall hold of fice for a term of three years;  
(c) the first Court and the first Executive Council shall consist of not more than thirty -one 
members and eleven members, respectively, who shall b e nominated by the Central Government and 
shall hold of fice for a term of three years;  
(d) the first College Development Council shall consist of not more than eleven members, who 
shall be nominated by the Central Government and they shall hold of fice for a term of three years;  
(e) the first Academic Council shall consist of not more than twenty -one members, who shall be 
nominated by the Central Government and they shall hold of fice for a term of three years:  
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above  offices or authorities, the same shall be filled by 
appointment or nomination, as the case may be, by the Central Government, and the person so appointed 
or nominated shall hold office for so long as the officer or member in whose place he is appointed or  
nominated would have held office, if  such vacancy had not occurred.  
48. Repeal of Tripura  Act 11 of 1987 .—(1) The Tripura University Act, 1987  is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, — 
(a) all appointments made, orders issued, degrees and othe r academic distinctions conferred, 
diplomas and certificates awarded, privileges granted, or other things done under the Tripura 
University Act, 1987  (Tripura Act 11 of 1987) , shall be deemed to have been respectively made, 
issued, conferred, awarded, gran ted or done under the corresponding provisions of this Act and, 
except as otherwise provided by or under this Act or the Statutes, continue in force unless and until 
they are superseded by any order made unde r this Act or the Statutes; and  
(b) all proceedi ngs of Selection Committees for the appointment or promotion of teachers that 
took place before the commencement of this Act and all actions of the Executive Council in respect of 
the recommendations of such Selection Committees where no orders of appointm ent on the basis 
thereof were passed before the commencement of this Act shall, notwithstanding that  the procedure 
for selection has been modified by this Act, be deemed to have been valid but further proceeding in 
connection with such pending selections shall be taken in accordance with the provisions of this Act 
and be continued from the stage where th ey stood immediately before such commencement, except if 
the concerned authorities take, with the approval of the Visit or, a decision to the contrary.   17 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 30)  
THE STATUTES OF THE UNIVERSITY  
1. The Chancellor .—(1) The Chancellor shall  be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less 
than three persons recommended by the Executive Council from amongst persons of eminence in the 
academic o r public life of the country:  
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the person s so recommended, he may call for 
fresh recommendati ons from the Executive Council.  
(2) The Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years and shall not be eligible for re -
appointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office, the Chancellor shall continue to hold 
office until his su ccessor enters upon his office.  
2. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of 
not less than three persons who shall be recommended by a Committee a s constituted under clause ( 2): 
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons included in the panel, he may ca ll 
for an extended fresh panel.  
(2) The Committee referred to in clause ( 1) shall consist of three persons, out of whom two shall be 
nominated by the Executive Council and one by the Visitor and the nominee of the Visitor shall be the  
convener of the Committee:  
Provided that none of the members of the Committee shall be an employee of the University or an 
Institution maintained  by, or admitted to the privileges of, the University or a member of a ny authority of 
the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor shall be a whole -time sala ried officer of the University.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters 
upon his office, or until he attains the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier, and he shall not be 
eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of five years, he shall continu e in office 
until his successor is appoin ted and enters upon his office:  
Provided further that the Visitor may direct any Vice -Chancellor after his term has expired, to 
continue in office for such period, not exceeding a total period of one ye ar, as may be  specified by him.  
(5) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Vice -Chancellor shall be a s follows: — 
(i) The Vice -Chancellor shall be paid a monthly salary and allowances, other than house rent 
allowance, at the rates fixed by the Central Government from time to time and he shall be entitled, 
without payment of rent, to use a furnished residence throughout his term of office and no charge 
shall fall on the Vice -Chancellor in respect of the  maintenance of such residence.  
(ii) The Vice -Chance llor shall be entitled to such terminal benefits and allowances as may be 
fixed by the Centra l Government from time to time:  
Provided that where an employee of the University, or a College or an Institution maintained by, 
or admitted to the privileges of, the University, or of any other University or any College or 
Institution maintained by or admitted to the privileges of, such other University, is appointed as the 
Vice -Chancellor, he may be allowed to continue to contribute to any provident fund of which he is a 
member and the University shall contribute to the account of such person in that provident fund at the 18 
 same rate at which the person had been contributing immediately before his appo intment as the           
Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that wh ere such employee had been member of any pension scheme, the 
University shall make the necessa ry contribution to such scheme.  
(iii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to travelling allowance at such rates as may be fixed by 
the Executive Council.  
(iv) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full pay at the rate of thirty days in a 
calendar year and the leave shall be credited to his account in advance in two half -yearly instalments 
of fifteen days each on the first day of January and July every  year: 
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor assumes or relinquishes charge of the office of the Vice -
Chancellor during the currency of a half year, the leave shall be credited proportionately at the rate of 
two and -a-half days for each completed month of s ervice. 
(v) In addition to the leave referred to in sub -clause ( iv), the Vice -Chancellor shall also be entitled 
to half -pay leave at the rate of twenty days for each completed year of service, and half -pay leave 
may also be availed of as commuted leave on full pay on medical certificate:  
Provided that when such commuted leave is availed of, twice the amount of half -pay leave shall 
be debi ted against half -pay leave due.  
(6) If the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or othe rwise, or if he 
is unable to perform his duties due to ill -health or any other cause, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall perform 
the duties of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the Pro -Vice -Chancellor is not available, the senior -most Professor shall perfor m the 
duties of the Vice -Chancellor until a new Vice -Chancellor assumes office or the existing Vice -Chancellor 
resumes the duties of his office, as the case may be.  
3. Powers and duties of the Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be ex officio  
Chairman of the Executive Council, the Academic Council and the Finance Committee and shall, in the 
absence of the Chancellor, preside at the Convocations held for conferring degree s and at meetings of the 
Court.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and address, any meeting of any authority 
or other body of the University, but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he is a me mber of such 
authority or body.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice -Chancellor to see that this Act, the S tatutes, the Ordinances and the 
Regulations are duly observed, and he shall have all the powers neces sary to ensure such observance.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall have all the powers necessary for the proper maintenance of discipline 
in the University and he may delegate any such powers to such per son or persons as he deems fit.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall have the power to convene or cause to be convened the meetings of the 
Executive Council, the Academic Cou ncil and the Finance Committee.  
4. Pro–Vice–Chancellor .—(1) The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Executive Council 
on the recomme ndation of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that where the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor is not accepted by the Executive 
Council, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor who may either appoint the person recommended by 
the Vice -Chancellor or ask the Vice -Chancellor to recommend another p erson to the Executive Council:  19 
 Provided further that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor, 
appoint a Professor to discharge the duties of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor in addition to his own duties as a 
Professor.  
(2) The term of office of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be such as may be decided by the Executive 
Council but it shall not in any  case exceed five years or until the expiration of the term of office of the 
Vice -Chancellor, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that a Pro -Vice -Chancellor whose term of office has expired shall be eligible for re -
appointment:  
Provided further that, in any cas e, a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall retire on attaini ng the age of sixty -five 
years:  
Provided also that a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall, while discharging the duties of the Vice -Chancellor 
under clause ( 6) of Statute 2, continue in office notwithstanding the expira tion of his term of office as 
Pro-Vice -Chancellor, until the Vice -Chancellor resumes office or a new Vice -Chancellor assu mes office, 
as the case may be.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be such 
as may b e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall assist the Vice -Chancellor in respect of such matters as may be 
specified by the Vice -Chancellor in this behalf, from time to time, and shall also exercise such powers 
and perform such duties as may be assigned or delegated  to him by the Vice -Chancellor.  
5. Deans of Faculties .—(1) Every Dean of Faculty shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor from 
amongst the Professors in the Faculty by rotation in the order of seniority f or a period o f three years:  
Provided that in case there is only one Professor or no Professor in a Faculty, the Dean shall be 
appointed, for the time being, from amongst the Professor, if any, and the Readers in the Faculty by 
rotation in the order of sen iority:  
Provid ed further that a Dean on attaining the age of sixty -two years shal l cease to hold office as such.  
(2) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness, absence or any 
other cause, unable to perform duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by the 
senior -most Professor or Reader, as the case may be in the Faculty.  
(3) The Dean shall be the Head of the Faculty and shall be responsible for the conduct and 
maintenance of the standards of teaching and resea rch in the Faculty and shall have such other functions 
as may b e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at any meeting of the Boards of Studies 
or Committees of the Faculty, as the case may be, but shall not have the right to vote thereat  unless he is a 
member thereof.  
6. The Registrar .—(1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the 
recommendation of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and shall be a whole -time sala ried 
officer of the University.  
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for re -appointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Registrar shall be such as may 
be prescribed by the Execu tive Counci l from time to time:  
Provided that the Registrar shall retire on attain ing the age of sixty -two years:  20 
 Provided further that a Registrar shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty -two years, 
continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office or until the expiry of a period 
of one year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar is, by reason of illness, abse nce or 
any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by 
such person as the Vice -Chancell or may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) (a) The Registrar shall have power to take disciplinary action against su ch of the employees, 
excluding teachers and other academic staff, as may be specified in the order of the Executive Council 
and to suspend them pending inquiry, to administer warnings to them or to impose on them the penalty of 
censure o r the withholding o f increment:  
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against the action propose d to be taken in regard to him.  
(b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice -Chancellor against any orde r of the Registrar imposing any of the 
penalties specified in sub -clause ( a). 
(c) In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the power of the Registrar is called 
for, the Registrar shall, upon the conclusion of the inquiry, make a repor t to the Vice -Chancellor along 
with h is recommendations:  
Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Executive Council against an order of the Vice -Chancellor 
imposing any penalty.  
(6) The Registrar shall be ex officio  Secretary of the Executive Council, the Academic Council and 
the College Development Council, but shall not be deemed to be a member of any of these authorities and 
he shall be ex officio  Member -Secretary of the Court.  
(7) It shal l be the duty of the Registrar — 
(a) to be the custodian of the rec ords, the common seal and such other property of the University 
as the Executive Coun cil shall commit to his charge;  
(b) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council, the College Development Council and of any Committees appointed by those authorities;  
(c) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council, the College Development Council and of any Committees appointed by those authorities;  
(d) to conduct the official correspondence of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council and t he College Development Council;  
(e) to supply to the Visitor, copies of the agenda of the meetings of the authorities of the 
University as soon as they are issued and the minutes of such meetings ; 
(f) to represent the University in suits or proceedings by or against the University, sign powers of 
attorney and verify pleadings or depute his repr esentative for the purpose; and  
(g) to perform such other duties a s may be specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances or the 
Regulations or as may be required from time to time, by the Executive Council or the Vice -
Chancellor.  
7. The Finance Officer .—(1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the 
recommendations of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time 
salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The Finance Officer shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for                      
re-appointment.  21 
 (3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Finance Officer shall be such as 
may be prescribed by the Execu tive Council from time to time:  
Provided that the Finance Officer shall retire on attain ing the age of sixty -two years:  
Provided further that the Finance Officer shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty -two 
years, continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office or until the expiry of a 
period of one year, whichever is earl ier. 
(4) When the office of the Finance Officer is vacant or when the Finance Officer is, by reason of 
illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall 
be performed by such person as the Vice -Chancell or may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) The Finance Officer shall be ex officio  Secretary of the Finance Committee, but shall not be 
deemed to  be a member of such Committee.  
(6) The Finance Officer shall — 
(a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the University and shall advise it as regards its 
financial policy; and  
(b) perform such other financial functions as may be assigned to him by the Executive Council or 
as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(7) Subject to the control o f the Executive Council, the Finance Officer sh all— 
(a) hold and manage the property and investments of the University including trust and endowed 
property;  
(b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Executive Council for recurring and non -recurring 
expenditu re for a year are not exceeded and that all moneys are expended on the purpose for whic h 
they are granted or allotted;  
(c) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget of the University and for 
their present ation to the Executive Co uncil;  
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank balances a nd on the state of 
investments;  
(e) watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advise on the methods of collection 
employed;  
(f) ensure that the registers of buildings, l and, furniture and equipment are maintained up -to-date 
and that stock -checking is conducted, of equipment and other consumable materials in all offices, 
Departments, University, Institutes, Centre s and Specialised Laboratories;  
(g) bring to the notice of t he Vice -Chancellor unauthorised expenditure and other financial 
irregularities and suggest disciplinary actio n against persons at fault; and  
(h) call for from any office, Department, Centre, Laboratory, College or Institution maintained by 
the University a ny information or returns that he may consider necessary for  the performance of his 
duties.  
(8) Any receipt given by the Finance Officer or the person or persons duly authorised in this behalf by 
the Executive Council for any money payable to the University shall be sufficient discharge for  payment 
of such money.  
8. The Controller of Examinations .—(1) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed by the 
Executive Council on the recommendations of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he 
shall be a whole -time salaried of ficer of the University.  22 
 (2) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for 
re-appointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service o f the Controller of Examinations shall 
be such as may be prescribed by the Execu tive Council from time to time:  
Provided that the Controller of Examinations shall retire on attain ing the age of sixty -two years:  
Provided further that the Controller of Exami nations shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of 
sixty -two years, continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office or until the 
expiry of a period of one year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Controller  of Examinations is vacant or when the Controller of 
Examinations is, by reason of illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his 
office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such person as the Vice -Chancell or may appoin t for 
the purpose.  
(5) The Controller of Examinations shall arrange for and superintend the examinations of the 
University in the manne r prescribed by the Ordinances.  
9. The Librarian .—(1) The Librarian shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the 
recommendations of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time 
salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned t o him by 
the Executive Council.  
10. Meetings of the Court .—(1) An annual meeting of the Court shall be held on a date to be fixed 
by the Executive Council unless some other date has been fixed by th e Court in respect of any year.  
(2) At an annual meeting of the Court, a report on the work ing of the University during the previous 
year, together with a statement of the receipts and expenditure, the balance sheet as audited, and the 
financial estimates for th e next year shall be presented.  
(3) A copy of the statement of receipts and expenditu re, the balance sheet and the financial estimates 
referred to in clause ( 2) shall be sent to every member of the Court at least seven days before the date of 
the annual meeting.  
(4) Special meetings of the Court may be convened by the Executive Council or the Vice -Chancellor 
or if there is no Vice -Chancellor, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor or if there is no Pro -Vice-Chancellor, by the 
Registrar.  
(5) Eleven members of the Court shall form a quo rum for a meeting of the Court.  
11. Quorum for meeting of the Executive Council .—Seven members of the Executive Council shall 
form a quorum for a me eting of the Executive Council.  
12. Powers and functions of the Executive Council .—(1) The Executive Council shall have the 
power of management and administration of the revenues a nd property of the University and the conduct 
of all administrative affairs of the Univers ity not otherwise provided for.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Executive Council shall, 
in addition to all other powe rs vested in it, have the fo llowing powers, namely: — 
(i) to create teaching and other academic posts, to determine the number and emoluments of such 
posts and to define the duties and conditions of service of Professors, Readers, Lect urers and other 
academ ic staff:  23 
 Provided that no action shall be taken by the Executive Council in respect of the number and 
qualifications of teachers and other academic staff otherwise than after consideration of the 
recommend ations of the Academic Council;  
(ii) to appoint su ch Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other academic staff, as may be necessary, 
on the recommendation of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and to fill -up 
temporary vacancies therein;  
(iii) to recognise persons as University recognised te achers in the manner pre scribed by the 
Ordinances;  
(iv) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts (including Chairs) and to make 
appointments thereto in the manne r prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(v) to grant leave of absence to any off icer of the University other than the Chancellor and the 
Vice -Chancellor, and to make necessary arrangements for the discharge of the functions of s uch 
officer during his absence;  
(vi) to regulate and enforce discipline among employees in accordance with t he Statutes and the 
Ordinances;  
(vii) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, investments, property, business and all other 
administrative affairs of the University and for that purpose to appoint s uch agents as it may think fit;  
(viii) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non -recurring expenditure for a year on the 
recommend ation of the Finance Committee;  
(ix) to invest any money belonging to the University, including any unapplied income, in such 
stocks, funds, shares or sec urities, from time to time as it may think fit or in the purchase of 
immovable property in India, with the like powers of varying suc h investment from time to time;  
(x) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immovable proper ty on behalf of the 
University;  
(xi) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus and other means needed for carrying  
on the work of the University;  
(xii) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contrac ts on behalf of the University;  
(xiii) to entertain, adjudicat e upon, and if thought fit, to redress any grievances of the employees 
and students of the University who may, for any reason, feel aggrieved;  
(xiv) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if necessary, to remove them, and to fix their fees, 
emoluments and travelling and other allowances, after c onsulting the Academic Council;  
(xv) to select a common seal for the University and provide for th e custody a nd use of such seal;  
(xvi) to make such special arrangements as may be necessary for t he residence of women 
students;  
(xvii) to institute fellowships, scholarships, s tudentships, medals and prizes;  
(xviii) to provide for the appointment of Visiting Profess ors, Emeritus Professors, Consultants and 
Scholars and determine the terms and condi tions of such appointments; and  
(xix) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed 
on it by the Act or the Statutes.  
13. Quoru m for meetings of the Academic Council .—Nine members of the Academic Council shall 
form a quorum for a meeting of the Ac ademic Council.  24 
 14. Powers and functions of the Academic Council .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the 
Statutes and the Ordinances , the Academic Council shall, in addition to all other powers vested in it, have  
the following powers, namely: — 
(a) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University and to give 
directions regarding methods of instruction, co -ordination of teaching among the Colleges and the 
Institutions, evaluation of research and improvement of academic stand ards;  
(b) to bring about and promote inter -Faculty co -ordination and to establish or appoint such 
committees or boards as may be de emed nec essary for the purpose;  
(c) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own initiative, or on a reference 
by a Faculty or the Executive Council, and to take appropriate action thereon; and  
(d) to frame such Regulations and rules consiste nt with the Statutes and the Ordinances regarding 
the academic functioning of the University, discipline, residence, admissions, award of fellowships 
and studentships, fees, concessions,  corporate life and attendance.  
15. Faculties and Departments .—(1) The  University shall have such Faculties as ma y be specified 
in the Statutes.  
(2) Every Faculty shall have a Faculty Board and the members of the first Faculty Board shall be 
nominated by the Executive Counc il for a period of three years.  
(3) The composition,  powers and functions of a Faculty Board shall b e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The conduct of the meetings of a Faculty Board and the quorum required for such meetings shall 
be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(5) (a) Every Faculty shall consist of such Departments as may be as signed to it by the Ordinances:  
Provided that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic Council, establish 
Centres of Studies to which may be assigned such teachers of the University as the Executive Council 
may consider necessary.  
(b) Each Department shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(i) Teachers of the Department;  
(ii) Persons conduct ing research in the Department;  
(iii) Dean of the Faculty;  
(iv) Honorary Professors, if any, attached to the De partment; and  
(v) Such other persons as may be members of the Department in accordance with the provis ions 
of the Ordinances.  
16. Board of Studies .—(1) Each Department  shall have a Board of Studies.  
(2) The constitution of the Board of Studies and the term  of office of its members shall b e prescribed 
by the Ordinances.  
(3) Subject to the overall control and supervision of the Academic Council, the functions of a Board 
of Studies shall be to approve subjects for research for various degrees and other require ments of research 
degrees and to recommend to the concerned Faculty Board in the manner prescribed  by the Ordinances — 
(a) courses of studies and appointment of examiners for courses, but excluding research degrees;  
(b) appointment o f supervisors for resear ch; and  
(c) measures for the improvement of the sta ndard of teaching and research:  25 
 Provided that the above functions of a Board of Studies shall, during the period of three years 
immediately after the commencement of the Act, be performed by the Department . 
17. The Finance Committee .—(1) The Finance Committee shall consist of the following member s, 
namely: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(ii) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(iii) one perso n to be nominated by the Court;  
(iv) three persons to be nominated by the Executiv e Council, out of whom at least one shall be a 
membe r of the Executive Council; and  
(v) three persons to be nominated by the Visitor.  
(2) Five members of the Finance Committee shall form a quorum for a me eting of the Finance 
Committee.  
(3) All the members of the Finance Committee, other than ex officio  members, shall hold office for a 
term of three years.  
(4) A member of the Finance Committee shall have the right to record a minute of dissent if he does 
not agree with any dec ision of the F inance Committee.  
(5) The Finance Committee shall meet at least thrice every year to examine the accounts and to 
scruti nise proposals for expenditure.  
(6) All proposals relating to creation of posts, and those items which have not been included in the 
Budget, shall be examined by the Finance Committee before they are consi dered by the Executive 
Council.  
(7) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University prepared by the Finance Officer 
shall be laid before the Finance Committee for con sideration and comments and thereafter submitted to 
the Executive Council for approval.  
(8) The Finance Committee shall recommend limits for the total recurring expenditure and the total 
non-recurring expenditure for the year, based on the income and resou rces of the University (which, in the 
case of productive works, may include the proceeds of loans).  
18. Selection Committees .—(1) There shall be Selection Committees for making recommendations 
to the Executive Council for appointment to the posts of Profes sor, Reader, Lecturer, Registrar, Finance 
Officer, Librarian and Principals of Colleges and Institution s maintained by the University.  
(2) The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts specified in Column 1 of the Table below 
shall consist of the Vi ce-Chancellor, a nominee of the Visitor and the persons specified in the 
corresponding entry in Column 2 of the said Table:  
TABLE  
1 2 
Professor  (i) The Dean of the Faculty . 
 (ii) The Head of the Department if he is a Professor.  
 (iii) Three persons not  in the service of the University, nominated by 
the Executive Council, out of a panel of names recommended by 
the Academic Council for their special knowledge of, or interest 
in, the subject with which the Professor will be concerned.  26 
 1 2 
Reader/Lecturer  (i) The Head of the Department.  
 (ii) One Professor nominated by the Vice -Chancellor.  
 (iii) Two persons not in the service of the University, nominated by 
the Executive Council, out of a panel of names recommended by 
the Academic Council for their spec ial knowledge of, or interest 
in, the subject with which the Reader/Lecturer will be concerned.  
Registrar/Finance Officer  (i) Two members of the Executive Council nominated by it.  
 (ii) One person not in the service of the University nominated by the 
Executive Council.  
Librarian  (i) Two persons not in the service of the University who have special 
knowledge of the subject of the Library Science/Library 
Administration nominated by the Executive Council  
 (ii) One person not in the service of the Univer sity nominated by the 
Executive Council.  
Principal of College or Institution  
maintained by the University.  Three persons not in the service of the University of whom two shall 
be nominated by the Executive Council and one by the  Academic 
Council for their special knowledge of, or interest in, a subject in 
which instruction is being provided by the College or Institution.  
Note 1. — Where the appointment is being made for an inter -disciplinary project, the head of the 
project shall be deemed to be the Head of the Department concerned.  
Note 2. — The Professor to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor shall be a Professor concerned 
with the speciality  for which the selection is being made and the Vice -Chancellor shall 
consult the Head of the Department and the Dean of Faculty before nominating the 
Professor.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor, or in his absence the Pro -Vice -Chancellor, shall convene and preside  at the 
meet ing of the Selection Committee:  
Provided that the meeting of the Selection Committee shall be fixed after prior consultation with, and 
subject to the convenience of Visitor’s nominee and the experts nomi nated by the Executive Council:  
Provided further that the proceedings of the Selection Commit tee shall not be valid unless, — 
(a) where the number of Visitor’s nominee and the persons nominated by the Executive Council 
is four in all, at least three of them attend the meeting; and  
(b) where the nu mber of Visitor’s nominee and the persons nominated by the Executive Council 
is three in all, at least two of them attend the meeting.  
(4) The procedure to be followed by the Selection Committee shall be laid down in the Ordinances.  
(5) If the Executive Co uncil is unable to accept the recommendations made by the Selection 
Committee, it shall record its reasons and submit the case to the Visitor for final orders.  
(6) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made in the manner indicated below: — 
(i) If the temporary vacancy is for duration longer than one academic session, it shall be filled on 
the advice of the Selection Committee in accordance with the procedure indi cated in the foregoing 
clauses:  27 
 Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor is satisfied that in t he interests of work it is necessary to fill 
the vacancy, the appointment may be made on a purely temporary basis on the advice of a local 
Selection Committee referred to in sub -clause ( ii) for a p eriod not exceeding six months.  
(ii) If the temporary vacancy is for a period less than a year, an appointment to such vacancy shall 
be made on the recommendation of a local Selection Committee consisting of the Dean of the Faculty 
concerned, the Head of the Department and a nominee of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and the Head of the Department, 
the Selection Committee may contain two n ominees of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that in the case of sudden casual vacancies of teachin g posts caused by death or 
any other reason, the Dean may, in consultation with the Head of the Department concerned, make a 
temporary appointment for a month and report to the Vice -Chancellor and the Re gistrar about such 
appointment.  
(iii) No teacher appo inted temporarily shall, if he is not recommended by a regular Selection 
Committee for appointment under the Statutes, be continued in service on such temporary 
employment, unless he is subsequently selected by a local Selection Committee or a regular Sele ction 
Committee, for a temporary or permanent a ppointment, as the case may be.  
19. Special mode of appointment .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 18, the 
Executive Council may invite a person of high academic distinction and professional at tainments to 
accept a post of Professor or any other equivalent academic post in the University on such terms and 
conditions as it deems fit and on the person agreeing to do so, appoint him to the post.  
(2) The Executive Council may appoint a teacher or an y other academic staff working in any other 
University or organisation for undertaking a joint project in accordance with the mann er laid down in the 
Ordinances.  
20. Appointment for a fixed tenure .—The Executive Council may appoint a person selected in 
accordance with the procedure laid down in Statute 18 for a fixed tenure on such terms and conditions as 
it deems fit.  
21. Recognised teachers .—(1) The qualifications of recognised teachers shall be such as may b e 
prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(2) All applica tions for the recognition of teachers shall be made in such manner as may be laid down 
by the Ordinances.  
(3) No teacher shall be recognised as a teacher except on the recommendation of a Selection 
Committee constituted for the purpose in the mann er laid d own in the Ordinances.  
(4) The period of recognition of a teacher shall be determined by the Ordinances made in that behalf.  
(5) The Academic Council may, by a special resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -
thirds of the members present and v oting, withdraw recognition f rom a teacher:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until notice in writing has been given to the person 
concerned calling upon him to show cause, within such time as may be specified in the notice, why such 
resolut ion should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in 
support of them have been cons idered by the Academic Council.  
22. Committees .—(1) An authority of the University may appoint as many standing or special 
Committee s as it may deem fit, and may appoint to such Committees persons who are  not members of 
such authority.  
(2) A Committee appointed under clause ( 1) may deal with any subject delegated to it subject to 
subsequent confirmation by the authority appointing it.  28 
 23. Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of the teachers , etc.—(1) All the teachers 
and other academic staff of the University shall, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, be 
governed by the terms and conditions of service and cod e of conduct as are specified in the Statutes, the 
Ordinances and the Regulations.  
(2) The emoluments of members of the academic staff shall be such as may b e prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(3) Every teacher and member of the academic staff of the Universit y shall be appointed on a written 
contract, the form of which shall b e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) A copy of every contract referred to in clause ( 3) shall b e deposited with the Registrar.  
24. Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of ot her employees .—(1) All the 
employees of the University, other than the teachers and other academic staff shall, in the absence of any 
contract to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as are 
specified in the S tatutes, the Ordin ances and the Regulations.  
(2) The manner of appointment and emoluments of employees, other than the teachers and other 
academic staff, shall be such as may b e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
25. Seniority l ist.—(1) Whenever, in accordance with the Statutes, any person is to hold an office or 
be a member of an authority of the University by rotation according to seniority, such seniority shall be 
determined according to the length of continuous service of such person in his grade and in acco rdance 
with such other principles as the Executive Council may , from time to time, prescribe.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain in respect of each class of persons to 
whom the provisions of these Statutes apply, a complete a nd up -to-date seniority list in accordance with 
the provisions of clause ( 1). 
(3) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous service in a particular grade or the relative 
seniority of any person or persons is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar may, on his own motion and shall, 
at the request of any such person, submit the matter to the Executive Council whose d ecision thereon shall 
be final.  
26. Removal of employees of the University .—(1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct 
against a teac her, a member of the academic staff or other employee of the University, the                        
Vice -Chancellor, in the case of the teacher or a member of the academic staff, and the authority 
competent to appoint (hereinafter referred to as the appoin ting authority) in the case of other employee 
may, by order in writing, place such teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee, as the case 
may be , under suspension and shall forthwith report to the Executive Council the circumstanc es in which 
the order was made:  
Provided that the Executive Council may, if it is of the opinion, that the circumstances of the case do 
not warrant the suspension of the teacher or a member of the aca demic staff, revoke such order.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contain ed in the terms of the contract of appointment or of any other 
terms and conditions of service of the employees, the Executive Council in respect of teachers and other 
academic staff, and the appointing authority in respect of other employees, shall have t he power to 
remove a teacher or a member of the academic staff or other employee, as the case may be, on grounds of 
misconduct.  
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Executive Council, or as the case may be, the appointing authority, shall not 
be entitled to remove a ny teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee except for a good 
cause and after giving three months’ notice or on payment of three months’ salary in lieu thereof.  29 
 (4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall be removed under clause ( 2) or 
clause ( 3) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed 
to be taken in regard to him.  
(5) The removal of a teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall take effect from 
the date on whic h the order of removal is made:  
Provided that where the teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee is under suspension 
at the time of his removal, such removal shall take effect from the date on which he was placed under 
suspen sion.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Statute, a teacher, member 
of the academic staff  or other employee may resign, — 
(a) if he is a permanent employee, only after giving three months’ notice in writing to the 
Executive Council or the appointing authority, as the case may be, or by paying three months’ salary 
in lieu t hereof;  
(b) if he is not a permanent employee, only after giving one month’s notice in writing to the 
Executive Council or, as the case may be, the a ppointing authority or by paying one month’s salary in 
lieu thereof:  
Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date on which the resignation is accepted 
by the Executive Council or the appointing  authority, as the case may be.  
27. Honora ry degrees .—(1) The Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic 
Council and by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and 
voting, make proposals to the Visitor for the conferment of honorary de grees:  
Provided that in case of emergency, the Executive Council may, on its own motion, make such 
proposals.  
(2) The Executive Council may, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the 
members present and voting, withdraw, with the previous sanction of the Visitor, any honorary degr ee 
conferred by the University.  
28. Withdrawal of degrees, etc .—The Executive Council may, by a special resolution passed by a 
majority  of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw any degree or academic 
distinction conferred on, or any certificate or diploma granted to, any person by the University  for good 
and sufficient cause:  
Provided that no such resolution  shall be passed until a notice in writing has been given to that person 
calling upon him to show cause within such time as may be specified in the notice why such a resolution 
should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in support of 
them, have been consi dered by the Executive Council.  
29. Maintenance of discipline among students of the University .—(1) All powers relating to the 
maintenance of discipline and disciplinary action in relation to the students of the U niversity sha ll vest in 
the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) There shall be a Proctor of the University to assist the Vice -Chancellor in the exercise of the 
powers referred to in clause ( 1), who shall be appointed by the Executive Council from amongst the 
Professors a nd Readers in the manne r prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may delegate all or any of the powers referred to in clause ( 1), as he deems 
proper, to the Proctor and to such other officers as  he may specify in this behalf.  
(4) Without prej udice to the generality of his powers relating to the maintenance of discipline and 
taking such action, as may seem to him appropriate for the maintenance of discipline, the Vice -Chancellor 30 
 may, in exercise of such powers, by order, direct that any student  or students be expelled or rusticated, for 
a specified period, or be not admitted to a course or courses of study in a College, Institution or 
Department or a Faculty of the University for a stated period, or be punished with fine for an amount to 
be spec ified in the order, or be debarred from taking an examination or examinations conducted by the 
University, College, Institution or Department or a Faculty for one or more years, or that the results of the 
student or students concerned in the examination or  examinations in which he or t hey have appeared be 
cancelled.  
(5) The Principals of Colleges, Institutions, Deans of Faculties and Heads of teaching Departments in 
the University shall have the authority to exercise all such disciplinary powers over the students in their 
respective Colleges, Institutions, Faculties and teaching Departments in the University, as may be 
necessary for the proper conduct of such Colleges, Institutions, Facu lties and teaching Departments.  
(6) Without prejudice to the powers of  the Vice -Chancellor and the Principal and other persons 
specified in clause ( 5), detailed rules of discipline and proper conduct shall be made by the University. 
The Princ ipals of Colleges, Institutions, Deans of Faculties and Heads of teaching Department s in the 
University may also make such supplementary rules as they deem necessary f or the purposes stated 
therein.  
(7) At the time of admission, every student shall be required to sign a declaration to the effect that he 
submits himself to the disciplinary  jurisdiction of the Vice -Chancellor and other  authorities of the 
University.  
30. Maintenance of discipline among students of College, or an Institution not maintained by 
University .—All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in relation to students of a College 
or an Institution not maintained by the University, shall vest in the Principal of the College or Institution, 
as the case may be, in accordance with the procedur e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
31. Admission of Colleges , etc., to the privileges of the University .—(1) Colleges and other 
Institutions situated within the jurisdiction of the University may be admitted to such privileges of the 
University as the Executive Council and the College Development Council may decide on the  following 
conditions, namely: — 
(i) Every such College or Institution shall have a regularly constituted Governing Body, 
consisting of not more than fifteen persons approved by the Executive Council and including among 
others, two teachers of the Universit y to be nominated by the Executive Council and three 
representatives of the teaching staff of whom the Principal of the College or Institution shall be one. 
The procedure for appointment of members of the Governing Body and other matters affecting the 
mana gement of a College or an Institution shall b e prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that the said condition shall not apply in the case of Colleges and Institutions 
maintained by Government which shall, however, have an Advisory Committee consisting of n ot 
more than fifteen persons which shall consist of among others, three teachers including the Principal 
of the College or Institution, and two teachers of the University nomi nated by the Executive Council.  
(ii) Every such College or Institution shall sati sfy the Executive Council and the College 
Development Council on the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the suitability and adequacy of its accommodat ion and equipment for teaching;  
(b) the qualifications and adequacy of its teaching staff and t he conditions of their service;  
(c) the arrangements for the residence, welfare, discipli ne and supervision of students;  
(d) the adequacy of financial provision made for the continued maintenance of the College or 
Institution; and  
(e) such other matters as are essential  for the maintenance of the sta ndards of University 
education.  31 
 (iii) No College or Institution shall be admitted to any privileges of the University except on the 
recommendation of the Academic Council made after considering the report of a Committee of 
Inspection appointed for the p urpose by the Academic Council.  
(iv) Colleges and Institutions desirous of admission to any privileges of the University shall be 
required to intimate their intention to do so in writing so as to reach the Registrar not later than the 
15th August, preceding the year from which permission  applied for is to have effect.  
(v) A College or an Institution shall not, without the previous permission of the Executive 
Council, College Development Council and the Academic Council, suspend instruction in any subject 
or course of study which it is a uthor ised to teach and teaches.  
(2) Appointment to the teaching staff and Principal of Colleges or Institutions admitted to the 
privileges of the University shall be made in the manne r prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that nothing in this clause shall app ly to Colleges and Institu tions maintained by 
Government.  
(3) The service conditions of the administrative and other non -academic staff of every College or 
Institution referred to in clause ( 2) shall be such as may be laid down in the Ordinances:  
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to Colleges and Institu tions maintained by 
Government.  
(4) Every College or Institution admitted to the privileges of the University shall be inspected at least 
once in every two academic years by a Committee appoint ed by the Academic Council, and the report of 
the Committee shall be submitted to the Academic Council, which shall forward the same to the College 
Development Council and Executive Council with such recommendati ons as it may deem fit to make.  
(5) The Coll ege Development Council and the Executive Council, after considering the report and the 
recommendations, if any, of the Academic Council, shall forward a copy of the report to the Governing 
Body of the College or Institution with such remarks, if any, as t hey ma y deem fit for suitable action.  
(6) The Executive Council may, after consulting the College Development Council and Academic 
Council, withdraw any privileges granted to a College or an Institution, at any time it considers that the 
College or Institu tion does not satisfy any of the conditions on the fulfilment of which the College or 
Institution w as admitted to such privileges:  
Provided that before any privileges are so withdrawn, the Governing Body of the College or 
Institution concerned shall be given an opportunity to represent to the Executive Council as to why s uch 
action should not be taken.  
(7) Subject to the conditions set forth in clause ( 1), the Ordinances may prescribe — 
(i) such other conditions as m ay be considered necessary; and  
(ii) the procedure for the admission of Colleges and Institutions to the privileges of the University 
and for the withdrawal of those privileges.  
32. Convocations .—Convocations of the University for the conferring of degrees or for other 
purposes shall be held in  such manner as may b e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
33. Acting Chairman of meetings .—Where no provision is made for a President or Chairman to 
preside over a meeting of any authority of the University or any Committee of such authority or when the 
Preside nt or Chairman so provided for is absent, the members present shall elect one from among 
themsel ves to preside at such meeting.  
34. Resignation .—Any member, other than an ex officio  member of the Court, the Executive Council, 
the Academic Council or any other authority of the University or any Committee of such authority may 32 
 resign by letter addressed to the Registrar and the resignation shall take effect as soon as such letter is 
received by  the Registrar.  
35. Disqualification s.—(1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a 
member of any of the  authorities of the University — 
(i) if he is of unsound mind;  
(ii) if h e is an undischarged insolvent;  
(iii) if he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving moral turpitude and 
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonmen t for not less than six months.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of the 
disqual ifications mentioned in clause ( 1), the question shall be referred to the Visitor and his decision 
shall be final and no suit or other proceeding shall lie in any civil court against such decision.  
36. Residence condition for membership and office .—Notwith standing anything contained in the 
Statutes, a person who is not ordinarily resident in India shall not be eligible to be an officer of the 
University or a member of a ny authority of the University.  
37. Membership of authorities by virtue of membership of other bodies .—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Statutes, a person who holds any post in the University or is a member of any 
authority or body of the University in his capacity as a member of a particular authority or body or as the 
holder of a pa rticular appointment shall hold such office or membership only for so long as he continues 
to be a member of that particular authority or body or the holder of that particular a ppointment, as the 
case may be.  
38. Alumni Association .—(1) There shall be an A lumni Association for the University.  
(2) The subscription for membership of the Alumni Association shall b e prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(3) No member of the Alumni Association shall be entitled to vote or stand for election unless he has 
been a member o f the Association for at least one year prior to the date of election and is a degree holder 
of the University o f at least five years standing:  
Provided that the condition relating to the completion of one year’s membership shall not apply in the 
case of the first election.  
39. Students ’ Council .—(1) There shall be constituted in the University, a Students’ Council for 
every academic year, consisting of — 
(i) the Dean of Students’ Welfare who shall be the Cha irman of the Students’ Council;  
(ii) twenty studen ts to be nominated by the Academic Council on the basis of merit in studies, 
sports and e xtra-curricular activities; and  
(iii) such number of elected representatives of students as may be spe cified by the Academic 
Council:  
Provided that any student of the University shall have the right to bring up any matter concerning the 
University before the Students’ Council if so permitted by the Chairman, and he shall have the right to 
participate in the discussions at any meeting when the matter is taken up fo r cons ideration.  
(2) The functions of the Students’ Council shall be to make suggestions to the appropriate authorities 
of the University in regard to the programmes of studies students ’ welfare and other matters of 
importance, in regard to the working of the Un iversity in general and such suggestions shall be made on 
the basis of consensus of opinion.  33 
 (3) The Students’ Council shall meet at least once in an academic year preferably  in the beginning of 
that year.  
40. Ordinances, how made .—(1) The first Ordinances  made Under sub -section ( 2) of section 31 may 
be amended, repealed or added to at any time by the Executive Council in the manner spec ified in the 
following clauses.  
(2) No Ordinance in respect of the matters enumerated in sub -section ( 1) of Section 31 sha ll be made 
by the Executive Council unless a draft of such Ordinance has been pr oposed by the Academic Council.  
(3) The Executive Council shall not have power to amend any draft of any Ordinance proposed by the 
Academic Council under clause ( 2), but may re ject the proposal or return the draft to the Academic 
Council for re -consideration, either in whole or in part, together with any amendment which the  
Executive Council may suggest.  
(4) Where the Executive Council has rejected or returned the draft of an Or dinance proposed by the 
Academic Council, the Academic Council may consider the question afresh and in case the original draft 
is reaffirmed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting and more than 
half the total number of members of the Academic Council, the draft may be sent back to the Executive 
Council which shall either adopt it or refer it to the Visitor  whose decision shall be final.  
(5) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall come into effect  immediately.  
(6) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall be submitted to the Visitor within two 
weeks  from the date of its adoption.  
(7) The Visitor shall have the power to direct the University to suspend the operation of any 
Ordinance.  
(8) The Visitor shall inform the Executive Council about his objection to the Ordinance referred to in 
clause ( 7) and may, after receiving the comments of the University, either withdraw the order suspending 
the Ordinance or disallow the Ordinance, and his d ecision shall be final.  
41. Regulations .—(1) The authorities of the University may make Regulations consistent with the 
Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for  the following matters, namely: — 
(i) laying down the procedure to be observed at their meetings and the number  of memb ers 
required to form a quorum;  
(ii) providing for all matters which are required by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances t o be 
prescribed by Regulations;  
(iii) providing for all other matters solely concerning such authorities or committees appo inted by 
them and not provided for by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the giving of notice to the 
members of such authority of the dates of meetings and of the business to be considered at meetings and 
for the keeping of a record of the proceedings of meetings.  
(3) The Executive Council may direct the amendment in such manner as it may specify of any 
Regulation made under the Statutes or the annulment of any such Regulation.   
42. Delegation of Powers .—Subject to the provisions of the Act and the Statutes, any officer or 
authority of the University may delegate his or its powers to any other officer or authority or person under 
his or its respective control and subject to the condition that overall responsibility for the exercise of the 
powers so delegated shall continue to vest in the officer or authority delegating such powers.  
--------------------------The Tyre Corporation of India Limited (Disinvestment of Ownership) Act, 2007--------------------------
1 
 THE TYRE CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED (DISINVESTMENT  
OF OWNERSHIP) ACT, 2007  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Disinvestment in the company . 
3. Payment of consideration for disinvestment in the company . 
4. Manner of disinvestment.  
5. Provision in respect of officers and other employees of the company.  
6. Act to have overriding effect.  
  2 
 THE TYRE CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED (DISINVESTMENT  
OF OWNERSHIP) ACT, 2007  
ACT NO. 50 OF 2007  
[12th December , 2007.]  
An Act to provide for disinvestment of Government's equity in the Tyre Corporation of India 
Limited and for matters connected  therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  the Inchek  Tyres  Limited and the National Rubber Manufacturers Limited, engaged in the 
manufacture, production and distribution of articles mentioned in the First Schedule to the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, namely, tyres, tubes and other rubber good s, were nationalised 
under the Inchek  Tyres Limited and National Rubber Manufacturers Limited (Nationalisation) Act, 1984 
and transferred to, and vested in, the Tyre Corporation of India Limited, Calcutta from the 5th day of 
March, 1984;  
AND WHEREAS  for th e purpose of securing optimum utilisation of the available facilities for the 
manufacture, production and distribution of tyres, tubes and other rubber goods, investment of large 
amount is necessary;  
AND WHEREAS  it is expedient to disinvest the Government' s equity in the Tyre Corporation of India 
Limited, Kolkata to enable the private sector to have investment made to ensure that the interest of 
general public are served by the continuance of the manufacture, production and distribution of the 
aforesaid art icles which are essential to the needs of the economy of the country.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -eighth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Tyre Corporation of India Limited (Disinvestment of 
Ownership) Act, 2007.  
2. Disinvestment in the company .—Where the Central Government, on the recommendations of the 
Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises, is of the opinion that disinvestment is to be made 
in the Tyre  Corporation of India Limited (hereinafter referred to as the company), it may pass an order 
providing for transfer, exchange or relinquishment of shares in the company to any person on such terms 
and conditions as may be agreed upon.  
3. Payment of conside ration for disinvestment in the company .—(1) For the transfer to, and 
vesting in, any person, the shares of the company, there shall be given to the Central Government by such 
person or in case such person is a company, by such company, such consideration,  having regard to the 
optimum valuation of land, assets and liabilities of the company in accordance with a valuation method as 
specified by the Central Government.  
(2) The manner of payment of consideration for transfer of shares of the company to the tra nsferee 
shall be such as may be agreed upon between the transferor, the company and the transferee, the person or 
the company, as the case may be.  
4. Manner of disinvestment .—The Central Government may, in its order made under section 2, 
specify that disinvestment of shares shall be effected by one or more of the following methods as may be 
specified in such order, namely: — 
(a) by making a public offer or preferential allotment or private placement in accordance with 
such procedure as applicable in cas e of any other Government company;  
(b) by directing the company to make further issue of equity capital to the members of the public 
or preferential allotment or private placement, as the case may be, in accordance with such procedure 
as applicable in case  of the Government company.  
5. Provision in respect of officers and ot her employees of the company .—(1) Every officer or 
other employee of the company, except the Chairman and Directors, serving in its employment 
immediately before the disinvestment of the company under this Act, shall continue in office or service 
after such disinvestment, on same terms a nd conditions as would have been admissible to him if there had 3 
 been no such disinvestment and shall continue to do so until the expiry of the period of three years from 
the date of disinvestments.  
(2) Where an officer or other employee of the company opts  under sub -section ( 1) not to be in the 
employment or service of the company, such officer or other employee shall be deemed to have resigned.  
6. Act to have overriding effect .—The p rovisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsist ent therewit h contained in the Inchek  Tyres  Limited and National Rubber 
Manufactures, Limited (Nationalisation) Act, 1984  (17 of 1984) or any other law for the time being in 
force.  
_____  
--------------------------The Warehousing (Development and Regulation) Act, 2007--------------------------
1 
 THE WAREHOUSING (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) ACT, 2007  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short  title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
REGULATION OF WAREHOUSING BUSINESS  
3. Requirement of registration for warehouses issuing negotiable warehouse receipts.  
4. Registration of warehousemen.  
5. Registration of accreditation agencies.  
 
CHAPTER III  
WAREHOUSEMEN  
6. Liabilities of warehousemen.  
7. Duties of warehousemen . 
8. Duties of warehouseman to keep records and accounts of warehouse business.  
9. Special powers of warehouseman to deal with perishable and hazardous goods.  
10. Lien of warehouseman on goods.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS  
11. Warehouse receipts.  
12. Negotiability of warehouse receipts.  
13. Negotiation of warehouse receipt by delivery.  
14. Transfer of negotiab le warehouse receipts  without endorsement.  
15. Warranties on negotiation of warehouse receipt s. 
16. Non-liability of the endorser.  
17. Negotiation of warehouse receipt not impaired by fraud, mistake or duress.  
18. Subsequent negotiation of warehouse receipt s. 
19. Delivery of goods to be made after due charges are paid.  
20. Transfer of non -negotiable receipts.  
21. Conclusiveness of negotiable warehouse receipt.  
22. Presumption in certain cases.  
23. Issue of duplicate receipt.  2 
 CHAPTER V  
THE WAREHOU SING DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATORY AUTHORITY  
SECTIONS  
24. Establishment and incorporation of Authority.  
25. Composition of Authority.  
26. Tenure of office of Chairperson and other members.  
27. Removal from office.  
28. Salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of Chairperson and other members.  
29. Bar on future employment of members.  
30. Chairperson to be the chief executive of Authority.  
31. Meetings of Authority.  
32. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Authority.  
33. Officers and employees of Authority.  
34. Warehousing Adv isory Committee.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF AUTHORITY  
35. Powers and functions of Authority.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
36. Grants by Central Government.  
37. Constitution of fund.  
38. Accounts and audit.  
39. Furnishing of returns, Annual Report, etc., t o Central Government.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
POWERS OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  
40. Powers of Central Government to issue directions.  
41. Power of Central Government to supersede Authority.  
 
CHAPTER IX  
APPEALS  
42. Appeals to Appellate Authority.  
 
CHAPTER X  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
43. Offences and penalties.  3 
 SECTIONS  
44. Offences by companies.  
45. Cognizance of offences by courts.  
 
CHAPTER XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
46. Chairperson, members, officers and other employees of Authority to be public servants.  
47. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
48. Delegation of powers.  
49. Exemption from tax on wealth and income.  
50. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
51. Power of Authority to make regulations.  
52. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
53. Act to have overriding effect.  
54. Power to remove difficulties.  
55. Amendment of Act 2 of 1899.  
  4 
 THE WAREHOUSING (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION)  ACT, 2007  
ACT NO. 37 OF 2007  
[19th September , 2007.]  
An Act to make provisions for the development and regulation of warehouses, negotiability of warehouse 
receipts, establishment of a Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and co mmencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Warehousing 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 2007.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “accreditation agency ” means an agency, whatever be its constitution, registered with the 
Authority under section 5;  
(b) “actionable claim ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 3 of the Transfer of 
Property Act, 1882  (4 of 1882) ; 
(c) “Authority ” means the Warehousin g Development and Regulatory Authority established 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 24;  
(d) “depositor” means a person who delivers goods to the warehouseman for storage;  
(e) “endorsee” means the person to whom the w arehouse receipt is negotiated;  
(f) “endorsement ” means signing on the warehouse receipt by the depositor or holder of the 
warehouse receipt for the purpose of its negotiation;  
(g) “electronic form ”, with reference to information, means any information generated, sent, 
received or stored in m edia, magnetic, optical, computer memory, microfilm, computer generated 
micro fiche or similar device;  
(h) “fungible goods ” means any goods of which any unit is, by nature or usage of trade, the 
equivalent of any other like unit and are received by a wareh ouseman as fungible goods;  
(i) “goods” means all tangible movable goods (other than actionable claims, money and 
securities), whether fungible or not;  
(j) “grade” means the quality standard of any goods as notified as grade designation by the 
Central Gover nment under the Agricultural Produce (Grading and Marking) Act, 1937  (1 of 1937)  or 
any other law for the time being in force;  
(k) “holder” means,— 
(i) in relation to a negotiable warehouse receipt, a person who is in possession of such receipt 
and a right to goods endorsed on it; and  
(ii) in relation to a non -negotiable warehouse receipt, a person named in it as the person to 
whom the goods are to be deliv ered or the assignee of that person;  
                                                           
1. 25th October, 2010, vide notification N o. S.O. 2613(E),  dated 21st October, 2010,  see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 5 
 (l) “member” means a member of the Authority and includes its Chairperson;  
(m) “negotiable warehouse receipt ” means a warehouse receipt under which the goods 
represented therein are deliverable to the depositor or order , the endorsement of which has the effect 
of transfer of goods represented thereby and the endorsee for which takes a good title;  
(n) “non-negotiable warehouse receipt ” means a warehouse receipt other than a negotiable 
warehouse receipt;  
(o) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(p) “person” includes a firm, co -operative society or any association or body of persons, whether 
incorporated or not;  
(q) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(r) “regulation ” means a regulation made under this Act;  
(s) “warehouse ” means any premises (including any protected place) conforming to all the 
requirements including manpower specified by the Authority by regulations wherein the 
warehouseman takes custody of the goods deposited by the depositor and includes a place of stora ge 
of goods under controlled conditions of temperature and humidity;  
(t) “warehousing business ” means the Business of maintaining warehouses in storage of goods 
and issuing negotiable warehouse receipts;  
(u) “warehouse receipt ” means an acknowledgement in writing or in electronic form issued by a 
warehouseman or his duly authorised representative (including depository by whatever name called) 
of the receipt for storage of goods not owned by the warehouseman;  
(v) “warehouseman ” means any person who is granted a certificate of registration in respect of 
any warehouse or warehouses by the Authority or an accreditation agency for carrying on the 
business of warehousing.  
CHAPTER II  
REGULATION OF WAREHOUSING BUSINESS  
3. Requirement of registration for warehouses issuing negotiable warehouse receipts .—(1) No 
person shall commence or carry on the warehousing business unless he has obtained a registration 
certificate in respect of the concerned warehouse or warehouses granted by the Author ity under this Act:  
Provided that a person carrying on the warehousing business immediately before the commencement 
of this Act shall be allowed to carry on such business, in case he has made an application for registration 
within thirty days from the date  of such commencement:  
Provided further that no such registration shall be required for warehouses which do not propose to 
issue negotiable warehouse receipt.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that a warehouse registered under this 
Act shall also be eligible to issue non -negotiable warehouse receipts.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Authority may, subject to such 
regulations and guidelines issued by it, authorise any person registered under section  5 as an accreditation 
agency to issue certificate of accreditation to any person for carrying on the business of warehousing 
issuing negotiable warehouse receipts.  
4. Registration of warehouses .—(1) Any person desirous of commencing or carrying on the 
business of maintaining a warehouse issuing negotiable warehouse receipts may make an application to 
the Authority for registration in respect of one or more warehouses owned or occupied by him.  
(2) Every application for registration under sub -section ( 1) sha ll be in such form and manner and shall 
be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.  6 
 (3) The Authority may, after such enquiry and subject to such terms and conditions as it thinks fit, 
grant a certificate of registration of the warehouse in the presc ribed form and bearing a registration 
number to the applicant authorising him to carry on the business of maintaining a warehouse or 
warehouses and to issue negotiable warehouse receipts.  
(4) The Authority may not grant a certificate of registration under this section unless it is satisfied that 
the warehouse in respect of which the application has been made has adequate facilities and safeguards 
required to warehouse the goods of the nature specified in the application and the applicant satisfies the 
finan cial, managerial and other eligibility criteria and competence as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no certificate of registration shall be refused to any applicant under this section unless 
the applicant has been given an opportunity of being heard.  
5. Reg istra tion of accreditation agencies. —(1) The Authority shall, from time to time, determine 
the number of accreditation agencies as it may authorise to issue certificate of accreditation to warehouses 
issuing negotiable warehouse receipts.  
(2) Any person fu lfilling the qualifications and other requirements as may be prescribed and desirous 
of functioning as an accreditation agency under this Act may make an application to the Authority 
seeking its registration as such under this Act.  
(3) Every application un der sub -section ( 2) shall be in such form and manner and shall be 
accompanied by such fees and security deposit as may be prescribed.  
(4) The form in which and the terms and conditions subject to which a certificate of registration as an 
accreditation agen cy may be issued under this section shall be such as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER III  
WAREHOUSEMEN  
6. Liabilities of warehousemen .—(1) A warehouseman is liable for loss of, or injury to, goods 
caused by his failure to exercise such care and diligence in regard to the goods as a careful and vigilant 
owner of the goods of the same bulk, quality and value would exercise in the custody of them in similar 
conditions.  
(2) In case the goods are damaged or lost in spite of taking all care and precautions by the 
warehouseman due to unavoidable circumstances, the compensation equal to the value of goods at the 
time of deposit of the goods shall be payable by the warehouseman.  
(3) In case the goods are damaged or lost due to the negligence of the warehouseman, then, the 
compensation shall be equal to value of goods plus the loss of profit to the holder of the receipt.  
(4) The warehouseman shall not be responsible for any loss, destruction, damage or deterioration of 
the goods delivered to him for storage attributable to circumstances such as force majeure , act of war, act 
of public enemies and the like.  
7. Duties of warehousemen .—(1) In the absence of a lawful excuse, a warehouseman shall deliver 
the goods referred to in a negotiable receipt, to the holder of the recei pt on demand made by the holder 
and on the holder fulfilling all the following conditions, namely: — 
(a) satisfying the warehouse lien;  
(b) surrendering the receipt in case of non -negotiable receipt and surrendering the receipt with 
endorsements in case of negotiable receipt; and  
(c) acknowledging in writing the receipt of the goods.  
(2) If a warehouseman refuses or fails to deliver the goods in compliance with the provisions of this 
section, the burden of proof shall lie on the warehouseman to establish the  existence of a lawful excuse 
for the refusal or failure.  
8. Duties of warehouseman to keep records and accounts of warehouse business .—(1) Every 
warehouseman shall keep in a place of safety a complete and accurate set of records and accounts of all 7 
 transa ctions pertaining to the operation of a warehouse including records and accounts of all goods 
received in the warehouse and withdrawn there from, of all un issued receipts in his possession, of all 
receipts issued, returned to, or cancelled, by him.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the warehouseman shall keep all the records and 
accounts of the warehouse business in numerical sequence separate and distinct from the records and 
accounts of any other business in such form and in such manner a nd for such period as the Authority may, 
by regulations, specify.  
(3) The warehouseman shall make available to the Authority for inspection the records and accounts 
of the warehouse business at any time as may be desired by the Authority.  
9. Special powers  of warehouseman to deal with perishable and hazardous goods .—(1) If the 
goods are of a perishable or hazardous nature, or their keeping shall deteriorate greatly in value or damage 
other property, the warehouseman may give notice that is reasonable and po ssible under the 
circumstances to the holder of the receipt for the goods, if the name and address of the holder is known to 
the warehouseman or if not known to the warehouseman, then, to the depositor, requiring that person to 
satisfy the lien on the good s and to remove them from the warehouse.  
(2) If the person to whom a notice under sub -section ( 1) is given, fails to satisfy the lien and remove 
the goods within the time specified in the notice, the warehouseman may sell the goods at public or 
private sal e without advertising.  
(3) The notice referred to in sub -section ( 1) may be given by sending it by electronic mail, speed post 
or registered post or telegraphically addressed to the person to whom it is to be given at the last known 
address of the person a nd the notice is deemed to be given on the third day of the mailing.  
(4) If the warehouseman after a reasonable effort is unable to sell the goods, the warehouseman may 
dispose of them in such other manner as he deems proper and shall incur no liability fo r that reason.  
(5) From the proceeds of any sale or disposal of goods made under this section, the warehouseman 
shall, after satisfying his lien, hold the balance in trust for the holder of the receipt.  
(6) No notice shall be necessary if the warehouseman is satisfied on reasonable grounds that in the 
circumstances of the case giving such notices is likely to cause further prejudice to the goods.  
(7) If, at any time, the warehouseman is satisfied that the quality of any fungible goods or any part 
thereof ha s so deteriorated or is so deteriorating that it is necessary to do so, to protect the holders of 
negotiable warehouse receipts from loss and time is not sufficient for him to seek their instructions, he 
may, subject to the regulations in this behalf, disp ose off the goods or any part thereof and keep the sale 
proceeds after satisfying his lien in an escrow account for the benefit of the holders of receipts.  
(8) In case of disposal of fungible goods under sub -section ( 7), the warehouseman shall, at the choi ce 
of the holder of the receipt, either pay the sale proceeds or deliver equivalent goods of the same grade, 
quality and quantity to him.  
(9) Any endorsee shall have the right to intimate the address for service recorded with the 
warehouseman.  
10. Lien of warehouseman on goods .—(1) Every warehouseman has a lien on goods deposited with 
him for storage, whether deposited by the owner of the goods or by his authority, or by any person 
entrusted with the possession of the goods by the owner or by his agent.  
(2) The lien of the warehouseman is for the amount of the storage an d maintenance charges 
including — 
(a) all lawful charges for storage and preservation of the goods;  
(b) all reasonable charges for — 
(i) any notice required to be given under the provisions of this Act;  
(ii) notice and advertisement of sale;  8 
 (iii) sale of goods where default is made in satisfying the lien of the warehouseman; and  
(iv) compliance of statutory provisions.  
(3) In case of any endorsement on the face of a negotiable warehouse receipt , by a bank or the 
warehouseman, such endorsement shall be evidence of a pledge and the pledgee shall have priority over 
the interest of the holder of the receipt.  
(4) In case of any pledge referred to in sub -section ( 3), the warehouseman shall not deliver  the goods 
unless the endorsement of the pledge has been duly got cancelled.  
(5) In case the goods are not taken back within the declared period of storage, the warehouseman 
shall have the right to recover his charges, selling the goods by public auction, or in any other manner 
provided in this section any goods upon which he has a lien.  
(6) The warehouseman shall give a notice in writing of his intention to sell the goods to the person 
liable as debtor for the charges for which the lien exists or to the ow ner or person owning the right of 
property of the goods.  
(7) The notice under sub -section ( 6) shall— 
(a) contain all the details about the goods, the location of warehouse, date of deposit, the name of 
depositor and a statement of lien claimed by the warehouseman for the goods stored in the 
warehouse; and  
(b) state that unless the charges are paid within the stipulated time mentioned in the notice, the 
goods shall be advertised for sale and sold by public auction at a time and place as specified in the  
notice.  
(8) If the charges are not paid on or before the day mentioned in the notice, then, unless any other 
mode of sale is specified by the Authority, by regulations, an advertisement of the sale shall be published 
in a leading newspaper having circulat ion in the locality where the sale is to be held as well as where the 
owner of the goods is located and the sale shall be held not less than fourteen days from the date of first 
publication of the advertisement.  
(9) The warehouseman shall, from the proceed s of the sale, satisfy his lien and shall pay over the 
surplus, if any, to the person entitled thereto.  
(10) If the surplus is not demanded by the person entitled thereto within ten days after the sale of 
goods or if there are different claims, the warehou seman shall seek instructions from the Authority and 
act as per the orders of the Authority.  
CHAPTER IV  
WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS  
11. Warehouse receipts .—(1) A warehouse receipt, which may be either in writing or in electronic 
form, shall be a document of title to goods in writing if it contains all the following particulars, namely: —  
(a) receipt number;  
(b) warehouse registration number and date up to which it is valid;  
(c) name of the warehouse and its complete postal address;  
(d) name  and address of the person by whom or on whose behalf the goods are deposited;  
(e) date of issue of the warehouse receipt;  
(f) statement that the goods received shall be delivered to the holder thereof, or that the goods 
shall be delivered to the order of a named person;  
(g) rates of storage charges and handling charges;  
(h) description of the goods or of the packages containing them with particulars of quantity and 
quality or grade;  9 
 (i) market value of the goods at the time of deposit;  
(j) private marks of  depositor on the goods or packages, if any, except in the case of fungible 
goods;  
(k) name of the insurance company indemnifying for fire, flood, theft, burglary, misappropriation, 
riots, strikes or terrorism;  
(l) whether the warehouse receipt is negotiab le or non -negotiable;  
(m) statement of the amount of any advance made and of any liability incurred for which th e 
warehouseman claims his lien;  
(n) date and signature of the warehouseman or his authorised agent;  
(o) declared shelf -life of goods;  
(p) the fa ct that the warehouseman holds the lien on the goods deposited for his storage and 
handling charges; and  
(q) that the receipt would be valid only till the date of expiry of declared shelf - life of the goods 
for which it is issued.  
(2) In case a warehousema n wilfully omits from a negotiable warehouse receipt any of the particulars 
set out in sub -section ( 1), he shall be liable for damages caused by such omission.  
(3) No warehouse receipt shall, by reason of the omission only of any of the particulars set-forth in 
sub-section ( 1), be deemed to be invalid for the purpose of settlement of disputes or claims.  
(4) Authority may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, add, delete or modify any 
particulars as specified in sub -clause ( 1) for all or  any commodity or class of commodities or for any class 
of warehouses.  
12. Negotiability of warehouse receipts .—(1) The words in a negotiable warehouse receipt limiting 
its negotiability shall be void.  
(2) A warehouseman who issues a non -negotiable warehouse receipt shall cause to be plainly marked 
upon its face the words “non-negotiable ” or “not negotiable ” in English or in the language in which it is 
issued.  
(3) In case of non -compliance of sub -section ( 2), a holder of the warehouse receipt who purchases it 
for valuable consideration believing it to be a negotiable warehouse receipt may, at his option, treat the 
receipt as vesting in him all rights attaching to a negotiable warehouse receipt and imposing upon the 
warehouseman the same liabilities which he would have incurred had the receipt been a negotiable 
warehouse receipt and the warehouseman shall be liable accordingly.  
(4) A negotiable warehouse receipt shall be valid for delivery till the date of ex piry of the declared 
shelf -life of the goods for which it is issued.  
13. Negotiation of warehouse receipt by delivery .—A negotiable warehouse receipt may be 
negotiated by its delivery if, by the terms of the receipt, the warehouseman undertakes to deliver the 
goods to the order of a named person, and that person or a subsequent endorsee has endorsed it.  
14. Transfer of negotiable warehouse receipts without endorsement .—Where  a negotiable receipt 
is transferred for valuable consideration by delivery, and the  endorsement of the transferor is essential for 
negotiation, the transferee acquires a right against the transferor to compel him to endorse the receipt, 
unless a contrary intention appears, and the negotiation takes effect as of the time when endorsement is 
made.  
15. Warranties on negotiation of warehouse receipt .—A person who, for valuable consideration, 
negotiates a negotiable warehouse receipt by endorsement and delivery, including one who assigns for 
valuable consideration, a claim secured by a receipt, unless a contrary intention appears, warrants the 
following: — 
(a) that the receipt is genuine;  10 
 (b) that the person has a legal right to negotiate or transfer it;  
(c) that the person has no knowledge of any fact that would impair the validity of th e receipt;  
(d) that the person has a right to trans fer the title to the goods; and  
(e) that the goods are merchantable or fit for a particular purpose when those warranties would 
have been implied, if the contract of the parties had been to transfer withou t a receipt the goods 
represented by it.  
16. Non -liability of the endorser .—The endorsement of a receipt does not make the endorser liable 
for any failure on the part of the warehouseman or previous endorsers of the receipt to fulfil their 
respective oblig ations.  
17. Negotiation of warehouse receipt not impaired by fraud, mistake or duress .—The validity of 
the negotiation of a receipt i s not impaired by the fact that — 
(a) the negotiation was a breach of duty on the part of the person making the negotiation;  or 
(b) the owner of the receipt was induced by fraud, mistake or duress to entrust the possession or 
custody of the receipt to that person, if the person to whom the receipt was negotiated or a person to 
whom the receipt was subsequently negotiated, paid value for it without knowing of the breach of 
duty, fraud, mistake or duress.  
18. Subsequent negotiation of warehouse receipts .—If a person having sold, mortgaged or pledged 
goods that are in the custody of a warehouseman and for which a negotiable receipt  has been issued, 
continues in possession of the negotiable receipt, the subsequent negotiation of it by that person under any 
sale or other disposition of the goods to any person receiving the receipt in good faith, for valuable 
consideration and without notice of the previous sale, mortgage or pledge, has the same effect as if a 
previous purchaser, mortgagee or pledgee of the goods, as the case may be, had expressly authorised the 
subsequent negotiation.  
19. Delivery of goods to be made after due charges are paid .—When a negotiable warehouse 
receipt has been issued in respect of any goods, the warehouseman shall not deliver the goods to the 
depositor or endorsee, until the due charges are paid to the custodian from the date of initial deposit till 
delivery  is made and the warehouse receipt is surrendered for cancellation.  
20. Transfer of non -negotiable receipts .—(1) A non -negotiable warehouse receipt may be 
transferred by the holder by delivery to a purchaser or don ee of the goods in writing executed by the  
holder.  
(2) A person to whom the goods covered by a non -negotiable warehouse receipt is transferred 
acquires— 
(a) the title of the transferor to the goods; and  
(b) the right to deposit with the warehouseman the receipt or duplicate thereof or to give notice in 
writing to the warehouseman of the transfer.  
(3) The transferee shall acquire the benefit of the obligation of the warehouseman to hold goods in 
storage for him a ccording to the terms of the receipt upon deposit of the transfer of the goods and on 
giving notice in writing of the transfer and upon the warehouseman having a reasonable opportunity of 
verifying the transfer.  
21. Conclusiveness of negotiable warehouse r eceipt .—In the hands of a holder who has purchased 
a negotiable warehouse receipt for valuable consideration, it shall be conclusive evidence of the goods 
described in it as against the warehouseman or any person claiming through him.  
22. Presumption in ce rtain cases .—In a dispute between an endorser of a negotiable warehouse 
receipt and his endorsee unless it is proved otherwise, it shall be presumed that — 
(a) the endorsement has been made voluntarily;  
(b) the endorsement has been made for full consideration;  11 
 (c) the endorser had full legal title in the goods represented by the receipt; and  
(d) the endorsement has extinguished all the rights, title and interest of the endorser in the goods.  
23. Issue of duplica te receipt .—(1) No warehouseman shall issue a warehouse receipt without 
actually receiving the goods of the quantity, quality or grade and other particulars as may be mentioned in 
the receipt.  
(2) No warehouseman shall issue more than one receipt for the s ame goods deposited by any person:  
Provided that in case of a loss or destruction, a duplicate receipt may be issued in such manner as may 
be specified by the Authority by regulations.  
(3) If a warehouseman fails to comply with the provisions of sub -sectio n (2), he would be liable for 
all such damages caused by the failure to any person who has transacted on such receipt for valuable 
consideration, believing it to be an original, even though the transaction is after the delivery of the goods 
by the warehous eman to the holder of the original receipt.  
(4) A receipt on the face of which the word “duplicate” is plainly marked is a representation and 
warranty by the warehouseman that it is an accurate copy of a receipt properly issued and uncancelled on 
the date of issue of the duplicate warehouse receipt.  
CHAPTER V  
THE WAREHOUSING DEVELOPMENT AND  REGULATORY AUTHORITY  
24. Establishment and incorporation of Authority .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify in this beh alf, there shall be constituted an authority to be 
called the Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority to exercise the powers conferred on, and 
to perform the functions assigned to it by or under this Act.  
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporat e by the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and a 
common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, 
both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.  
(3) The head office of the Authority shall be at New Delhi and the Authority may, with the previous 
approval of the Central Government, establish offices at other places in India.  
25. Composition of Authority .—The Authority shall consist of — 
(a) a Chairperson;  and 
(b) not more than two other members,  
to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst persons of ability, integrity and standing who 
have wide knowledge and experience in inventory management, insurance, preservation, quality control, 
agricultur e banking, finance, economics, law or administration.  
26. Tenure of office of Chairperson and other members .—(1) The Chairperson and every other 
member shall hold office for a term not exceeding five years from the date on which he enters upon his 
office a nd shall be eligible for reappointment:  
Provided that no person shall hold office as the Chairperson or other member after he has attained the 
age of sixty -five years.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a member may — 
(a) relinquish his office by giving in writing to the Central Government notice of not less than 
three months; or  
(b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of section 27.  
27. Removal from office .—(1) The Central Government may re move from office an y member 
who— 
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudged as an insolvent; or  12 
 (b) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a member; or  
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves 
moral turpi tude; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
a member; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuation in office detrimental to the public 
interest.  
(2) No such member shall be removed under clause ( d) or clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) unless he has 
been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
28. Salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of Chairperson and other members .—
Subject to the rules as may be made in this behalf, the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms 
and conditions of service of — 
(a) the Chairperson shall be the same as that of a Secretary to the Government of India;  
(b) the other members of the Authority shall be th e same as that of Joint Secretaries to the 
Government of India.  
29. Bar on future employment of members .—The Chairperson and the other members shall not, for 
a period of two years from the date on which they cease to hold office as such, except with the pr evious 
approval of the Central Government, accept any employment in any concern in the warehousing sector.  
30. Chairperson to be the chief executive of Authority .—The Chairperson shall be the chief 
executive of the Authority.  
31. Meetings of Authority .—(1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe 
such rules of procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at such 
meetings) as may be determined by regulations.  
(2) The Chairperson, or if, for any reason he is unable to attend a meeting of the Authority, any other 
member chosen by the members present from amongst themselves at the meeting shall preside at the 
meeting.  
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be d ecided by a majority 
of votes by the members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson, or 
the person presiding shall have a second or casting vote.  
32. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Authority .—No act  or proceeding of the 
Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Authority; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Authority; or  
(c) any  irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of the case.  
33. Officers and employees of Authority .—(1) The Authority may appoint officers and such other 
employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its func tion under this Act.  
(2) The terms and conditions of service of officers and other employees of the Authority appointed 
under sub -section ( 1) shall be governed by regulations made under this Act.  
34. Warehousing Advisory Committee .—(1) The Authority may, b y notification, constitute a 
Committee to be known as the Warehousing Advisory Committee to advise the Authority on matters 
relating to the making of regulations under section 51 and make recommendations for effective 
implementation of the provisions of th is Act.  
(2) The Warehousing Advisory Committee shall consist of not more than fifteen members excluding 
the members of the Authority to represent the interests of commerce, industry, engineering, agriculture, 
consumers, organisations engaged in warehousing , quality control, preservation and research bodies.  13 
 (3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Warehousing Advisory Committee may 
advise the Authority on such other matters as may be referred to it by the Authority.  
CHAPTER VI  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF AUTHORITY  
35. Powers and functions of Authority .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and any other law 
for the time being in force, the Authority shall have the duty to regulate and ensure implementation of the 
provisions of this Act  and promote orderly growth of the warehousing business.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the powers and functions of the 
Authority shall include the following, namely: — 
(a) to issue to the applicants fulfilling the requirements for warehousemen a certificate of 
registration in respect of warehouses, or renew, modify, withdraw, suspend or cancel such 
registration;  
(b) to regulate the registration and functioning of accreditation  agency, renew, modify, withdraw, 
suspend or cancel such registration, and specify the code of conduct for officials of accreditation 
agencies for accreditation of the warehouses;  
(c) to specify the qualifications, code of conduct and practical training fo r warehousemen and 
staff engaged in warehousing business;  
(d) to regulate the process of pledge, creation of charges and enforcement thereof in respect of 
goods deposited with the warehouse;  
(e) to promote efficiency in conduct of warehouse business;  
(f) to make regulations laying down the standards for approval of certifying agencies for grading 
of goods;  
(g) to promote professional organisation s connected with the warehousing business;  
(h) to determine the rate of, and levy, the fees and other charges fo r carrying out the provisions of 
this Act;  
(i) to call for information from, undertaking inspection of, conducting enquiries and investigation  
including audit of the warehouses, accreditation agencies and other organisation s connected with the  
warehousing business;  
(j) to regulate the rates, advantages, terms and conditions that may be offered by warehousemen 
in respect of warehousing business;  
(k) to specify, by regulations, the form and manner in which books of account shall be maintained 
and statement of  accounts shall be rendered by warehousemen;  
(l) to maintain a panel of arbitrators and to nominate arbitrators from such panel in disputes 
between warehouses and warehouse receipt holders;  
(m) to regulate and develop electronic system of holding and trans fer of credit balances of 
fungible goods deposited in the warehouses;  
(n) to determine the minimum percentage of space to be kept reserved for storage of agricultural 
commodities in a registered warehouse;  
(o) to specify the duties and responsibilities of the warehouseman;  
(p) to exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be prescribed.  
  14 
 CHAPTER VII  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
36. Grants by Central Government .—The Central Government may, a fter due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Authority grants of such sums of money as the 
Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.  
37. Constitution of fund .—(1) There shall be constituted a fund to be called the Warehousing 
Development and Regulatory Authority Fund and there shall be credited thereto — 
(a) all Central Government grants, fees and charges received by the Authority;  
(b) all sums received by the Authority from such other source as  may be decided upon by the 
Central Government;  
(c) all sums realised by way of penalties under this Act.  
(2) The fund shall be applied for meeting — 
(a) the salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the members, officers and other employees 
of the Aut hority;  
(b) the other expenses of the Authority in connection with the discharge of its functions and for 
the purposes of this Act.  
38. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual st atement of accounts in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India  at 
such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor -General.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any other person appointed by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority shall have the same rights, privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General generally has in 
connection with the audit of the Gover nment accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand 
the production of books of account, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect 
any of the offices of the Authority.  
(4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by th e Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each 
Hous e of Parliament.  
39. Furnishing of returns, Annual Report, etc., to Central Government .—(1) The Authority shall 
furnish to the Central Government at such time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed, or as 
the Central Government may direct to furn ish such returns, statements and other particulars in regard to 
any proposed or existing programme for the promotion and development of the warehousing industry as 
the Central Government may, from time to time, require.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisi ons of sub -section ( 1), the Authority shall, within nine months 
after the close of each financial year, submit to the Central Government an Annual Report giving a true 
and full account of its activities including the activities for promotion and developmen t of the 
warehousing business during the previous financial year.  
(3) Copies of the reports received under sub -section ( 2) shall be laid, as soon as may be after they are 
received, before each House of Parliament.  
  15 
 CHAPTER VIII  
POWERS OF CENTRAL GOVERNMEN T 
40. Powers of Central Government to issue directions .—(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing 
provisions of this Act, the Authority shall, in exercise of its powers and performance of its functions 
under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy, other than those relating to technical 
and administrative matters, as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time:  
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views 
before any direction is given under this sub -section.  
(2) The decision of the Central Government, whether a question is one of policy or not, shall be final.  
41. Power of Central Government to supersede Authority .—(1) If, at any time, the Central 
Government is  of the opinion — 
(a) that, on account of circumstances beyond the control of the Authority, it is unable to discharge 
the functions or perform the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or  
(b) that the Authority has persistently defaulted in complying with any direction given by the 
Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions or performance of the duties 
imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act and as a result of such default the financial 
position of the Authority or the administration of the Authority has suffered; or  
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest so to do, the Central 
Government may, by notification and for reasons to be specified therein, sup ersede the Authority for 
such period not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification and nominate a person 
to look after the functions of the Authority:  
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central Government shall give  a 
reasonable opportunity to the Authority to make representations against the proposed supersession 
and shall consider the representation, if any, of the Authority.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section  (1) superseding the authority ,— 
(a) the Chairperson and other members shall, as from the date of supersession, be deemed to have 
vacated their offices;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be 
exercised or discharged by or on behal f of the Authority shall, until the Authority is reconstituted 
under sub -section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by the person nominated by the Central 
Government under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1); 
(c) all properties owned or controlled by the Authority  shall, until the Authority is reconstituted 
under sub -section ( 3), vest in the Central Government.  
(3) On or before the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under 
sub-section ( 1), the Central Government shall recon stitute the Authority by a fresh appointment of its 
Chairperson and other members and in such case any person who had vacated his office under clause ( a) 
of sub -section ( 2) shall not be deemed to be disqualified for reappointment.  
(4) The Central Governmen t shall cause a copy of the notification issued under sub -section ( 1) and a 
full report of any action to be laid before each House of Parliament at the earliest.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law or in any contract or memorandum or articles  of 
association, on the removal of a person, from office under this section, that person shall not be entitled to 
claim any compensation for the loss or termination of office.  
CHAPTER IX  
APPEALS  
42. Appeals to Appellate Authority .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Authority made 
under this Act, or any rules or the regulations made thereunder may prefer an appeal to such person or 16 
 authority appointed by the Central Government (hereafter referred to as the Appellate Authority)  within 
sixty days from the date of such order:  
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the said period of sixty days but not 
beyond a total period of ninety days if the appellant satisfies the Appellate Authority that he had sufficient  
cause for not preferring the appeal within the said period.  
(2) Every appeal made under this section shall be made in such form and manner and shall be 
accompanied by a copy of the order appealed against and by such fees as may be prescribed.  
(3) The proc edure for disposing of an appeal shal l be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that before disposing of an appeal, the appellant shall be given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard.  
(4) An appeal filed before the Appellate Authority shall be heard and di sposed of as expeditiously as 
possible and endeavour shall be made to finally dispose of the appeal within a period of ninety days from 
the date of its filing.  
CHAPTER X  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
43. Offences and penalties .—(1) Any warehouseman knowingly issu ing a negotiable warehouse 
receipt without taking the actual physical delivery of the goods in his warehouse or a warehouseman or an 
agent or servant of the warehouseman who issues a warehouse receipt without reasonably satisfying 
himself that the goods fo r which such warehouse receipt is issued have actually been received or the 
number, weight or grade of the goods corresponds to the number, weight or grade specified in the 
warehouse receipt or the goods are under his actual control at the time of issuing such warehouse receipt, 
commits an offence and shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
years or with fine which may extend to four times the value of the goods or with both.  
(2) A warehouseman or an agent or servant of th e warehouseman, who knowingly issues a duplicate 
negotiable warehouse receipt without substantially following the procedure for the issue of a duplicate 
warehouse receipt, commits an offence and shall be punishable for such offence with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.  
(3) A warehouseman or an agent or servant of the warehouseman, who, knowingly that the negotiable 
warehouse receipt in respect of such goods is outstandin g and is uncancelled, delivers the goods without 
obtaining possession of such negotiable warehouse receipt at or before the time of such delivery and 
thereby causes unlawful loss or gain to any person, commits an offence and shall be punishable for such 
an offence by imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to 
one lakh rupees, or with both.  
(4) A warehouseman who fails, on surrender of a negotiable warehouse receipt by the depositor or 
endorsee and payment of all  his lawful charges and cancellation of encumbrances endorsed on the receipt, 
within the declared shelf -life of the goods, as mentioned therein to deliver the goods represented by the 
receipt commits an offence and shall be punishable for such offence with  imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to three times the value of the goods or with 
both.  
(5) Any depositor, who declared as the value of the goods delivered by him for storage with a 
warehouseman an amount which he does not believe to be the proper value, commits an offence and shall 
be punishable for such an offence with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.  
44. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Chapter is committed by a company, 
every person, who at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of the company or was 
responsible for making the deposit, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and 
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordin gly: 17 
 Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to punishment 
if he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence 
to prevent such contravention.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Chapter has 
been committed by a company and it is proved that such an offence has been committed with the consent 
or connivance of any director, manager, secretary or other  officer of the company, such director, manager, 
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished  accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
45. Cognizance of offences by courts .—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence 
punishable under this Act, save on a complaint made by the Authority or by any officer authorised in 
writing in this behalf by the authority.  
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
CHAPTER XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
46. Chairperson, members, officers and other employees of Authority to be public servants .—
The Chairperson, members, officers and other employees of Authority and Appellate Authority shall be 
deemed, when  acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public 
servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
47. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or any officer of the Central Government or any member, officer or 
other employee of the Authority for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under 
this Act or the rules or regulation s made there under:  
Provided that nothing in this Act shall exempt any person any suit or other proceedings which might, 
apart from this Act, be brought against him.  
48. Delegation of powers .—The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, deleg ate to 
the Chairperson or any other member or officer of the Authority subject to such conditions, if any, as may 
be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions (excluding the power to make regulations under 
section 51) under this Act as it ma y deem necessary.  
49. Exemption from tax on wealth and income .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Wealth -tax Act, 1957  (27 of 1957) , the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) or any other enactment for the 
time being in force relating to tax on wealth, income, profits or gains, the Authority shall not be liable to 
pay wealth -tax, income -tax or any other tax in respect of their wealth, income, profits or gains derived.  
50. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notif ication, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the form and manner in which an  application for obtaining a certificate of registration for 
commencing or carrying on the business of warehousing issuing negotiable warehouse receipts may 
be made and the fees which shall accompany such application under sub -section ( 2) of section 4;  
(b) the form in which a certificate for registration of warehouses may be issued under              
sub-section ( 3) of section 4;  18 
 (c) the financial, managerial and other eligibility criteria and competence which an applicant for 
registration of warehouses sha ll satisfy under sub -section ( 4) of section 4;  
(d) the qualification and other requirements which a person applying for functioning as an 
accreditation agency shall fulfill under sub -section ( 2) of section 5;  
(e) the form and manner in which an application for registration as an accreditation agency may 
be made and the fees which shall accompany such application under sub -section ( 3) of section 5;  
(f) the form of certificate of registration of accreditation agency und er sub -section ( 4) of     
section 5;  
(g) the salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson and other members under section 28;  
(h) such other powers that may be exercised by the Authority under clause ( p) of sub -section ( 2) 
of section 35;  
(i) the form and manner of maintenance of annual statement of accounts to be maintained by the 
Authority under sub -section ( 1) of section 38;  
(j) the form and manner in which and the time within which returns and stateme nts and 
particulars are to be furnished by the Authority to the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 39;  
(k) the form and the manner in which an appeal may be made to the Appellate Authority and the 
fee which shall accompany such appeal unde r sub -section ( 2) of section 42;  
(l) the procedure to be followed by the Appellate Authority in disposing of  an appeal under            
sub-section ( 3) of section 42;  
(m) any  other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which 
provision is to be or may be made by rules.  
51. Power of Authority to make regulations .—(1) The Authority may, with the previous approval 
of the Central Government, and in  consultation with the Warehousing Advisory Committee, by 
notification, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the 
provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foreg oing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the matters regulating the authorities of accreditation agencies under sub -section ( 2) of  
section 3;  
(b) the form and manner and the period for which a warehous eman shall keep the records and 
accounts of the warehousing business under sub -section ( 2) of section 8;  
(c) the manner of disposal of goods or any part thereof and the keeping of sale proceeds in an 
escrow account by the warehouseman under sub -section ( 7) of section 9;  
(d) the mode of sale under sub -section ( 10) of section 10;  
(e) the manner of issuance of duplicate warehouse receipt under the proviso to sub -section ( 2) of 
section 23;  
(f) the time and places of meetings of the Authority and the procedure t o be followed at such 
meetings including the quorum necessary for the transaction of business under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 31;  
(g) the terms and conditions of service of officers and other employees of the Authority under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 33;  19 
 (h) the registration and functioning of accreditation agencies, renewal, modification, withdrawal, 
suspension or cancellation of such registration and the code of conduct for officials of accreditation 
agencies for accreditation of the warehouses under cl ause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 35;  
(i) the standards for approval of certifying agencies for grading of goods under clause ( f) of     
sub-section ( 2) of section 35;  
(j) the rate of fees and other charges to be levied for carrying out the provisions  of this Act under 
clause ( h) of sub -section ( 2) of section 35;  
(k) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations or in respect of 
which provision is to be or may be made by regulations.  
52. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule made by the Central 
Government and every regulation made by the Authority under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or r egulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should 
not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall  be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.  
53. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.  
54. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from th e 
date of commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
55. Amendment of Act 2 of 1899 .—After section 8B of the Stamp Act, 1899, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely: — 
“8C. Negotiable warehouse receipts not liable to stamp duty .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act, negotiable warehouse receipts shall not be liable to stamp duty. ” 
