--------------------------The Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008--------------------------
1 
 THE AIRPORTS ECONOMIC REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF INDIA ACT, 2008  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, commencement and application.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
THE AIRPORTS  ECONOMIC  REGULATORY  AUTHORITY  
3. Establishment of Authority.  
4. Composition of Authority.  
5. Constitution of Selection Committee to recommend Members.  
6. Terms of office and other conditions of service, etc., of Chairperson and Members.  
7. Power of Chairperson.  
8. Removal and suspension of Members.  
9. Appointment of Secretary, experts, professionals and officers and other employees of Authority.  
10. Meetings.  
11. Authentication.  
12. Vacancies , etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Authority.  
 
CHAPTER III  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE AUTHORITY  
13. Functions of Authority . 
14. Powers of Authority to call for information, conduct investigations, etc.  
15. Power of Authority to issue certain directions.  
16. Power of seizure.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
APPELLATE  TRIBUNAL  
17. Appellate Tribunal.  
18. Application for settlement of disputes and appeals to Appellate  Tribunal.  
19. [Omitted .] 
20. [Omitted .] 
21. [Omitted .] 
22. [Omitted .] 
 2 
  
SECTIONS  
23. [Omitted .] 
24. [Omitted .] 
25. [Omitted .] 
26. [Omitted .] 
27. [Omitted .] 
28. Civil court not to have jurisdiction.  
29. Procedure and powers of Appellate Tribunal.  
30. Right to legal representation.  
31. Appeal to Supreme Cour t. 
32. Orders passed by Appellate Tribunal to be executable as a decree.  
 
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
33. Budget . 
34. Grants by Central Government.  
35. Annual statement of accounts.  
36. Furnishing of returns, etc., to Central Government.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
37. Penalty for wilful failure to comply with orders of Appellate Tribunal.  
38. Punishment for non -compliance of orders and directions under this Act.  
39. Punishment for non -compliance with order of Authority or Appellate Tribunal.  
40. Offences by companies.  
41. Offences by Government Departments.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
42. Directions by Central Government.  
43. Members, officers and employees of Authority to be public servants.  
44. Bar of jurisdiction.  
45. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
46. Exemption from tax on wealth an d income.  
47. Cognizance of offences . 
48. Delegation of powers.  
49. Power of Central Government to supersede Authority.  
50. Application of other laws not barred.  
51. Power to make rules.  
52. Power to make regulations.   3 
 SECTIONS  
53. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
54. Amendment of certain enactments.  
55. Power to remove difficulties.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
  4 
 THE AIRPORTS ECONOMIC REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF INDIA ACT, 2008  
ACT NO. 27 OF 2008  
[5th December , 2008.]  
An Act to provide for the establishment of an Airports Economic Regulatory Authority to 
regulate tariff and other charges for the aeronautical services rendered at airports and to 
monitor performance standards of airports 1* * *  and for matters connected t herewith or 
incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -ninth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, commencement and application .—(1) This Act may be called the Airports Economic  
Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
(3) It applies to — 
(a) all airports whereat air transport services are operated or are intended to be operated, other 
than airports and airfields belonging to or subject to the control of the Armed Forces or paramilitary 
Forces of the Union;  
(b) all private airports and leased airports;  
(c) all civil enclaves;  
(d) all major airports.  
2. Definitions .—In thi s Act, unless the context ot herwise requires, — 
(a) "aeronautical serv ice" means any service provided — 
(i) for navigation, surveillance and supportive communication thereto for air traffic 
management;  
(ii) for the landing, housing or parking of an aircraft or any other ground facility offered in 
connection with aircraft operations at an airport;  
(iii) for ground safety services at an airport;  
(iv) for ground handling services relating to aircraft, passengers an d cargo at an airport;  
(v) for the cargo facility at an airport;  
(vi) for supplying fuel to the aircraft at an airport; and  
(vii) for  a stake -holder at an airport, for which the charges, in the opinion of the Central 
Government for the reasons to be recorded in writing, may be determined by the Authority;  
(b) "airport" means a landing and taking off area for aircrafts, usually with runw ays and aircraft 
maintenance and passenger facilities and includes an aerodrome as defined in clause ( 2) of section 2 
of the Aircraft Act, 1934  (22 of 1934) ; 
(c) "airport user" means any person availing of passenger or cargo facilities at an airport;  
                                                           
1.  The words “and also to establish Appellate Tribunal to adjudicate disputes and dispose of appeals” o mitted by Act 7 of 2017,   
s. 170 (w.e.f. 26-5-2017) . 
2. 1st January, 2009  (except Chapters III and IV) , vide notification No. S.O. 894(E), dated 30th December , 2008, see Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, Part II, s ec. 3 (ii). 5 
 1[(d) "Appellate Tribunal" means the Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribu nal 
referred to in section 17;]  
 (e) "Authority" means the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority established under                   
sub-section ( 1) of section 3;  
(f) "civil enclave" means an area, if any, allotted at an airport belonging to any armed force of the 
Union, for use by persons availing of any air transport services from such airport or for the handling 
of baggage or cargo by such service, and includes land compris ing of any building and structure on 
such area;  
(g) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Authority appointed under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 4;  
(h) "leased airport" means an airport in respect of which a lease has been made under section 12A 
of the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994  (55 of 1994) ; 
(i) "major airport" means any airport which has, or is designated to have, annual passenger 
throughput in excess of one and a half million or any other airport as the Central Government may, by 
notificati on, specify as such;  
(j) "Member" means a Member of the Authority and includes the Chairperson;  
(k) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(l) "private airport" has the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( nn) of section 2 of the 
Airports Authority of India Act, 1994  (55 of 1994) ; 
(m) "regulations" means regulations made by the Authority under this Act;  
(n) "service provider" means any person who provides aeronautical services and is eligible to levy 
and charge user development fee s from the embarking passengers at any airport and includes the 
authority which manages the airport;  
(o) "stake -holder" includes a licensee of an airport, airlines operating thereat, a person who 
provides aeronautical services, and any association of individuals, which in the opinion of the 
Authority, represents the passenger or cargo facility users;  
(p) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Airports Authority 
of India Act, 1994  (55 of 1994) shall have the same meani ngs respectively assigned to them in that 
Act. 
CHAPTER II  
THE AIRPORT S ECONOMIC  REGULATORY  AUTHORITY  
3. Establishment of Authority .—(1) The Central Government shall, within three months from the 
date of commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish an Authority, to be 
known as the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority, to exercise the powers conferred on, and the 
functions assigned to it, by or under this Act.  
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name afores aid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to 
contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.  
(3) The head office of the Authority shall be at such place as  the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify.  
4. Composition of Authorit y.—(1) The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and two other 
Members to be appointed by the Central Government:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 170 , for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  6 
 Provided that whenever the Authori ty is deciding a matter involving a civil enclave in a defence 
airfield, there shall be an additional Member, not below the rank of Additional Secretary to the 
Government of India, to be nominated by the Ministry of Defence.  
(2) The Chairperson and Members  of the Authority shall be appointed by the Central Government 
from amongst persons of ability and integrity having adequate knowledge of, and professional experience 
in, aviation, economics, law, commerce or consumer affairs:  
Provided that a person who i s or has been in the service of Government shall not be appointed as a 
Member unless such person has held the post of Secretary or Additional Secretary to the Government of 
India or any equivalent post in the Central or State Government for a total period of not less than three 
years.  
(3) The Chairperson and other Members shall be whole -time Members.  
(4) The Chairperson or other Members shall not hold any other office.  
(5) The Chairperson shall be the Chief Executive of the Authority.  
(6) The Chairperson and other Members of the Authority shall be appointed by the Central 
Government on the recommendation of Selection Committee referred to in section 5.  
5. Constitution of Selection  Committee to recommend Members .—(1) The Central Government 
shall, for the pu rpose of sub -section ( 6) of section 4 constitute a Selection Committee consi sting of the 
following, namely: — 
(a) Cabinet Secretary  —Chairman;  
(b) Secretary, in the Ministry of Civil Aviation  —Member;  
(c) Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs in the Ministry of   
Law and Justice   
—Member;  
(d) Secretary, in the Ministry of Defence  —Member;  
(e) One expert to be nominated by the Ministry of Civil Aviation  —Member . 
(2) The Central Government shall within one month from the date of occurrence of any vacancy by 
reason of death, resignation or removal of the Chairperson or a Member and six months before the 
superannuation or end of tenure of the Chairperson or any Member, make a reference to the Selection 
Committee for filling up of the vacancy.  
(3) The  Selection Committee shall finalise the selection of the Chairperson and Members within one 
month from the date on which the reference is made to it.  
(4) The Selection Committee shall recommend a panel of two names for every vacancy referred to it.  
(5) Bef ore recommending any person for appointment as a Chairperson or other Member of the 
Authority, the Selection Committee shall satisfy itself that such person does not have any financial or 
other interest which is likely to affect prejudicially his functions  as a Member.  
 (6) No appointment of the Chairperson or other Member shall be invalid merely by reason of any 
vacancy in the Selection Committee.  
6. Terms of office and other con ditions of service, etc., of Chairperson and Members .—(1) The 
Chairperson and other Members, shall hold office, as such, for a term of five years from the date on which 
he enters upon his office, but shall not be eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that no Chairperson or other Member shall hold of fice, as such, after he attains  — 
(a) in the case of the Chairperson, the age of sixty -five years; and  
(b) in the case of any other Member, the age of sixty -two years.  7 
 Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, a Member may be appointed as Chairperson of 
the Authority, but a person  who has been the Chairperson shall not be eligible for appointment as a 
Member.  
(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
Chairperson and other Members shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) The salar y, allowances and other conditions of service of the Chairperson and other Members 
shall not be varied to their disadvantage after their appointment.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the  Chairperson or any Member may, — 
(a) relinquish his office by giving, in writing to the Central Government, a notice of not less than 
three months; or  
(b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of section 8.  
(5) The Chairperson or any Member ceasing  to hold office, as su ch, shall— 
(a) be ineligible for further employment under the Central Government or any State Government 
for a period of two years from the date he ceases to hold such office;  
(b) not accept any commercial employment including private for a period of two y ears from the 
date he ceases to hold such office; or  
(c) not represent any person before the Authority in any other manner.  
Explanation .—For th e purposes of this sub -section,— 
(a) "employment  under the Central Government or State Government" includes employment 
under any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Central 
Government or State Government or under any corporation or society owned or controll ed by the 
Government;  
(b) "commercial employment" means employment in any capacity under, or agency of, a person 
engaged in trading, commercial, industrial or financial business in any field and includes also a 
director of a company or partner of a firm an d it also includes setting up practice either independently 
or as partner of a firm or as an adviser or a consultant.  
7. Power of Chairperson .—The Chairperson shall have powers of general superintendence and 
directions in the conduct of the affairs of the Authority and he shall, in addition to presiding over the 
meetings of the Authority, exercise and discharge such powers and functions of the Authority and shall 
discharge such other powers and functions as may be prescribed.  
8. Removal and suspension of Me mbers .—(1) The Central Government may, by order, remove 
from office the Chairperson or other Member, if the Chairperson or such other Member, as the case may 
be,— 
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) has  been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude; or  
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest, as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
a Member; or  
(e) has so abused his position, as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest; or  
(f) has engaged at any time during his term of office in any other employment.  
(2) The Chairperson or any other Member shall not be removed from his office except by an order of 
the Central Government on the ground of his proved misbehavior or incapacity after the Central 8 
 Government, has, on an inquiry, held in accordance with the proc edure prescribed in this behalf by the 
Central Government, come to the conclusion that the Member ought on any such ground to be removed.  
(3) The Central Government may suspend any Member in respect of whom an inquiry under  
sub-section ( 2) is being initia ted or pending until the Central Government has passed an order on receipt 
of the report of the inquiry.  
9. Appointment of Secretary, experts, professionals and officers a nd other employees of 
Authority .—(1) The Central Government may appoint a Secretary to discharge his functions under this 
Act. 
(2) The Authority may appoint such officers and other employees as it considers necessary for the 
efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.  
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and  conditions of service of the Secretary 
and officers and other employees of the Authority and the number of such officers and other employees 
shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(4) The Authority may engage, in accordance with the procedure specified by re gulations such 
number of experts and professionals of integrity and outstanding ability, who have special knowledge of, 
and experience in, economics, law, business or such other disciplines related to aviation as it deems 
necessary to assist the Authority in the discharge of its functions under this Act.  
10. Meetings .—(1) The Authority shall meet at such places and times and shall observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at its meetings),  
as may be determined by regulations.  
(2) The Chairperson shall preside at the meeting of the Authority and if for any reason the 
Chairperson is unable to attend a meeting of the Authority, any other Member chosen by the members 
present from amongst themselves at the meeting shall preside at the meeting.  
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided by a majority 
of votes of the Members present and voting and, in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson  or 
the Member presiding shall have the right to exercise a second or casting vote.  
(4) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 1), every Member shall have one vote.  
11. Authentication .—All orders and decisions of the Authority shall be authenticated by  signatures 
of the Secretary or any other officer of the Authority, duly authorised by the Authority in this behalf.  
12. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Authority .—No act or proceedings of the 
Authority shall  be invalid merely by reason o f — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in, the constitution of the Authority; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the Authority; or  
(c) any  irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of the case.  
CHAPTER III  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE AUTHORITY  
13. Functions of Authorit y.—(1) The Authority shall perform the following functions in res pect of 
major airports, namely :— 
(a) to determine the tariff for the aeronautical ser vices taking into consideration — 
(i) the capital expenditure incurred and timely investment in improvement of airport facilities;  
(ii) the service provided, its quality and other relevant factors;  
(iii) the cost for improving efficiency;  
(iv) economic and viable operation of major airports;  
(v) revenue received from services other than the aeronautical services;  9 
 (vi) the concession offered by the Central Government in any agreement or memorandum of 
understanding or otherwise;  
(vii) any other factor which may be relevant for the purposes of this Act:  
 Provided that different tariff structures may be determined for differen t airports having 
regard to all or any of the above considerations specifi ed at sub -clauses ( i) to ( vii); 
(b) to determine the amount of the development fees in respect of major airports;  
(c) to determine the amount of the passengers service fee levied und er rule 88 of the Aircraft 
Rules, 1937 made under the Aircraft Act, 1934  (22 of 1934) ; 
(d) to monitor the set performance standards relating to quality, continuity and reliability of 
service as may be specified by the Central Government or any authority a uthorised by it in this 
behalf;  
(e) to call for such information as may be necessary to determine the tariff under clause ( a); 
(f) to perform such other functions relating to tariff, as may be entrusted to it by the Central 
Government or as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this  Act. 
(2) The Authority shall determine the tariff once in five years and may if so considered a ppropriate 
and in public interest, amend, from time to time during the said period of  five years, the tariff so 
determined.  
(3) While discharging its functions under sub -section ( 1) the Authority shall not act against the 
interest of the sovereignty and in tegrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign 
States, public order, decency or morality.  
(4) The Authority shall ensure transparency while exercising its powers and dischar ging its functions, 
inter alia ,— 
(a) by holding due c onsultations with all stake -holders with the airport;  
(b) by allowing all stake -holders to make their submissions to the authority; and  
(c) by making all decisions of the authority fully documented and explained.  
14. Powers of Authority to call for information, conduct investigations, etc .—(1) Where the 
Authority considers it expedient so to  do, it may by order in writing — 
(a) call upon any service provider at any time to furnish in writing such information or 
explanation relating to its functions as  the Authority may require to access the performance of the 
service provider; or  
(b) appoint one or more persons to make an inquiry in relation to the affairs of any service 
provider; and  
(c) direct any of its officers or employees to inspect the books of account or other documents of 
any service provider.  
(2) Where any inquiry in relation to the affairs of a service provider has been u ndertaken under            
sub-section ( 1)— 
(a) every office of the Government department, if such service provider is a de partment of the 
Government; or  
(b) every director, manager, secretary or other officer, if such service provider is a company; or  
(c) every partner, manager, secretary or other officer, if such service provider is a firm; or  
(d) every  other person or body of persons who has had dealings in the course of business with any 
of the persons mentioned in clauses ( b) or ( c), 
shall be bound to produce before the Authority making the inquiry, all such books of account or other 
documents in his custody or power relating to, or having a bearing on the subject -matter of such inquiry 10 
 and also to furnish to the Authority with any such statement or information relating thereto, as the case 
may be, required of him, within  such time as may be specified.  
(3) Every service provider shall maintain such books of account or other documents as may be 
prescribed.  
(4) The Authority shall have the power to issue such directions to monitor the performance of the 
service providers as it may consider necessary for p roper functioning by service providers.  
15. Power of Authority to issue certain dir ections .—The Authority may, for the purpose of 
discharge of its functions under this Act, issue, from time to time to the service providers, such directions, 
as it may consi der necessary.  
16. Power of seizure .—The Authority or any other officer specially authorised by it in this behalf 
may enter any building or place where the Authority has reason to believe that any document relating to 
the subject matter of the inquiry may be found, and may seize any such document or take extracts or 
copies therefrom subject to the provisions of section 100 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973           
(2 of 1974)  in so far as they may be applicable.  
CHAPTER IV  
APPELLATE  TRIBUNAL  
17. 1[Appellate Tribunal] .— 2[The Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal established 
under section 14 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997  (24 of 1997)  shall, on and from 
the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Ac t, 2017  (7 of 2017) , be the Appellate 
Tribunal for the purposes of this Act and the said Appellate Tribunal shall exercise the jurisdiction, 
powers and authority confe rred on it by or under this Act ] to— 
(a) adjudicate any dispute — 
(i) between  two or more service providers;  
(ii) between a service provider and a group of consumer:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may, if considers appropriate, obtain the opinion of the 
Authority on any m atter relating to such dispute:  
Provided further that n othing in this clause sh all apply in respect of matters — 
(i) relating to the monopolistic trade practice, restrictive trade practice and unfair trade 
practice which are subject to the jurisdiction of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade 
Practices Commission established under sub -section ( 1) of section 5 of the Monopolies and 
Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969  (54 of 1969) ; 
(ii) relating to the complaint of an individual consumer maintainable before a Consumer 
Disputes Redressal Forum or a Consum er Disputes Redressal Commission or the National 
Consumer Redressal Commission established under section 9 of the  Consumer Protection 
Act, 1986  (68 of 1986) ; 
(iii) which are within the purvie w of the Competition Act, 2002  (12 of 2003) ; 
(iv) relating  to an order of eviction which is appealable under section 28K of the Airport s 
Authority of India Act, 1994  (55 of 1994) . 
(b) hear and dispose of appeal against any direction, decision or order of the Authority under this 
Act. 
18. Application for settle ment of disputes an d appeals to Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Central 
Government or a State Government or a local authority or any person may make an application to the 
Appellate Tribunal for adjudication of any dispute as referred to in clause ( a) of section 17. 
                                                           
1. Subs.  by Act 7 of 2017, s. 170, for “ Establishment of Appellate Tribunal”  (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
2. Subs. by s. 170 , ibid., for certain  words (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  11 
 (2) The Central Government or a State Government or a local authority or any person aggrieved by 
any direction, decision or order made by the Authority may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal.  
(3) Every appeal under sub -section ( 2) shall be pref erred within a period of thirty days from the date 
on which a copy of the direction or order or decision made by the Authority is received by the Central 
Government or the State Government or the local authority or the aggrieved person and it shall be in s uch 
form, verified in such manner and be accompanied by  such fee as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain any appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for n ot filing it within that period.  
(4) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1) or an appeal under sub -section ( 2), the 
Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the dispute or the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such orders th ereon as it thinks fit.  
(5) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the parties to the dispute or 
the appeal and to the Authority, as the case may be.  
(6) The application made under sub -section ( 1) or the appeal preferred unde r sub -section ( 2) shall be 
dealt with by it as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the 
application or appeal finally within ninety days from the date of receipt of application  or appeal, as the 
case may be:  
Provided th at where any such application or appeal could not be disposed of within the said period of 
ninety days, the Appellate Tribunal shall record its reasons in writing for not disposing of the application 
or appeal within that period.  
(7) The Appellate Tribunal  may, for the purpose of examining the legality or propriety or correctness, 
of any dispute made in any application under sub -section ( 1), or of any direction or order or decision of 
the Authority referred to in the appeal preferred under sub -section ( 2), on its own motion or otherwise, 
call for the records relevant to disposing of such application or appeal and make such orders as it thinks 
fit. 
19. [Compos ition of Appellate Tribunal .] Omitted by  the Finance Act , 2017 (7 of 2017), s. 170 
(w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  
20. [Qualifications for appoint ment  of Chair person and Members .] Omitted by s. 170, ibid.  
(w.e.f. 26-5-2017) . 
21. [Term of office .] Omitted by s. 170, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017) . 
22. [Terms and conditions of service .] Omitted by s. 170, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017) . 
23. [Vacancies .] Omitted by s. 170, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017) . 
 24. [Removal and  resignation .] Omitted by s. 170, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017) . 
25. [Staff of Appellate Tribunal .] Omitted by s. 170, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017) . 
26. [Decision to be by majority .] Omitted by s. 170, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017) . 
27. [Members,  etc., to be public servants .] Omitted by s. 170, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017) . 
28. Civil court not to have j urisdiction .—No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit 
or proceeding in respect of any matter which the Appellate Tribunal is empowered by or under this Act to 
determine and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken 
or to be taken in pursuance of any power conf erred by or under this Act.  
29. Procedure and powers of Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound 
by the procedure laid down by the  Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , but shall be guided by the 
principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal shall 
have powers  to regulate its own procedure.  12 
 (2) The Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act, the 
same powers as are vested in a civil court under the  Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , while 
trying a suit, in respect of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and produc tion of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 o f the Indian Evidence Act, 1872                           
(1 of 1872) , requisitioning any public record or document or a copy of such record or document, from 
any office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  
(f) reviewing its decisions;  
(g) dismissing an application for default or deciding it, ex parte ; 
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any application f or default or any order passed by it,  
ex parte ; and  
(i) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(3) Every proceeding before the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding 
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code  
(45 of 1860)  and the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 
and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
30. R ight to legal representa tion.—The applicant or appellant may either appear in person or 
authorises one or more chartered accountants or company secretaries or cost accountants or legal 
practitioners or any of its officers to present his or its case before the Appellate Tribunal.  
Explanation .—For the  purposes of this section, — 
(a) "chartered accountant" means a chartered accountant as defined in clause ( b) of                    
sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949  (38 of 1949)  and who has 
obtained a certificate of practice under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(b) "company secretary" means a company secretary as defined in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980  (56 of 1980)  and who has obtained a certificate of 
practice under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(c) "cost accountant" means a cost accountant as defined in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 (23 of 1959) , and who has obtained a 
certificate of practice under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(d) "legal practitioner" means an advocate, vakil or an attorney of any High Court, and includes a 
pleader in practice.  
31. Appeal to Supreme Court .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908)  or in any other law, an appeal shall lie against any order, not being an 
interlocutory order, of the Appellate Tribunal to the Supreme Court on one or more of the grounds 
specified in section 100 of that Code.  
(2) No appeal shall lie against any decision or order made by the Appellate Tribunal with the consent 
of the parties.  
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of ninety days from the date of 
the deci sion or order appealed against:  
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of ninety 
days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal in 
time. 13 
 32. Orders passed by Appellate Tribunal to be executable as a decree .—(1) An order passed by 
the Appellate Tribunal under this Act shall be executable by the Appellate Tribunal as a decree of civil 
court, and for this purpose, the Appellate Tribunal shall have all the powers of a civil court.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Appellate Tribunal may transmit any 
order made by it to a civil court having local jurisdiction and such civil court shall execute the order as if 
it were a decree made by that court.  
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE , ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
33. Budget .—The Authority shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year as 
may be prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated rece ipts and expenditure 
of the Authority and forward the same to the Central Government, for information.  
34. Grants by Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Authority grants of such sums of money as are required 
to be paid for the salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and other Members and the 
administrative expenses, including the salaries and allowances and pension payable to or in respect of 
officers and  other employees of the Authority.  
35. Annual statement of accounts .— (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other 
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government in con sultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor - General of India 
at such interv als as may be specified by him.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any person appointed by him in connection with 
the audit of the accounts of the Authority under this Act shall have the same rights, privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit, as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India generally has, i n 
connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand 
the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect 
any of the offices of the Authority.  
(4) The accou nts of the Authority, as certified by Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and the Central Government sha ll cause the same to be laid before 
each House of Parliament.  
36. Furnishing of returns,  etc., to Central Government .—(1) The Authority shall furnish to the 
Central Government, at such time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed or as the Central  
Government may direct, such returns and statements and such particulars in regard to any matter under 
the jurisdiction of the Authority, as the Central Government m ay, from time to time, require.  
(2) The Authority shall prepare, once every year, in such f orm and at such time as may be prescribed, 
an annual report, giving a summary of its activities during the previous year and copies of the report shall 
be forwarded to the Central Government.  
(3) A copy of the report received under sub -section ( 2) shall be  laid by the Central Government, as 
soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER VI  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
37. Penalty for wilful failure to comply with orders of Appellate Tribunal .—If any person 
wilfully fails to comply with the order of the Appellate Tribunal, he shall be punishable with fine which 
may extend to one lakh rupees and in case of a second or subsequent offence with fine which may extend 
to two lakh rupees and in the case of continuing contravention with addi tional fine which may extend to 
two lakh rupees for every day during which such default continues.  14 
 38. Punishment for non -compliance of orders a nd directions under this Act .—Whoever fails to 
comply with any order or direction given under this Act, or contr avenes, or attempts to contravene or 
abets the contravention of the provisions of this Act or of any rules or regulations made thereunder shall 
be punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and in the case of a second or subsequent 
offence wi th fine which may extend to two lakh rupees and in the case of a continuing contravention with 
an additional fine which may extend to four thousand rupees for every day during which the default 
continues.  
39. Punishment for non -compliance with order of Aut hority or Appellate Tribunal .—If any 
person wilfully fails to comply with an order of the Authority or of the Appellate Tribunal, passed under 
Chapter IV, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and, in the case of a 
second or subsequent offence, with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees and in the case of a 
continuing failure, with an additional fine which may extend to four thousand rupees for every day during 
which such failure continues.  
40. Offences by companies .—(1) Wh ere an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to the company for the conduct of, the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be d eemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the of fence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company, and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall  also be deemed to be guilty 
of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section — 
(a) "company" means any body  corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) "director" means a whole -time director in the company and in relation to a firm, means a 
partner in the firm.  
41. Offenc es by Government Departments .—(1) Where an offence under thi s Act has been 
committed by any Department of Government or any of its undertakings, the Head of the Department or 
its undertakings shall be deemed to be guilty of an offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly unless he pr oves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he 
had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by  any Department of Government or its undertakings and it is proved that the offence has 
been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any 
officer, other than the Head of the Department, or its undertakin gs, such officer shall also be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
CHAPTER VI I 
MISCELLANEOUS  
42. Dire ctions by Central Government .—(1) The Central Government may, from time to time, 
issue to the Authority such directions as it may think necessary in the interest of the sovereignty and 
integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or 
morality.  15 
 (2) Without prejudice to the f oregoing provisions, the Authority shall, in exercise of its powers or the 
performance of its functions, be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central 
Government may give in w riting to it from time to time:  
Provided that the Authority s hall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views 
before any direction is given under this sub -section.  
(3) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not shall be final.  
43. Members, officers and employees of Aut hority to be public servants .—The Chairperson, 
Members, officers and other employees of the Authority shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to 
act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of            
section 21 of the Indian Pen al Code  (45 of 1860) . 
44. Bar of jurisdiction .—No civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the 
Authority is empowered by or under this Act to determine.  
45. Protection o f action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Central Government or the Authority or any Member, officer or other employees thereof 
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules and regulations 
made thereunder.  
46. Exemption f rom tax on wealth and income .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Wealth -tax Act, 1957 (27 of 1957) , the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) , or any other enactment for the 
time being in force relating to tax on wealth, income, profits or ga ins, the Authority shall not be liable to 
pay wealth -tax, income -tax or any other tax in respect of their wealth, income, profits or gains derived.  
47. Cognizance of offences .—No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this 
Act, except u pon a complaint in writing made by the Authority or by any officer of the Authority duly 
authorised by the Authority for this purpose.  
48. Delegation of powers .—The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to 
the Chairperson or any Member or officer of the Authority, subject to such conditions and limitations, if 
any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act (except the power to 
settle disputes and the power to make regulations), as it may dee m necessary.  
49. Power of Central Gover nment to supersede Authority .—(1) If, at any time, the Central 
Governmen t is of opinion — 
(a) that on account of a grave emergency, the Authority is unable to discharge the functions and 
duties imposed on it by or unde r the provisions of this Act; or  
(b) that the Authority has persistently made default in complying with any direction issued by the 
Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions and duties imposed on it by or 
under the provisions of this Act and as a result of which default, the financial position of the 
Authority or the administration of any airport, heliport, airstrip, civil enclave or aeronautical 
communicati on station has deteriorated; or  
(c) that circumstances exist which rend er it necessary in the public interest so to do, the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, supersede the Authority for such period, not 
exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification:  
Provided that before issuing a  notification under this sub -section for the reasons mentioned in clause 
(b), the Central Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Authority to show cause as to why 
it should not be superseded and shall consider the explanations and objections , if any, of the Authority.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section ( 1) superseding the Author ity,— 
(a) all the Members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be 
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Authority, shall until the Authority is re -constituted 16 
 under sub -section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by such pe rson or persons as the Central 
Government may direct;  
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until the Authority is re -constituted 
under sub -section ( 3), vest in the Central Government.  
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under sub -
section ( 1), the Central Government may, — 
(a) extend the period of supersession for such further term not exceeding  six months, as it may 
consider necessary; or  
(b) re-constitute the Authority by fresh appointment and in such case the Members who vacated 
their offices under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) shall not be deemed disqualified for appointment:  
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time before the expiration of the period of 
supersession, whether as originally specified under sub -section ( 1) or as extended under this sub -section, 
take action under clause ( b) of this sub -section.  
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub -section ( 1) and a full report of  
any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid before both 
Houses of Parliament at the earliest opportunity.  
50. Application o f other laws not barred .—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.  
51. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carryin g out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the salary and allowances payable to, and the other conditions of service of, the Chairperson 
and other Members under sub -section ( 2) of section 6;  
(b) the form and manner in which and the Authority before whom the oath of office and secrecy 
shall be made and  subscribed under sub -section ( 4) of section 6;  
(c) the powers and functions to be exercised or discharged by the Chairperson under section 7;  
(d) the procedure for conducting any inquiry made under sub -section ( 2) of section 8;  
(e) the salaries and allowa nces payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of the 
Secretary, officers and other employees of the Authority under sub -section ( 3) of section 9;  
(f) the performance standards relating to the quality, continuity and reliability of service to be 
monitored under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 13;  
(g) the books of account or other documents which are required to be maintained by the service 
provider under sub -section ( 3) of section 14;  
(h) the form and manner in which the form shall be verified and fee to be accompanied by the 
form under sub -section ( 3) of section 18;  
1*   *   *   *   * 
 (l) the form in which the Authority shall prepare, and at such time in each financial year, its 
budget and the time at which such budget shall be pre pared under section 33;  
(m) the form in which proper accounts and other relevant records shall be maintained and the 
annual statement of accounts shall be prepared by the Authority under sub -section ( 1) of section 35;  
(n) the form, manner and the time in w hich the returns and statements shall be furnished by the 
Authority under sub -section ( 1) of section 36;  
                                                           
1. Clauses ( i), (j) and ( k) omitted by Act 7 of 2017, s. 170 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  17 
 (o) the form and time at which the annual report shall be prepared by the Authority under  
sub-section ( 2) of section 36;  
(p) any  other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to 
be made by rules.  
52. Power to make r egulations .— (1) The Authority may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
and with the previous approval of the Central Gove rnment, make regulations, not inconsistent with this 
Act, and the rules made thereunder, to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the procedure in accordance with which the experts and professionals may be engaged under 
sub-section ( 4) of section 9;  
(b) the  places and time of meetings of the Authority and the procedure to be followed at such 
meetings, (including the quorum at its meetings) under sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations.  
53. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule made by the Central 
Government, and every regulation made by the Authority, under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in  session, for a total period of thirty days, 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should 
not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.  
54. Ame ndment of certain enactments .—The enactments specified in the Schedule to this Act shall 
be amended in the manner specified therein and such amendments shall take effect on the date of 
establishment of the Authority.  
55. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving  effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the pro visions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided  that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.   18 
 THE SCHEDU LE 
[See section 54]  
AMEN DMENT  TO THE  AIRCRAFT  ACT, 1934  
(22 OF 1934)  
Section 5, sub -section ( 2), clause ( ab), for "or revision on tariff of operators of air transport services", 
substitute "or revision on tariff of operators of air transport services [other than the tariff referred to in 
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 13 of the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 
2008]".  
_______  
AMENDMENT TO THE  AIRPORTS  AUTHORITY  OF INDIA  ACT, 1994  
(55 OF 1994)  
1. Section 22A, for the portion beginning with the words "The Authority may" and ending with the 
words "for the purposes of  — ", substitute the following: — 
"The Authority may, — 
(i) after the previous approval of the Central Government in this behalf, levy on, and collect 
from, th e embarking passengers at an airport other than the major airports referred to in clause ( h) 
of section 2 of the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 the development 
fees at the rate as may be prescribed;  
(ii) levy on, and collect from , the embarking passengers at major airport referred to in clause 
(h) of section 2 of the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 the 
development fees at the rate as may be determined under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 
13 of the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008,  
and such fees shall be credited to the Authority and shall be regulated and utilised in the pre scribed 
manner, for the pur poses of—" 
2. Section 41, in sub -section ( 2), clause ( ee), for "the rat e of de velopment fees and", substitute — 
"the rate of development fees in respect of airports other than major airports and ”. 
______  
 
 
--------------------------The Indian Maritime University Act, 2008--------------------------
1 
 THE INDIAN MARITIME UNIVERSITY ACT, 2008  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. The University.  
4. Objects of the University.  
5. Powers of the University.  
6. Jurisdiction.  
7. University open to all classes,  castes and creed.  
8. Fund of the University.  
9. The Visitor.  
10. Officers of the University.  
11. The Chancellor.  
12. The Vice -Chancellor.  
13. The Pro -Vice -Chancellor.  
14. Deans of Schools.  
15. Director s. 
16. Registrars.  
17. The Finance Officer.  
18. Other officers.  
19. Authorities of the University.  
20. The Court.  
21. The Executive Council.  
22. The Academic Council.  
23. The Board of Affiliation and Recognition.  
24. The Planning Board.  
25. The Boards of Schools.  
26. The Finance Committee.  
27. Other authorities of the University.  
28. Power to make statutes.  
29. Statutes how to be made.  
30. Power to make Ordinances.  
31. Regulations.  
32. Annual report.  
33. Annual accounts.  
34. Conditions of service of employees.  
35. Tribunal of Arbitration.  
36. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students.  
37. Right to appeal.  
38. Provident and pension funds.  
39. Disputes  as to constitution of University authorities and bodies.  
40. Constitution of Committees.  
41. Filling of casual vacancies.  
42. Proceedings of University authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.  
43. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
44. Mode of proof of Univ ersity record.  
45. Power to remove difficulties.  
46. Transitional provisions.  
 2 
 SECTIONS  
47. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before 
Parliament.  
48. Completion of courses of studies in colleges or institutions affiliated to the University.  
49. Transfer of assets and options of the employees.  
50. Role of Central Government and Director -General of shipping.  
THE SCHEDULE.  
 
  3 
 THE INDIAN MARITIME UNIVERSITY ACT, 2008  
ACT NO. 22 OF 2008  
[11th November,  2008.]  
An Act to establish and incorporate a teaching and affiliating University at the national level to 
facilitate and promote maritime studies and research and to achieve excellence in areas of 
marine science and technology, marine environment and other related fields, and to provide 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Indian Maritime University Act, 
2008.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, and 2[in the Statutes made thereunder ], unless the context otherwise 
requires,— 
(a) “Academic Council ” means the Academic Council of the University;  
(b) “academic staff ” means such categories of staff as are designated as academic staff by the 
Ordinances;  
(c) “Board of Affiliation and Recognition ” means Board of Affiliation and Recognition of the 
University;  
(d) “Board of Studies ” means the Board of Studies of the University;  
(e) “Campus ” means the unit established or constituted by the University for making 
arrangements for instruction, research, education and training;  
(f) “Certificate of Competency ” means a certificate issued by the competent authority under the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958  (44 of 1958) ; 
(g) “Chancellor ”, “Vice -Chancellor ” and “Pro-Vice -Chancellor ” mean, respectively, the 
Chancellor, Vice -Chancellor and Pro -Vice -Chancellor of the University;  
(h) “College ” means a college maintained by or admitted to the privileges of the University for 
imparting education and training in maritime studies or in its associated disciplines;  
(i) “Court ” means the Court of the University;  
(j) “Department ” means a Department of Studies; and includes a Centre of Studies;  
(k) “Director -General ” means the Director -General of Shipping appointed by the Government of 
India under section 7 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958  (44 of 1958) ; 
(l) “Distance Edu cation System ” means the system of imparting education through any means of 
communication, such as broadcasting, telecasting, correspondence courses, seminars, contact 
programmes, e -learning or the combination of any two or more such means;  
(m) “Employee ” means any person appointed by the University and includes teachers and other 
staff including deputationists of the University;  
(n) “Executive Council ” means the Executive Council of the University;  
(o) “Finance Committee ” means the Finance Committee of the University;  
                                                           
1. 14th November, 2008, vide Notification No. S.O. 2660(E), dated 14th November, 2008, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, s ec. 3( ii). 
2. Subs. by Act 19 of 2015, s.  3 and Second S ch., for “in all S tatutes made thereunder”  (w.e.f. 14 -5-2008).  4 
 (p) “Governing Body ” in relation to a college or an institution, means the Governing Body or any 
other body, by whatever name called, charged with the management of the affairs of such college or 
institution,  as the case may be, and recognised as such by the University;  
(q) “Hall” means a unit of residence for the students of the University, or of a College or an 
Institution, maintained by the University;  
(r) “Institution ” means an institution, school, college  or centre of studies maintained by or 
admitted to the privileges of the University for imparting education and training in maritime studies 
or in its associated disciplines;  
(s) “Notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(t) “Off-shore Campus ” means an institution, college, centre, school or campus of the University, 
that could be established outside the country;  
(u) “Planning Board ” means the Planning Board of the University;  
(v) “Principal ” means the head of a college or an institution;  
(w) “Recognised Institution ” means an institution admitted to the privileges of the University for 
imparting education in maritime studies or its associated disciplines;  
(x) “Recognised teachers ” means such p ersons as are recognised by the University for the purpose 
of imparting instructions in a college or an institution admitted to the privileges of the University;  
(y) “School ” means a School of Studies of the University;  
(z) “Statutes ”, “Ordinances ” and “Regulations ” mean, respectively, the Statutes, the Ordinances 
and the Regulations made under this Act;  
(za) “University ” means the Indian Maritime University established under this Act;  
(zb) “teachers of the University ” means Professors, Associate Professo rs, Assistant Professors, 
Readers, Senior Lecturers, Lecturers and such other persons as may be appointed for imparting 
instruction or conducting research in the University or in any college or institution maintained by the 
University; and  
(zc) “University  Grants Commission ” means the commission established under section 4 of the 
University Grants Commission Act, 1956  (3 of 1956) . 
3. The University .—(1) There shall be established a University by the name of Indian Maritime 
University.  
(2) The headquarters of the University shall be at Chennai with its campuses at Mumbai, Kolkata, 
Chennai, Vishakhapatnam and such other places within its  jurisdiction as it may deem fit.  
(3) The first Chancellor, the first Vice -Chancellor, the first members of the Court, the E xecutive 
Council, the Academic Council, the Planning Board and all persons who may hereafter become such 
officers or members, so long as they continue to hold such office or membership, shall constitute the 
University.  
(4) The University shall have perpetu al succession and a common seal and shall sue and be sued by 
the said name.  
(5) The University shall be both, a teaching and an affiliating University.  
4. Objects of the University .—The objects of the University shall be, — 
(i) to facilitate and promote mar itime studies, training, research and extension work with focus on 
emerging areas of studies like oceanography, maritime history, maritime laws, maritime security, 
search and rescue, transportation of dangerous cargo, environmental studies and other relate d fields, 
and also to achieve excellence in these and connected fields and other matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto;  5 
 (ii) to promote advanced knowledge by providing institutional and research facilities in such 
branches of learning as it may  deem fit and to make provisions for integrated courses in Science and 
other key and frontier areas of Technology and allied disciplines in the educational programmes of 
the University;  
(iii) to take appropriate measures for promoting innovations in teachi ng-learning process, inter -
disciplinary studies and research; and to pay special attention to the promotion of educational and 
economic interests and welfare of the people of India;  
(iv) to promote freedom, secularism, equality and social justice as enshri ned in the Constitution of 
India and to act as catalyst in socio -economic transformation by promoting basic attitudes and values 
of essence to national development; and  
(v) to extend the benefits of knowledge and skills for development of individuals and s ociety by 
associating the University closely with local, regional and national issues of development.  
5. Powers of the University .—The University shall have the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to provide for instruction in such branches of learning as the University may, from time to 
time, determine and to make provision for research and for the advancement and dissemination of 
knowledge;  
(ii) to make provision for recognised institutions to undertake special studies;  
(iii) to establish and maintain campuse s, colleges, institutions, departments, laboratories, libraries, 
museums, centres of research, training and specialised studies;  
(iv) to establish and maintain hostels, health centres and other related facilities like auditoria, 
playgrounds, gymnasiums, sw imming pools, training ships;  
(v) to provide for establishment of campuses for serving a group of recognised colleges and to 
provide for and maintain common resource centres in such campuses in the form of libraries, 
laboratories, computer centres and the like centres of learning;  
(vi) to grant, subject to such conditions as the University may determine, diplomas for certificates 
other than Certificates of Competencies of Sea -farers, which shall continue to be issued by Director -
General of Shipping, Governm ent of India till the Central Government otherwise decides, and confer 
degrees and other academic distinctions on the basis of examinations, evaluation or any other method 
of testing on persons, and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or o ther academic 
distinctions for good and sufficient cause;  
(vii) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner prescribed by the Statutes;  
(viii) to organise and to undertake extra -mural studies, training and extension services;  
(ix) to ins titute Directorships, Principalships, Professorships, Associate Professorships, Assistant 
Professorships and other teaching or academic positions, required by the University and to appoint 
persons to such Principalships, Professorships, Associate Professor ships, Assistant Professorships or 
academic positions;  
(x) to provide for the ter ms and conditions of service of — 
(i) Directors, Principals and teachers and other members of the academic staff appointed by 
the University;  
(ii) teachers and other members of  the academic staff appointed by any college or institution; 
and 
(iii) any other employee of recognised college or institution, whether appointed by the 
University or such college or institution;  
(xi) to appoint persons working in any other University or o rganisation as teachers of the 
University for a specified period;  6 
 (xii) to recognise an institution of higher learning for such purposes as the University may 
determine and to withdraw such recognition;  
(xiii) to organise and conduct refresher courses, wor kshops, seminars and other programmes for 
teachers, evaluators and other academic staff;  
(xiv) to appoint on contract or otherwise visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors, Consultants, 
Scholars and such other persons who may contribute to the advancement of the objects of the 
University;  
(xv) to create teaching, non -teaching, administrative, ministerial and other posts in the University 
and to make appointments thereto;  
(xvi) to co -operate or collaborate or associate with any other University or authority or institution 
of higher learning within India or abroad, in such manner and for such purposes as the University 
may determine;  
(xvii) to approve appointment of persons for imparting instructions in any institution admitted to 
the privileges of the Univers ity and to withdraw such approval;  
(xviii) to inspect recognised institutions through suitable machinery established for the purpose, 
and to take measures to ensure that proper standards of instruction, teaching and training are 
maintained by them, and ade quate library, laboratory, hospital, workshop and other academic 
facilities are provided for;  
(xix) to prescribe fees and other charges to be levied on the students of self -financing colleges and 
institutions;  
(xx) to coordinate the work of different colleges and institutions working in the same and similar 
areas;  
(xxi) to set up central facilities like computer centre, training centre, instrumentation centre, 
library, simulators;  
(xxii) to set up curriculum development centres for different subjects;  
(xxiii) to admit to its privileges colleges and institutions, not maintained by the University, and to 
withdraw all or any of those privileges in accordance with such conditions as may be prescribed by 
the Statutes;  
(xxiv) to recognise guide, supervise and  control Halls not maintained by the University and other 
accommodation for students, and to withdraw any such recognition;  
(xxv) to make provision for research and advisory services and for that purpose, to enter into such 
arrangements with other institut ions or bodies as the University may deem necessary;  
(xxvi) to prescribe fees for recognising of colleges and institutions;  
(xxvii ) to determine standards of admission to the University which may include examination, 
evaluation or any other method of testi ng; 
(xxviii ) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, assistantships, medals and 
prizes;  
(xxix) to demand and receive payment of fees and other charges;  
(xxx) to supervise the residences of the students of the University and to make arrangements for 
promoting their health and general welfare;  
(xxxi) to make such special arrangements in respect of women students as the University may 
consider desirable;  
(xxxii ) to regulate the conduct of the students of the University and of colleges a nd institutions;  
(xxxiii ) to control and regulate admission of students for various courses of study in Departments, 
recognised institutions, schools and centres of studies;  7 
 (xxxiv ) to regulate the work and conduct of the employees of the University and of  the employees 
of the colleges and institutions;  
(xxxv) to regulate and enforce discipline among the employees and students of the University and 
to take such disciplinary measures in this regard as may be deemed necessary;  
(xxxvi ) to prescribe code of conduct for managements of recognised colleges and institutions;  
(xxxvii ) to make arrangements for promoting the health and general welfare of the employees of 
the University and those of colleges and institutions;  
(xxxviii ) to receive benefactions, donati ons and gifts from persons and to name after them such 
chairs, institutions, buildings and the like, the University may determine, whose gift or donation to 
the University is worth such amount as the University may decide;  
(xxxix ) to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of any property, movable or immovable, including 
trust and endowment properties for the purposes of the University;  
(xl) to borrow, with the approval of the Central Government, on the security of the property of the 
University, money for the pu rposes of the University;  
(xli) to assess needs of the students in terms of subjects, fields of specialisation, levels of 
education and training of technical manpower, both on short and long term basis, and to initiate 
necessary programmes to meet these ne eds; 
(xlii) to initiate measures to enlist the co -operation of the industry to provide complementary 
facilities;  
(xliii) to provide for instruction through “distance learning ” and “open approach ” and for mobility 
of students from the non -formal open learni ng stream to the formal stream and vice versa ; 
(xliv) to establish such campuses, special centres, specialised laboratories or other units for 
research and instruction as are, in the opinion of the University, necessary for the furtherance of its 
objective ; 
(xlv) to confer autonomous status on a college or an institution or a Department, as the case may 
be, in accordance with the Statutes;  
(xlvi) to arrange for the training to upgrade maritime standard of the employees of the industry 
and institutes and to levy fees for such training as prescribed by the Statutes;  
(xlvii) to establish Off -shore Campus at any place outside the Country as and when it is 
considered necessary for advancing the aims and objectives of the University; and  
(xlviii ) to do all such ot her acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the 
attainment of all or any of its objects.  
6. Jurisdiction .—The jurisdiction of the University shall extend to the whole of India.  
7. University open to all classes, castes and creed .—The University shall be open to persons of 
either sex and of whatever caste, creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt 
or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him  to be 
appointed as a teacher of the University or to hold any other office therein or be admitted as a student in 
the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or  exercise any privilege thereof : 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to  prevent the University from making special 
provisions for the employment or promotion of educational interests of women, physically handicapped 
or of persons belonging to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes 
and t he Scheduled Tribes.  
8. Fund of the University .—(1) There shall be a University Fund which shall include — 
(a) any contribution or grant made by the Central Government or an instrumentality of the 
Central Government;  
(b) any contribution or grant made by th e State Governments;  8 
 (c) any contribution from the shipping companies, off -shore construction companies and diving 
companies;  
(d) any bequests, donations, endowments or other grants made by any private individual or 
institution;  
(e) income received by the University from fees and charges; and  
(f) amounts received from any other source.  
(2) The said fund shall be utilised for such purposes of the University and in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes and the Ordinances.  
9. The Visitor .—(1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University.  
(2) The Visitor may, from time to time, appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress 
of the University, including colleges and institutions managed by it, and to submit a report ther eon; and 
upon receipt of that report, the Visitor may, after obtaining the views of the Executive Council thereon 
through the Vice -Chancellor, take such action and issue such directions as he considers necessary in 
respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report and the University shall be bound to comply with 
such directions.  
(3) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made by such person or persons as he 
may direct, of the University, its buildings, libraries, laboratories and  equipment, and of any college, 
institution or Campus maintained by the University or admitted to its privileges; and also of the 
examinations, instruction and other work conducted or done by the University and to cause an inquiry to 
be made in like manner  in respect of any matter connected with the administration or finances of the 
University, colleges or institutions.  
(4) The Visitor shall, in every matter referred to in sub -section ( 3), give notice to the University of his 
intention to cause an inspectio n or inquiry to be made, — 
(a) to the University, if such inspection or inquiry is to be made in respect of the University or 
any college or institution maintained by it, or  
(b) to the management of the college or institution, if the inspection or inquiry is to be made in 
respect of the college or institution admitted to the privileges of the University,  
and the University or the management, as the case may be, shall have the right to make such 
representations to the Visitor, as it may consider necessary.  
(5) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University or the management, as the 
case may be, the Visitor may cause to be made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in                        
sub-section ( 3). 
(6) Where any inspectio n or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the University or the 
management shall be entitled to appoint a representative, who shall have the right to be present in person 
and be heard at such inspection or inquiry.  
(7) The Visitor may, if the  inspection or inquiry is made in respect of the University, college or 
institution maintained by it, address the Vice -Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or 
inquiry together with such views and advice with regard to the action to be  taken thereon, as the Visitor 
may be pleased to offer, and on receipt of address made by the Visitor, the Vice -Chancellor shall 
communicate forthwith to the Executive Council the results of the inspection or inquiry, and the views of 
the Visitor and the a dvice tendered by him upon the action to be taken thereon.  
(8) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of any college or institution 
admitted to the privileges of the University, address the management concerned through the Vice -
Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or inquiry, his views thereon and such advice as 
he may be pleased to offer upon the action to be taken thereon.  9 
 (9) The Executive Council or the management, as the case may be, shall communicate, th rough the 
Vice -Chancellor to the Visitor such action, if any, as it proposes to take or has been taken upon the result 
of such inspection or inquiry.  
(10) Where, the Executive Council or the management, does not, within a reasonable time, take action 
to th e satisfaction of the Visitor, the Visitor may, after considering any explanation furnished or 
representation made by the Executive Council or the management, issue such directions as he may think 
fit and the Executive Council shall comply with such direct ions.  
(11) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Visitor may, by order in 
writing, annul any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with the Act, the Statutes or 
the Ordinances:  
Provided that before making any such order, the Visitor shall call upon the Registrar to show cause 
why such an order should not be made, and, if any cause is shown within a reasonable time, he shall 
consider the same.  
(12) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions, the Visitor may give any 
direction to the University after giving an opportunity to the University as the circumstances warrant.  
(13) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
10. Officers of the University .—The followi ng shall be the officers of the University: — 
(1) the Chancellor;  
(2) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(3) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(4) the Deans of Schools;  
(5) the Directors;  
(6) the Registrars;  
(7) the Finance Officer; and  
(8) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be officers of the University.  
11. The Chancellor .—(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the Head of the University.  
(3) The Chancellor shall, if present, preside at the convocations of the University held for conferring 
degrees.  
12. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of the University, and 
shall exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of the University and give effect to the 
decisions of all the authorities of the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may, if he is of opinion that immediate action is necessary on any matter, 
exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under this Act and shall report to 
such authority the action taken by him o n such matter:  
Provided that if the authority concerned is of opinion that such action ought not to have been taken, it 
may refer the matter to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final:  
Provided further that any person in the service of the Univer sity who is aggrieved by the action taken 
by the Vice -Chancellor under this sub -section shall have the right to appeal against such action to the 
Executive Council within three months from the date on which decision on such action is communicated 
to him an d thereupon the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the action taken by the       
Vice -Chancellor.  10 
 (4) The Vice -Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that any decision of any authority of the University is 
beyond the powers of the authority conf erred by the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances 
or that any decision taken is not in the interest of the University, may ask the authority concerned to 
review its decision within sixty days of such decision and if the authority refuses to review the decision 
either in whole or in part or no decision is taken by it within the said period of sixty days, the matter shall 
be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor may cause an inspection to be m ade by such person or persons as he may 
direct, of a college or an institution not being maintained by the University, its buildings, libraries, 
laboratories and equipment, and also examinations, teaching and other work conducted or done by the 
college or the institution and cause an inquiry, to be made in the like manner, in respect of any matter 
connected with the administration or finance of the college or the institutions.  
(6) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other d uties as may be 
prescribed by the statutes or the Ordinances.  
13. The Pro -Vice -Chancellor .—The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed in such manner, on 
such terms and conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be  
prescribed by the Statutes.  
14. Deans of Schools .—Every Dean of a School shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
15. D irectors .—Every Director shall be appointed in su ch manner, on such terms and conditions of 
service, and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
16. Registrars .—(1) Every Registrar shall be appointed in such manner, as may be prescribed by the 
Statutes.  
(2) The Registrar shall have the  power to enter into agreement, sign documents and authenticate 
records on behalf of the University.  
(3) Every Registrar shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the 
Statutes.  
17. The Finance Officer .—The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
18. Other officers .—The manner of appointment and powers and duties of the other officers of the 
University shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
19. Authorities of the University .—The following shall be the  authorities of the University: — 
(1) the Court;  
(2) the Executive Council;  
(3) the Academic Council;  
(4) the Planning Board;  
(5) the Board of Affiliation and Recognition;  
(6) the Boards of Schools;  
(7) the Finance Committee; and  
(8) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the 
University.  
20. The Court .—(1) The constitution of the Court and the term of office of its members shall be 
prescr ibed by the Statutes.  
 
 11 
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall have the following powers and functions, 
namely:— 
(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of the University and to 
suggest measures for the impro vement and development of the University;  
(b) to consider and pass resolutions on the annual report and the annual accounts of the University 
and the audit report on such accounts;  
(c) to advise the Visitor in respect of any matter which may be referred to  it for advice; and  
(d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
21. The Executive Council .—(1) The Executive Council shall be the principal executive body of the 
University.  
(2) The constitution of the Executive Council, the t erm of office of its members and its powers and 
functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
22. The Academic Council .—(1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the 
University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the S tatutes and the Ordinances, have the 
control and supervision over, and be responsible for, the maintenance of standards of instruction, 
education and examination within the University and shall exercise such other powers and perform such 
other duties as ma y be conferred or imposed upon it.  
(2) The Academic Council shall have the right to advise the Executive Council on all academic 
matters.  
(3) The constitution of the Academic Council and the term of office of its members shall be such as 
may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
23. The Board of affiliation and r ecognition .—(1) The Board of affiliation and r ecognition shall be 
responsible for admitting colleges and institutions to the privileges of the University.  
(2) The constitution of the Board of Affiliation a nd Recognition, the term of office of its members 
and its powers and duties shall be such as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
24. The Planning Board .—(1) The Planning Board shall be the principal planning body of the 
University.  
(2) The Planning Board shall be responsible for monitoring the development of the University.  
(3) The constitution of the Planning Board, term of office of its members and its powers and functions 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
25. The Boards of Schools .—(1) There shall be  such number of Boards of Schools as the University 
may determine from time to time.  
(2) The constitution, powers and functions of the Boards of Schools shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
26. The Finance Committee .—The constitution, powers  and functions of the Finance Committee 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
27. Other authorities of the University .—The constitution, powers and functions of other 
authorities, as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the University, s hall be prescribed 
by the Statutes.  
28. Power to make statutes .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all 
or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of the authorities and other bodies  of the University, as 
may be constituted from time to time;  
(b) the election and continuance in office of the members of the said authorities and bodies, the 
filling up of vacancies of members, and all other matters relating to those authorities and other  bodies 
for which it may be necessary or desirable to provide;  
(c) the manner of appointment of the officers of the University, terms and conditions of service, 
their powers and duties and emoluments;  12 
 (d) the manner of appointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees of the University 
and their emoluments;  
(e) the manner of appointment of teachers and academic staff working in any other University or 
organisation for a specific period for undertaking a joint project, their terms and conditions  of service 
and emoluments;  
(f) the conditions of service of employees including provision for pension, insurance and 
provident fund, the manner of termination of service and disciplinary action;  
(g) the principles governing the seniority of service of the  employees of the University;  
(h) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or students and the 
University;  
(i) the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council by any employee or student against the 
action of any officer or auth ority of the University;  
(j) the conferment of autonomous status on a college or an institution or a Department;  
(k) the establishment and abolition of Schools, Departments, Centres, Halls, colleges an d 
institutions;  
(l) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(m) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions;  
(n) the conditions under which colleges and institutions may be admitted to the privileges of the 
University and the withdrawal of such privileges;  
(o) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, assistantships, medals and prizes;  
(p) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the University;  
(q) the maintenance of the discipline among the employees and students; and  
(r) all other m atters which by this Act are to be or may be provided for by the Statutes.  
29. Statutes how to be made .—(1) The first Statutes are those set out in the Schedule.  
(2) The Executive Council may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend  or 
repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that the Executive Council shall not make, amend or repeal any Statutes affecting the status, 
powers or constitution of any authority of the University until such authority has been given an 
opportunity of expressing an opinion in writing on the proposed changes, and any opinion so expressed 
shall be considered by the Executive Council.  
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require 
the assent of the Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold assent or remit to the Executive Council for 
consideration.  
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless 
it has been assented to by the Visit or. 
(5) Notwithstand ing anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may make new or 
additional Statutes or amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1), during the period of three 
years immediately after the commencement of  this Act:  
Provided that the Visitor may, on the expiry of the said period of three years, make, within one year 
from the date of such expiry, such detailed Statutes as he may consider necessary and such detailed 
Statutes shall be laid before both Houses o f Parliament.  
(6) Notwiths tanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -section, the Visitor may direct the 
University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by him and if the 
Executive Council is unable to implement such d irection within sixty days of its receipt, the Visitor may, 13 
 after considering the reasons, if any, communicated by the Executive Council for its inability to comply 
with such direction, make or amend the Statutes suitably.  
30. Power to make Ordinances .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the 
Ordinances may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of the 
University;  
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;  
(d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions, the qualifications 
for the same and the means to be taken relating to  the granting and obtaining of the same;  
(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission to the 
examinations, degrees and diplomas of the University;  
(f) the conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships, studentship s, assistantships, medals and 
prizes;  
(g) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and manner of appointment and the 
duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators;  
(h) the conditions of residence of the students of the University;  
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence, discipline and teaching 
of women students and the prescribing of special courses of studies for them;  
(j) the appointment and emoluments of employees other than those for whom provis ion has been 
made in the Statutes;  
(k) the establishment of centre of Studies, Board of Studies, Special centre, Specialised 
Laboratories and other Committees;  
(l) the manner of co -operation and collaboration with other Universities in India or abroad and 
authorities including learned bodies or associations;  
(m) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is considered necessary for 
improving the academic life of the University;  
(n) such other terms and conditions of service of teachers and other academic staff as are not 
prescribed by the Statutes;  
(o) the management of colleges and institution maintained by the University;  
(p) the supervision and management of colleges and institutions admitted to the privileges of the 
University;  
(q) the setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances of employees; and  
(r) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes may be provided for by the Ordinances.  
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice -Chancellor with the previous approv al of the 
Central Government and the Ordinances so made may be amended, repealed or added to at any time by 
the Executive Council in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.  
31. Regulations .—The authorities of the University may make Regulations, consistent with this Act, 
the Statutes and the Ordinances in the manner prescribed by the Statutes, for the conduct of their own 
business and that of the Committees, if any, appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the 
Statutes or the Ordinances.  
32. Annua l report .—(1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of 
the Executive Council, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the University 
towards the fulfilment of its objects and shall be submitted to th e Court on or after such date as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes and the Court shall consider the report in its annual meeting.  14 
 (2) The Court shall submit the annual report to the visitor along with its comments, if any.  
(3) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub -section ( 1), shall also be submitted to the 
Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of 
Parliament.  
33. Annual accounts .—(1) The annual accounts and balance sheet of the University shall be 
prepared under the directions of the Executive Council and shall, once at least every year and at intervals 
of not more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or by such 
persons as he may authori se in this behalf.  
(2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report thereon shall be submitted to the 
visitor and the Court along with the observations, if any, of the Executive Council.  
(3) Any observation made by the Visitor on the annual  accounts shall be brought to the notice of the 
Court and the observations of the Court, if any, shall, after being considered by the Executive Council, be 
submitted to the Visitor.  
(4) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report as submit ted to the Visitor, shall also 
be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before 
both Houses of Parliament.  
(5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before both Houses of Parliament shall  be 
published in the Gazette of India.  
34. Conditions of service of employees .—(1) The University shall enter into written contract of 
service with every employee of the University appointed on regular basis or otherwise and the terms and 
conditions of the  contract shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the 
Ordinances.  
(2) A copy of the contract referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be kept with the University and a copy 
thereof shall also be furnished to the employee con cerned.  
35. Tribunal of Arbitration .—(1) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and 
any employee shall, at the request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of 
one member appointed by the Executive Cou ncil, one member nominated by the employee concerned and 
an umpire appointed by the Visitor.  
(2) The decision of the Tribunal of Arbitration shall be final and binding on the parties.  
(3) Every request made by the employee under sub -section ( 1), shall be deemed to be a submission to 
arbitration upon the terms of this section within the meaning of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996  
(26 of 1996) . 
(4) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
36. Proced ure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students .—(1) Any student 
or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed from the rolls of the University by the 
orders or resolution of the Vice -Chancellor and who has been debarred from appearing at the 
examinations of the University for more than one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt of such 
orders or copy of such resolution by him, appeal to the Executive Council and the Executive Council may 
confirm, modify or reve rse the decision of the Vice -Chancellor or the Committee, as the case may be.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against a student shall, 
at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of section 35 
shall, as far as may be, apply to a reference made under this sub -section.  
37. Right to appeal .—Every employee or student of the University or of a college or institution 
maintained by the University shall, notwiths tanding anything contained in this Act, have a right to appeal 
within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes to the Executive Council against the decision of any 
officer or authority of the University or of the Principal of any college or institution, as t he case may be, 
and thereupon the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed against.  15 
 38. Provident and pension funds .—(1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its 
employees such provident or pension fund or provid e such insurance schemes as it may deem fit in such 
manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Where such provident fund or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central Government may 
declare that the provision of the Provident Funds Act, 1925  (19 of 1925)  shall apply to such fund, as if it 
were a Government provident fund.  
39. Disputes as to constitution of University authorities and bodies .—If any question arises as to 
whether any person has been duly elected or a ppointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority 
or other body of the University, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be 
final.  
40. Constitution of Committees .—Where any authority of the University is given power by this Act 
or the Statutes to appoint Committees, such Committees shall, save as otherwise provided, consist of the 
members of the authority concerned and of such other person, if any, as the authority in each case may 
think fit.  
41. Filling of casu al vacancies .—All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio  
members) of any authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the 
person or body who appointed, elected or co -opted the member whose place has be come vacant and the 
person appointed, elected or co -opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority or body for 
the residue of the term for which the person of whose place he fills would have been a member.  
42. Proceedings of University autho rities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies .—No act or 
proceedings of any authority or other body of the University shall be invalid merely by reason of the 
existence of a vacancy or vacancies among its members.  
43. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
any officer or other employee of the University for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
44. Mode of proof of University record .—A copy of any receipt, application, notice, order, 
proceedings, resolution of any authority or Committee of the University, or other documents in 
possession of the University, or any entry in any register duly maintai ned by the University, if certified by 
the Registrar, shall be received as prima facie  evidence of such receipt, application, notice, order, 
proceeding, resolution or documents or the existence of entry in the register and shall be admitted as 
evidence of the matters and transactions therein where the original thereof would, if produced, have been 
admissible in evidence, notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) 
or in any other law for the time being in force.  
45. Power  to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon a s may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
46. Transitional provisions .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the Statutes, — 
(a) the first Chancellor and the first Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor and each of 
the said officers shall hold office for a term of three years;  
(b) the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Visitor on the 
recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor and each of the said officers shall hold office for a term o f 
two years;  16 
 (c) the first Court and the first Executive Council shall consist of not more than fifteen members, 
who shall be nominated by the Visitor and they shall hold office for a term of two years;  
(d) (i) the first Planning Board shall consist of not  more than fifteen members, who shall be 
nominated by the Visitor out of a panel submitted by the Vice -Chancellor and they shall hold office 
for a term of two years; and  
(ii) the first Planning Board shall, in addition to the powers and functions conferred  on it by this 
Act, exercise the powers of the Academic Council, until the Academic Council is constituted under 
the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, and in the exercise of such powers, the Planning Board 
may co -opt such members as it may decide:  
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or authorities, the same shall be filled by 
appointment or nomination, as the case may be, by the Visitor, and the person so appointed or 
nominated shall hold office for so long as the officer or memb er in whose place he is appointed or 
nominated would have held that office, if such vacancy had not occurred.  
47. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid 
before Parliament .—(1) Every Statute, Ordinance or  Regulation made under this Act shall be published 
in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a tota l period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modificati on in the Statute,  Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree that the Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation should not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may b e; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that Statute, Ordinance or Regulation.  
(3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shall include the power to  give 
retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the Statutes, 
Ordinances or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation so as to prejudiciall y affect the interests of any person to whom such Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation may be applicable.  
48. Completion of courses of studies in colleges or institutions affiliated to the                 
University .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, or in the Statutes or the Ordinances, any 
student of a college or an institution, who, immediately before the admission of such college or institution 
to the privileges of the University, was studying for a degree, diploma or certificate of any Univer sity 
constituted under any Act, shall be permitted by the University, to complete his course for that degree, 
diploma or certificate, as the case may be, and the University shall provide for the instructions and 
examination of such student in accordance wi th the syllabus of studies of such college or institution or 
University, as the case may be.  
49. Transfer of assets and options of the employees .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, or in the Statutes or the Ordinances, consequent upon merger o f the Training Ship Chanakay, 
Mumbai, the Marine Engineering and Research Institute, Mumbai, the Marine Engineering and Research 
Institute, Kolkata, Lal Bahadur Shastri College of Advance Maritime Studies, Mumbai, the National 
Maritime Academy, Chennai, In dian Institute of Port Management, Kolkata and the National Ship Design 
and Research Centre, Visakhapatnam into the Indian Maritime University, all the assets and employees 
shall stand transferred to the University and such employees shall have the followi ng options: — 
(i) the employees of the four training institutes under Indian Institute of Maritime Studies who 
shall stand transferred to Indian Maritime University shall have the option to continue on deemed 
deputation in Indian Maritime University on the terms and conditions in force of the Central 
Government and also continue to retain or to be allotted government residential accommodation on 
turn and avail of the Central Government Health Scheme facilities till their retirement;  17 
 (ii) the employees of the  National Maritime Academy, Chennai, Indian Institute of Port 
Management, Kolkata and the National Ship Design and Research Centre, Visakhapatnam shall have 
the option to continue on the terms and conditions of their respective institutes till their retire ment; 
and 
(iii) all employees shall have the option to join University as per the service conditions of the 
University.  
50. Role of Central Government and Director -General of Shipping .—(1) The University shall, in 
discharge of its functions under this Act,  be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the 
Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time.  
(2) The decision of the Central Government as to whether a question is one o f policy or not shall be 
final.   18 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 29)  
THE STATUTES OF THE UNIVERSITY  
1. The Chancellor .—(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor recommended by the 
Executive Council from amongst three persons of eminence in the field of academic, maritime, public 
administration, or pu blic life of the country:  
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons so recommended, he may call for 
fresh recommendations from the Executive Council.  
(2) The Chancellor shall hold office for a term of three years and shall be elig ible for re -appointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office, the Chancellor shall continue to hold 
office until his successor enters upon his office.  
2. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visi tor from a panel of 
not less than three persons having experience in the field of human resource management, maritime, 
public administration, marine or port administration:  
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons included in the  panel, he may call 
for a fresh panel.  
(2) The Committee referred to in clause ( 1), shall consist of three persons, none of whom shall be an 
employee of the University or the Academic Council or a member of the Court, the Executive Council, 
Planning Board or member of any authority of the University or connected with an institution recognised 
by or associated with the University and out of the three persons, one shall be nominated by the Executive 
Council, one by the Court and one by the Visitor and the nom inee of the Visitor shall be the convener of 
the Committee.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters 
upon his offic e, or until he attains the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier, and he shall not be 
eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of five years, he shall continue in office 
until his successor is appoint ed and enters upon his office:  
Provided further that the Visitor may direct any Vice -Chancellor after his term has expired, to 
continue in office for such period, not exceeding a total period of one year, as may be specified by him.  
(5) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Vice -Chancellor shall be as follows: — 
(i) The Vice -Chancellor shall be paid a monthly salary and allowances other than the house rent 
allowance, at the rates fixed by the Central Government from time to time and he shall be entitled, 
without payment of rent, to use a furnished residence throughout his term of office and no charge 
shall fall on the Vice -Chancellor in respect of the maintenance of such residence.  
(ii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to such terminal be nefits and allowances as may be 
fixed by the Executive Council with the approval of the Visitor from time to time:  
Provided that where an employee of the University or a college or an institution maintained by or 
affiliated to it, or of any other Universit y or any institution maintained by or affiliated to such other 
University, is appointed as the Vice -Chancellor, he may be  allowed to continue to any provident fund 
of which he is a member and the University shall contribute to the account of such person in  that 
provident fund at the same rate at which the person had been contributing immediately before his 
appointment as the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that where such employee had been a member of any pension sc heme, the 
University shall make  the nece ssary contribution to such scheme.  19 
 (iii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to travelling allowance at such rate as may be fixed by 
the Executive Council.  
(iv) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full pay at the rate of thirty days in a 
calendar year and the leave shall be credited to his account in advance in two half -yearly instalments 
of fifteen days each on the 1st day of January and July every year:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor assumes or relinquinshes  charges of the office of the Vice -
Chancellor during the currency of a half year, the leave shall be credited proportionately at the rate of 
two and -a-half days for each completed month of service.  
(v) In addition to the leave referred to in sub -clause ( iv), the Vice -Chancellor sha ll also be entitled 
to half pay leave at the rate of twenty days for each completed year of service. This half pay leave 
may also be availed of as commuted leave on full pay on medical certificate. When commuted leave 
is availed, twice the amount of half p ay leave shall be debited against half pay leave due.  
(6) If the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or otherwise, of if he 
is unable to perform his duties due to ill health or any other cause, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor sha ll perform 
the duties of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the Pro -Vice -Chancellor is not available, the senior -most Professor shall perform the 
duties  of the Vice -Chancellor until a new Vice -Chancellor assumes office or until the existing Vice -
Chancel lor attends to the duties of his office, as the case may be.  
3. Powers and duties of the Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be ex officio 
Chairman of the Executive Council, the Academic Council, the Planning Board, Board of Affiliation and 
Recognition and the Finance Committee and shall, in the absence of the Chancellor, preside at the 
convocations held for conferring degrees.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and address, any meeting of any authority 
or other body of the University, but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he is a member of such 
authority or body.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice -Chancellor to see that this Act, the Statutes, the Ordinances and the 
Regulations are duly observed, and he s hall have all the powers necessary to ensure such observance.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise control over the affairs of the University and shall give effect 
to the decisions of all the authorities of the University.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall h ave all the powers necessary for the proper maintenance of discipline 
in the University and he may delegate any such powers to such person or persons as he may deem fit.  
(6) The Vice -Chancellor shall have the power to convene or cause to be convened the me eting of the 
Executive Council, the Academic Council, the Planning Board and the Finance Committee.  
(7) The Vice -Chancellor shall have the power to make a short -term appointment with the approval of 
the Executive Council, for a period of six months of such  persons as he may consider necessary for the 
functioning of the University.  
4. Pro -Vice-Chancellor .—(1) Every Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Executive 
Council on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that where the recommendat ion of the Vice -Chancellor is not accepted by the Executive 
Council, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor who may either appoint the person recommended by 
the Vice -Chancellor or ask the Vice -Chancellor to recommend another person to the Executive Co uncil:  
Provided further that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor, 
appoint a Professor to discharge the duties of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor in addition to his own duties as a 
Professor.  
(2) The term of office of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be such as may be decided by the Executive 
Council but it shall not in any case exceed five years or until the expiration of the term of office of the 
Vice -Chancellor, whichever is earlier:  20 
 Provided that a Pro -Vice -Chancellor whose term of o ffice has expired shall be eligible for 
reappointment:  
Provided further that, in any case, a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall retire on attaining the age of sixty -five 
years:  
Provided also that the Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall, while discharging the duties of the Vice -Chancellor 
under clause ( 6) of Statute 2, continue in office notwithstanding the expiration of his term of office as 
Pro-Vice -Chancellor, until a new Vice -Chancellor or the Vice -Chancellor, as the case may be, assumes 
office:  
Provided also that when t he office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant and there is no              
Pro-Vice -Chancellor to perform the functions of the Vice -Chancellor, the  Executive Council may appoint   
Pro-Vice -Chancellor and the Pro -Vice -Chancellor so appointed shall cease t o hold office as such as soon 
as a Vice -Chancellor is appointed and enters upon his office.  
(3) (a) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be 
such as may be laid down by the Ordinances.  
(b) The salary of the  Pro-Vice -Chancellor shall be decided by the Executive Council with the 
approval of the Visitor.  
(c) The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled without payment of rent, to the use of a furnished 
residence throughout his tenure of office and no charge shall fall on the Pro -Vice -Chancellor personally 
in respect of maintenance of such residence.  
(d) In addition to the salary specified in sub -clause ( b), a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to such 
leave, benefits and other allowances as admissible to the emp loyees of the University from time to time.  
(e) The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to such terminal benefits as may be fixed by the 
Executive Council from time to time.  
(f) The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to subscribe to the contributory provident fund of the 
University till the end of his tenure:  
Provided that when an employee of the University or a college or an institution or of any other 
University or institution maintained or affiliated to such other University is appointed as                             
Pro-Vice -Chancellor, his salary shall be fixed after taking into consideration the salary of such person.  
(4) A Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall assist the Vice -Chancellor in respect of such matters as may be 
specified by the Vice -Chancellor in this behalf, from time to time, and shall also exercise such powers 
and perform such duties as may be assigned or delegated to him by the Vice -Chancellor.  
5. Registrars .—(1) Every Registrar shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the  
recommendati on of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and shall be a whole -time salaried 
officer of the University:  
Provided that a nominee of the Court shall also be included in the Selection Committee.  
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years  and shall be eligible for reappointment for one more 
term.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Registrar shall be such as may 
be prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that the Registrar shall retire on attaining the age of  sixty -two years.  
(4) When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar is, by reason of illness, absence, 
or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed 
by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) (a) The Registrar shall have power to take disciplinary action against such of the employees, 
excluding teachers and academic staff, as may be specified in the order of the Executive Council and to 21 
 suspend them pending inquiry, to administer warnings to them or to impose upon them the penalty of 
censure or the withholding of increment:  
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person concerned has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cau se against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him.  
(b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice -Chancellor against any order of the Registrar imposing any of the 
penalties specified in sub -clause ( a). 
(c) In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punis hment beyond the power of the Registrar is called 
for, the Registrar shall, upon conclusion of the inquiry, make a report to the Vice -Chancellor along with 
his recommendations:  
Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Executive Council against an order of the Vice -Chancellor 
imposing any penalty on an employee.  
(6) The Executive Council shall designate any Registrar to act ex officio  in one or more of the 
following capacities, namely: — 
(i) Secretary to the Court;  
(ii) Secretary to the Executive Council;  
(iii) Secretary to the Academic Council;  
(iv) Secretary to the Board of Affiliation and Recognition; and  
(v) Secretary to the Planning Board.  
(7) It shall be the duty of the Registrar so designated in relatio n to the authority concerned to — 
(a) be the custo dian of the records, the common seal and such other property of the University as 
the Executive Council shall commit to his charge;  
(b) issue all notices convening meetings of that authority and the Committees appointed by it;  
(c) keep the minutes of all t he meetings of that authority and the Committees appointed by it;  
(d) conduct the official correspondence of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council, the Planning Board and the Board of Affiliation and Recognition;  
(e) arrange for and superi ntend the examinations of the University in accordance with the manner 
prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(f) supply to the Visitor copies of the agenda of meetings of the authorities of the University as 
soon as they are issued; and the minutes of such meeting s; 
(g) represent the University in suits or proceedings by or against the University, sign powers -of-
attorney and verify pleadings or depute his representative for the purpose; and  
(h) perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the Ordi nances or the 
Regulations or as may be required, from time to time, by the Executive Council or the Vice -
Chancellor.  
6. The Finance Officer .—(1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Executive Council on 
the recommendations of a Selection Committee  constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time 
salaried officer of the University.  
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for reappointment for one more 
term.  
(3)The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Finance Officer shall be such as 
may be laid down by the Ordinances:  
Provided that a Finance Officer shall retire on attaining the age of sixty -two years.  22 
 (4) When the office of the Finance Officer is vacant or when the Finance Officer is, b y reason of 
illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall 
be performed by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) The Finance Officer shall be ex officio  Secretar y of the Finance Committee but shall not be 
deemed to be a member of such Committee.  
(6) The Finance Officer shall — 
(a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the University and shall advise it as regards its 
financial policy; and  
(b) perform such other financial functions as may be assigned to him by the Executive Council or 
as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances:  
Provided that the Finance Officer shall not make any expenditure or make any investment 
exceeding one lakh rupees withou t the prior approval of the Executive Council.  
(7) Subject to the control of the Executive Cou ncil, the Finance Officer shall — 
(a) hold and manage the property and investments of the University including trust and endowed 
property;  
(b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Executive Council for recurring and non -recurring 
expenditure for a year are not exceeded and that all moneys are expended on the purpose for which 
they are granted or allotted;  
(c) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget of the University and for 
their presentation to the Executive Council after they have been considered by the Finance 
Committee;  
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and balances and on the state of investments;  
(e) watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advise on the methods of collection 
employed;  
(f) ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture and equipment are maintained up -to-date 
and that stock -checking is conducted, of equipment and other consuma ble materials in all offices, 
Special Centres, Specialised Laboratories, colleges and institutions maintained by the University;  
(g) bring to the notice of the Vice -Chancellor, unauthorised expenditure or any other financial 
irregularities and suggest appr opriate action against persons at fault; and  
(h) call for from any office, Centre, Laboratory, college or institution maintained by the 
University any information that he may consider necessary for the performance of his duties.  
(8) Any receipt given by th e Finance Officer or the person or persons duly authorised in this behalf by 
the Executive Council for any money payable to the University shall be sufficient discharge for payment 
of such money.  
7. Deans of Schools of Studies .—(1) Every Dean of a School o f Studies shall be appointed by the 
Vice -Chancellor from among the Professors in the School for a period of three years and he shall be 
eligible for reappointment:  
Provided that a Dean on attaining the age of sixty years shall cease to hold office as such:  
Provided further that if at any time there is no Professor in a School, the Vice -Chancellor, or a Dean 
authorised by the Vice -Chancellor in this behalf, shall exercise the powers of the Dean of the School.  
(2) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when  the Dean is, by reason of illness, absence or any 
other cause, unable to perform duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such 
person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(3) The Dean shall be the Head of the Sch ool and shall be responsible for the conduct and 
maintenance of the standards of teaching and research in the School and shall have such other functions 
as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  23 
 (4) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at  any meeting of the Boards of Studies 
or Committees of the School, as the case may be, but shall not have the right to vote thereat unless he is a 
member thereof.  
8. Heads of Departments .—(1) In the case of Departments which have more than one Professor, t he 
Head of the Department shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation of the Vice -
Chancellor from among the Professors on rotation basis.  
(2) In the case of Departments where there is only one Professor, the Executive Council shall have the 
option to appoint, on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor, either the Professor or a Reader as the 
Head of the Department:  
Provided that it shall be open to a Professor or Reader to decline the offer of appointment as the Head 
of the Departm ent. 
(3) A person appointed as the Head of the Department shall hold office as such for a period of three 
years and shall be eligible for reappointment.  
(4) A Head of a Department may resign his office at any time during his tenure of office.  
(5) A Head of  a Department shall perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
9. Proctors .—(1) Every Proctor shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation 
of the Vice -Chancellor and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties a s may be assigned to him 
by the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) Every Proctor shall hold office for a term of two years and shall be eligible for reappointment.  
10. Librarian .—(1) The Librarian shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the 
recommendations of the  Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time 
officer of the University.  
(2) The Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to him by 
the Executive Council.  
11. Membership, Constitution, Quorum and Tenure of the Executive Council .—(1) The 
Executive Council shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Vice -Chancellor, who shall be the Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(b) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor, ex officio ; 
(c) the Secretary of Ministry  of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways (Department of 
Shipping), Government of India, or his nominee not below the rank of a Joint Secretary;  
(d) the Director -General of Shipping or his nominee not below the rank of a Joint Secretary;  
(e) The Chairman, Indian Port Association, New Delhi;  
(f) the Financial Adviser, Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways (Department of 
Shipping), Government of India, or his nominee not below the rank of a Joint Secretary;  
(g) five members to be nominated by the Visitor having special knowledge and/or practical 
experience in respect of maritime -education, industry, science or technology and other related 
subjects on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor, out of a panel of at least ten persons;  
(h) one member n ot below the rank of Joint Secretary to be appointed by the Central Government 
to represent the Ministry of De fence of the Central Government;  
(i) one Dean of Schools of Studies nominated by the Vice - Chancellor by rotation on the basis of 
seniority;  
(j) two Directors nominated by the Vice -Chancellor by rotation on the basis of seniority;  
(k) three Principals of the affiliated colleges and academic institutions nominated by the 
Executive Council by rotation;  24 
  (l) one Vice -Chancellor present or former, of an y technical University; and  
(m) one representative of the Government of the State where University is located.  
(2) The Registrar shall be ex officio  Secretary of the Executive Council.  
(3) Seven members of the Executive Council shall form a quorum for a me eting of the Executive 
Council.  
(4) The members of the Executive Council other than ex officio  members shall hold office for a term 
of three years.  
(5) There shall be not less than four meetings of the Executive Council in a year and the rules of 
procedure  for conduct of business to be followed at a meeting and such other matters in relation to 
meeting as may be necessary shall be such as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
12. Powers and functions of the Executive Council .—(1) The Executive Council shall ha ve the 
power of management and administration of the revenue and property of the University and the conduct 
of all administrative affairs of the University not otherwise provided for.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Executive Council shall, 
in addition to all other powers vested in it, have the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to create teaching and academic posts, to determine the number and emoluments of such posts 
and to define the duties and conditio ns of service of Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant 
Professors and other academic staff and Principals of colleges and institutions maintained by the 
University:  
Provided that no action shall be taken by the Executive Council in respect of the num ber, 
qualifications and the emoluments of teachers and academic staff otherwise than after consideration 
of the recommendations of the Academic Council;  
(ii) to appoint such Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant Professors and other academic 
staff, a s may be necessary, and the Principals of colleges and institutions maintained by the 
University on the recommendation of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and to fill 
the temporary vacancies therein;  
(iii) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts and to make appointments 
thereto in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(iv) to grant leave of absence to any officer of the University other than the Chancellor and the 
Vice -Chancellor, and to make necessary arra ngements for the discharge of the functions of such 
officer during his absence;  
(v) to regulate and enforce discipline among employees in accordance with the Statutes and the 
Ordinances;  
(vi) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, investments, prop erty, business and all other 
administrative affairs of the University, and for that purpose to appoint such agents as it may think fit;  
(vii) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non -recurring expenditure for a year on the 
recommendations of the Finance Committee;  
(viii) to invest any money belonging to the University, including any unapplied income, in such 
stocks, funds, share or securities, from time to time, as it may think fit or in the purchase of 
immovable property in India, with the li ke powers of varying such investment from time to time;  
(ix) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immovable property on behalf of the 
University;  
(x) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus and other means needed for carrying 
on the work of the University;  
(xi) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on behalf of the University;  25 
 (xii) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and, if thought fit, to redress any grievances of the employees 
and students of the University who may,  for any reason, feel aggrieved;  
(xiii) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if necessary, to remove them, and to fix their fees, 
emoluments and travelling and other allowances, after consulting the Academic Council;  
(xiv) to select a common seal for t he University and provide for th e custody and use of such seal;  
(xv) to make such special arrangements as may be necessary for the residence and discipline of 
women students;  
(xvi) to delegate any of its powers to the Vice -Chancellor, the Pro-Vice -Chancellor, the Deans, 
the Registrar or the Finance Officer or such other employee or authority of the University or to a 
committee appointed by it as it may deem fit;  
(xvii) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, assistantships, me dals and prizes;  
(xviii) to provide for the appointment of Visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors, Consultants and 
Scholars and determine the terms and conditions of such appointments; and  
(xix) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties  as may be conferred or imposed 
on it by the Act, or the Statutes.  
13. Meeting s of the Court .—(1) An annual meeting of the Court shall be held on a date to be fixed 
by the Executive Council unless some other date has been fixed by the Court in respect of a ny year.  
(2) At an annual meeting of the Court, a report on the working of the University during the previous 
year, together with a statement of the receipts and expenditure, the balance -sheet as audited, and the 
financial estimates for the next year shall  be presented.  
(3) A copy of the statement of receipts and expenditure, the balance -sheet and the financial estimates 
referred to in clause ( 2), shall be sent to every Member of the Court at least seven days before the date of 
the annual meeting.  
(4) Twelv e Members of the Court shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Court.  
(5) Special meetings of the Court may be convened by the Executive Council or the Vice -Chancellor 
or if there is no Vice -Chancellor, Pro -Vice -Chancellor or if there is no Pro -Vice -Chanc ellor, by the 
Registrar.  
(6) The Court shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
Ex Officio Members : 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(ii) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(iii) the Deans of S chools of Studies;  
(iv) the Heads of teaching Departments who are not the  Deans;  
(v) the Dean of students' Welfare;  
(vi) the Registrar;  
(vii) the Librarian;  
(viii) the Proctor;  
(ix) the Finance Officer.  
Representatives of Teachers : 
(x) All Professors who are not Heads of teaching Departments;  
(xi) Two Readers who are not Heads of teaching Departments, by rotation according to seniority, 
to be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor;  26 
 (xii) Two Lecturers by rotation according to seniority, to be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor.  
Representatives of Non -Teaching Staff : 
(xiii) Two members o f the non -teaching staff, one from among group 'D' Staff and the other from 
the rest, to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor.  
Representatives of Institutions affiliated to the University:  
(xiv) One representative from the affiliated institutions who shall be the head of the institution, to 
be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor.  
Representatives of Parliament : 
(xv) Five representatives of Parliament out of which three to be nominated by the Speaker of the 
Lok Sabha and two by the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha fro m amongst the Members thereof. 
However, consequent upon a Member of Parliament becoming a Minister or Speaker or Deputy 
Speaker, of the Lok Sabha or Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, his/her nomination or election to 
the Court of the University shall be deemed to have been terminated.  
Persons representing Industry : 
(xvi) Eleven persons representing the Maritime Industries, to be nominated by Visitor out of 
which one each from, - Indian National Ship Owners' Association, Maritime Association of Ship 
Owners and Ship Managers Association, Foreign Owners Representatives and Ship Managers 
Association, Ship Building Industries, Dredging Industries, Offshore Industries, Unions representing 
Seamen, Association of Multimodal Transport Operators of India, Indian Regi ster of Shipping, Major 
and Minor Ports;  
(xvii) Ten representatives of maritime States, out of which one each to be nominated by the States 
or Union territories.  
Other Members : 
(xviii) Members of the Executive Council, who are not authorised members of the  Court.  
(7) All members of the Court, other than the ex officio members, shall hold office for a term of three 
years:  
Provided that a Member of Parliament shall hold office for three years or so long as he continues to 
be a member of the House which he represents, whichever is less.  
14. Membership, Constitution, Quorum and Tenure of the Academic Council .—(1) The 
Academic Council shall consist of  the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Vice -Chancellor, who shall be the Chairperson , ex officio ; 
(b) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(c) the Chief Surveyor, Directorate -General of Shipping, Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport 
and Highways (Department of Shipping), Government of India, or his nominee;  
(d) the Nautical Advisor, Directorate -General of Shipping, Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport 
and Highways (Department of Shipping), Government of India, or his nominee;  
(e) the Deans of Schools of Studies;  
(f) all Directors of University maintained Campuses;  
(g) all Heads of University teaching Departments;  
(h) one Professor from each University teaching Department by rotation on the basis of seniority 
to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor;  
(i) three eminent experts in the field of maritime studies and related subjects, nominated by the 
Vice -Chancellor; and  
(j) two Principals of recognised colleges.  27 
 (2) The Registrar shall be ex officio  Secretary to the Academic Council, but shall have no right to 
vote.  
(3) Nine members of the Academic Council shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Academic 
Council.  
(4) The members  of the Academic Council other than ex officio  members, shall hold office for a term 
of three years.  
(5) The Academic Council shall meet at least twice a year.  
15. Powers of the Academic Council .—Subject to the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the 
Academic Council shall, in addition to all other powers vested in it, hav e the following powers, 
namely:— 
(a) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University and to give 
directions regarding methods of instructions, co -operative teaching among colleges and institutions, 
evaluation of research or improvements in academic standards;  
(b) to bring about inter -School co -ordination, to establish or appoint committees or boards, for 
taking up projects on an inter -School basis;  
(c) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own initiative or on a reference 
by a School or the Executive Council and to take appropriate action thereon;  
(d) to frame such regulations and rules consistent with the Statutes and the Ordinance s regarding 
the academic functioning of the University, discipline, residences, admissions, award of fellowship 
assistantship, research assistantship and studentships, fees, concessions, corporate life and attendance;  
(e) to recommend the Executive Council , the number, qualification and the emolument of the 
teacher and other academic staff;  
(f) to recommend the Executive Council, examiners and moderators;  
(g) to recommend the Executive Council, persons for award of honorary degrees; and  
(h) to recommend the  executive council, setting up of Chairs.  
16. Membership, Constitution, Quorum and Tenure of the Planning Board .—(1) The Planning 
Board shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Vice -Chancellor, who shall be the Chairperson ex officio ; 
(b) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(c) the Secretary, Department of Shipping, in the Government of India or his nominee not below 
the rank of a Joint Secretary;  
(d) the Secretary, Ministry of Defence in the Government of India, or his nominee not below the 
rank of a Joint Secretary;  
(e) the Director -General of Shipping, Department of Shipping, in the Government of India;  
(f) the Financial Adviser, Department of Shipping, in the Government of India, or his nominee 
not below the rank of a Joint Secretary;  
(g) two member s to be nominated by the Visitor having special knowledge and/or practical 
expe rience in respect of maritime -education, industry, science or technology and other related 
subjects on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor out of a panel of at least six persons;  
(h) one Dean of Schools of Studies nominated by the Vice -Chancellor by rotation on the basis of 
seniority;  
(i) one Director of the University Campus nominated by the Vice -Chancellor by rotation on the 
basis of seniority;  
(j) one Principal of the a ffiliated colleges nominated by the Exe cutive Council by rotation; and  28 
 (k) one Vice -Chancellor present or former, of any Technical University:  
Provided that the members nominated under sub -clauses ( e) to ( i) above shall, as far as 
practicable, be drawn fro m different faculties.  
(2) The Registrar shall be the ex officio  Secretary of the Planning Board.  
(3) The conduct of the meetings of the Planning Board and the quorum required for such meetings 
shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The members of the Planning Board other than ex officio  members, shall hold office for a term of 
three  years.  
17. The Planning Board .—(1) The Planning Board shall be the principal planning body of the 
University and shall be responsible for — 
(a) reviewing the educational programmes offered by the University;  
(b) organising the structure of education in the University so as to provide opportunities to 
students to offer different combinations of subjects appropriate for the development of personality 
and skills for useful wo rk in society;  
(c) creating an atmosphere and environment conducive to value oriented education; and  
(d) developing new teaching -learning processes which will combine the lectures, tutorials, 
seminars, demonstrations, self -studies and collective practical projects.  
(2) The Planning Board shall have the power to advise on the development of the University and 
review the progress implementation of programmes so as to ascertain whether they are on the lines 
recommended by it and shall also have the power to ad vise the Executive Council and the Academic 
Council on any matter in connection therewith.  
(3) The Academic Council and the Executive Council shall be bound to consider the 
recommendations of the Planning Board and shall implement such of the recommendatio ns as are 
accepted by it.  
(4) Recommendations of the Planning Board as have not been accepted by the Executive Council or 
the Academic Council under clause ( 3) shall be submitted by the Vice -Chancellor along with the 
recommendations of the Executive Counci l or the Academic Council, to the Visitor for advice and the 
advice of the Visitor shall be implemented by the Executive Council or the Academic Council, as the case 
may be.  
(5) The Planning Board may constitute such committees as may be necessary for plan ning and 
monitoring the programmes of the University.  
18. Schools of Studies and Departments .—(1) The University shall have such Schools of Studies as 
may be specified by the Ordinances.  
(2) Every School shall have a School Board and the members of the fir st School Board shall be 
nominated by the Executive Council and shall hold offi ce for a period of three years.  
(3) The powers and functions of a School Board shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The conduct of the meetings of a School Board and the q uorum required for such meetings shall 
be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(5) (a) Each School shall consist of such Departments as may be assigned to it by the Ordinances.  
(b) No Department shall be established or abolished except by the Statutes:  
Provided t hat the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic Council, establish 
Centres of Studies to which may be assigned such teachers of the University as the Executive Council 
may consider necessary.  
(c) Each Department shall consist of the fo llowing members, namely: — 
(i) Teachers of the Department;  29 
 (ii) Persons conducting research in the Department;  
(iii) Dean of the School;  
(iv) Honorary Professors, if any, attached to the Department; and  
(v) Such other persons as may be members of the Department in accordance with the provisions 
of the Ordinances.  
19. Boards of Studies .—(1) Each Department shall have a Board of Post -graduate Studies and a 
Board of Under -graduate Studies.  
(2) The Constitution of a Board of Post -graduate Studies and the t erm of office of its members shall 
be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(3)The functions of a Board of Post -graduate Studies shall be to approve subjects for research for 
various degrees and other requirements of research degrees and to recommend to the concer ned School 
Board in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances — 
(a) courses of studies and appointment of examiners for Post -graduate courses, but excluding 
research degrees;  
(b) appointment of supervisors of research; and  
(c) measures for the improvement of the standard of Post -graduate teaching and research:  
Provided that the above functions of a Board of Post -graduate Studies shall, during the period of three 
years immediately after the commencement of the Act, be performed by the Department.  
(4) The consti tution and functions of a Board of Under -graduate, Post -graduate and Vocational 
Studies and the term of its members shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
20. Finance Committee .—(1) The Finance Committee shall consist of the following members, 
namely:— 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(ii) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(iii) three persons nominated by the Executive Council, out of whom at least one shall be a 
member of the Executive Council;  
(iv) three persons nominated by the Visitor; and  
(v) atleast one person to be n ominated by the Court.  
(2) Five members of the Finance Committee shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Finance 
Committee.  
(3) All the members of the Finance Committee, other than ex officio  members, shall hold office for a 
term of three years.  
(4) A mem ber of the Finance Committee shall have the right to record a minute of dissent if he does 
not agree with any decision of the Finance Committee.  
(5) The Finance Committee shall meet at least thrice every year to examine the accounts and to 
scrutinise propo sals for expenditure.  
(6) All proposals relating to creation of posts, and those items which have not been included in the 
Budget, should be examined by the Finance Committee before they are considered by the Executive 
Council.  
(7) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University prepared by the Finance Officer 
shall be laid before the Finance Committee for consideration and comments and thereafter submitted to 
the Executive Council for approval.  30 
 (8) The Finance Committee shall recommend li mits for the total recurring expenditure and the total 
non-recurring expenditure for the year, based on the income and resources of the University (which, in the 
case of productive works, may include the proceeds of loans).  
21. Selection Committees .—(1) There shall be Selection Committees for making recommendations 
to the Executive Council for appointment to the posts of Professor, Reader, Lecturer, Registrar, Finance 
Officer, Librarian and Principals of colleges and institutions maintained by the Universit y. 
(2) The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts specified in column 1 of the Table below 
shall consist of the Vice -Chancellor, Pro -Vice -Chancellor, a nominee of the Visitor and the persons 
specified in the corresponding entry in column 2 of the  said Table:  
TABLE  
1 2 
Professor  (i) The Head of Department concerned, if he is a Professor.  
(ii) One Professor to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor.  
(iii) Three persons not in the service of the University, nominated by the 
Executive Council, out of a panel of names recommended by the Academic 
Council for their special  knowledge of, or interest in, the subject with which 
the Professor will be concerned.  
Reader/Lecturer  (i) The Head of the Department concerned.  
(ii) One Professor to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor.  
(iii) Two persons not in the service of the University, nominated by the 
Executive Council, out of a panel of names recommended by the Academic 
Council for their special knowledge of, or interest in the subject with which 
the Reader or a L ecturer will be concerned.  
Registrar, Finance Officer  (i) Two members of the Executive Council nominated by it.  
(ii) One person not in the service of the University nominated by the 
Executive Council.  
Librarian  (i) Two persons not in the service of the U niversity, who have special 
knowledge of the subject of the Library Science/ Library Administration to 
be nominated by the Executive Council.  
(ii) One person not in  the service of the University, nominated by the 
Executive Council.  
Principal of college  or 
institution maintained  by 
the University  Three persons not in the service of the University of whom  two shall be 
nominated by the Executive Council and one by  the Academic Council for 
their special knowledge of, or interest in, a subject in which instruct ion is 
being provided by the college or institution.  
NOTE:  1. Where the appointment is being made for an inter -disciplinary project, the head of the 
project shall be deemed to be the Head of the Department concerned.  
2. The Professor to be nominated shall  be Professor concerned with the speciality for which the 
selection is being made and that the Vice -Chancellor shall consult the Head of the Department and the 
Dean of School before nominating the Professor.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor, or in his absence, the  Pro-Vice -Chancellor shall preside at the meetings of a 
Selection Committee:  
Provided that the meetings of the Selection Committee shall be fixed after prior consultation with, 
and subject to the convenience of Visitor's nominee and the persons nominated by the Executive Council 
under clause ( 2): 31 
 Provided further that the proceedings of the Selection Committee shall not be valid unless, — 
(a) where the number of Visitor's nominee and the persons nominated by the Executive Council is 
four in all, at least th ree of them attend the meeting; and  
(b) where the number of Visitor's nominee and the persons nominated by the Executive Council is 
three in all, at least two of them attend the meeting.  
(4) The meeting of a Selection Committee shall be convened by the Vic e-Chancellor or in his absence 
by the Pro -Vice -Chancellor.  
(5) The procedure to be followed by a Selection Committee in making recommendations shall be laid 
down in the Ordinances.  
(6) If the Executive Council is unable to accept the recommendations made b y a Selection 
Committee, it shall record its reasons and submit the case to the Visitor for final orders.  
(7) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made in the manner indicated below: — 
(i) If the temporary vacancy is for a duration longer than one acade mic session, it shall be filled 
on the advice of the Selection Committee in accordance with the procedure indicated in the foregoing 
clauses:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor is satisfied that in the interests of work it is necessary to fill 
the vacanc y, the appointment may be made on a purely temporary basis by a local Selection 
Committee referred to in sub -clause ( ii) for a period not exceeding six months.  
(ii) If the temporary vacancy is for a period less than a year, an appointment to such vacancy s hall 
be made on the recommendation of a local Selection Committee consisting of the Dean of the School 
concerned, the Head of the Department and a nominee of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and the Head o f the Department, 
the Selection Committee may contain two nominees of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that in case sudden casual vacancies of teaching posts caused by death or any 
other reason, the Dean may, in consultation with the Head of the Depar tment concerned, make a 
temporary appointment for a month and report to the Vice -Chancellor and the Registrar about such 
appointment.  
(iii) No teacher appointed temporarily shall, if he is not recommended by the regular Selection 
Committee for appointment under the Statutes, be continued in service on such temporary 
employment, unless he is subsequently selected by a local Selection Committee, for a temporary or 
permanent appointment, as the case may be.  
22. Special mode of appointment .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 21, 
Executive Council may invite a person of high academic distinction and professional attainments to 
accept a post of  Professor or Reader or any other academic post in the University, as the case may be, o n 
such terms and conditions as it deems fit, and on the person agreeing to do so appoint him to the post.  
(2) The Executive Council may appoint a teacher or any other academic staff working in any other 
University or organisation for undertaking a joint pr oject in accordance with the manner, laid down in the 
Ordinances.  
23. Appointment for a fixed tenure .—The Executive Council may appoint a person selected in 
accordance with the procedure laid down in Statute 21 for a fixed tenure on such terms and conditio ns as 
it deems fit.  
24. Recognised teachers .—(1) The qualifications of recognised teachers shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(2) All applications for the recognition of teachers shall be made in such manner as may be laid down 
in the Or dinances.  32 
 (3) No teacher shall be recognised as a teacher except on the recommendation of a Selection 
Committee constituted for the purpose in the manner laid down in the Ordinances.  
(4) The period of recognition of a teacher shall be determined by the Ord inances made in that behalf.  
(5) The Academic Council may, by a special resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -
thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw recognition from a teacher:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until notice in writing has been given to the person 
concerned calling upon him to show cause, within such time as may be specified in the notice, why such 
resolution should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in  
support of them have been considered by the Academic Council.  
(6) Any person aggrieved by an order of withdrawal under clause ( 5) may, within three months from 
the date of communication to him of such order, appeal to the Executive Council which may pass such 
orders thereon as it thinks fit.  
25. Committees .—(1) Any authority of the University may appoint as many Standing, Special or 
Search Committees as it may deem fit, and may appoint to such Committees, persons who are not 
members of such authority.  
(2) Any such Committee appointed under clause ( 1) may deal with any subject delegated to it subject 
to subsequent confirmation by the authority appointing.  
26. Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of the teachers, etc .—(1) All the 
teachers and o ther academic staff of the University shall, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, 
be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as are specified in the Statutes, 
the Ordinances and the Regulations.  
(2) Every teacher and  member of the academic staff of the University shall be appointed on a written 
contract, the form of which shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(3) A copy of every contract referred to in clause ( 2) shall be deposited with the Registrar.  
27. Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of other employees .—All the employees 
of the University, other than the teachers and other academic staff of the University, shall, in the absence 
of any contract to the contrary, be governed by the terms and condi tions of service and code of conduct as 
are specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations.  
28. Seniority list .—(1) Whenever, in accordance with the Statutes, any person is to hold an office or 
be a member of an authority of the University b y rotation according to seniority, such seniority shall be 
determined according to the length of continuous service of such person in his grade, and, in accordance 
with such other principles as the Executive Council ma y, from time to time prescribe.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain, in respect of each class of persons to 
whom the provisions of these Statutes apply, a complete and up -to-date seniority list in accordance with 
the provisions of clause ( 1). 
(3) If two or more pe rsons have equal length of continuous service in a particular grade or the relative 
seniority of any person or persons is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar may, on his own motion and shall, 
at the request of any such person, submit the matter to the Execut ive Council whose decision thereon shall 
be final.  
29. Removal of employees of the University .—(1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct 
against a teacher, a member of the academic staff or other employee of the University, the                        
Vice -Chancellor, in the case of the teacher or member of the academic staff, and the authority competent 
to appoint (hereinafter referred to as the appointing authority) in the case of other employee, may, by 
order in writing, place such teacher, member of  the academic staff or other employee, as the case may be, 
under suspension and shall forthwith report to the Executive Council the circumstances in which the order 
was made:  
Provided that the Executive Council may, if it is of the opinion, that the circum stances of the case do 
not warrant the suspension of the teacher or the member of the academic staff, revoke such order.  33 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of the contract of appointment or of any other 
terms and conditions of service of t he employees, the Executive Council in respect of teachers and other 
academic staff, and the appointing authority, in respect of other employees, shall have the power to 
remove a teacher or a member of the academic staff, or as the case may be, other emplo yee on grounds of 
misconduct.  
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Executive Council, or as the case may be the appointing authority, shall not 
be entitled to remove any teacher, member of the academic staff or other  employee except for a good 
cause and after giving  three months' notice or on payment of three months' salary in lieu thereof.  
(4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall be removed under clause ( 2) or 
clause ( 3) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause a gainst the action proposed 
to be taken in regard to him.  
(5) The removal of a teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall take effect from 
the date on which the order of removal is made:  
Provided that where the teacher, member of the acad emic staff or other employee is under suspension 
at the time of his removal, such removal shall take effect from the date on which he was placed under 
suspension.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Statute, a teacher, member 
of the academic staff or other employee may resign, — 
(a) if he is a permanent employee, only after giving three months' notice in writing to the 
Executive Council or the appointing authority, as the case may be or by paying three months' sa lary in 
lieu thereof; and  
(b) if he is not a permanent employee, only after giving one month's notice in writing to the 
Executive Council or, as the case may be, the appointing authority or by paying one month's salary in 
lieu thereof:  
Provided that such r esignation shall take effect only on the date on which the resignation is accepted 
by the Executive Council or the appointing authority, as the case may be.  
30. Honorary Degrees .—(1) The Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic 
Council and by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and 
voting, make proposals to the Visitor for the conferment of honorary degrees:  
Provided that in case of emergency, the Executive Council may, on its own motion, make such 
proposals.  
(2) The Executive Council may, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the 
members present and voting, withdraw, with the previous sanction of the Visitor, any honorary degree 
conferred by the University.  
31. Withdrawal of degrees, etc .—The Executive Council may, by a special resolution passed by a 
majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw any degree or academic 
distinction conferred on, or any certificate or diploma g ranted to, any person by the University for good 
and sufficient cause:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been given to that person 
calling upon him to show cause within such time as may be specified in the notic e why such a resolution 
should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in support of 
them, have been considered by the Executive Council.  
32. Maintenance of discipline among students of the University .—(1) All powers  relating to 
discipline and disciplinary action in relation to students of the University shall vest in the                          
Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor may delegate all or any of his powers as he deems proper to a Proctor and to 
such other officers as  he may specify in this behalf.  34 
 (3) Without prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to the maintenance of discipline and 
taking such action, as may seem to him appropriate for the maintenance of discipline, the Vice -Chancellor 
may, in exercise of his powers, by order, direct that any student be expelled, or rusticated, for a specified 
period, or be not admitted to a course of study in a college, institution or Department of the University for 
a stated period, or be punished with fine for an amount to be specified in the order, or be debarred from 
taking an examination or examinations conducted by the University, college, institution or Department or 
a School for  one or more years, or that the results of the student or students con cerned in the examination 
or examinations in which he or they have appeared be cancelled.  
(4) The Principals of colleges, institutions, Deans of Schools of Studies and Heads of teaching 
Departments in the University shall have the authority to exercise all  such disciplinary powers over the 
students in their respective colleges, institutions, Schools and teaching Departments in the University as 
may be necessary for the proper conduct of such colleges, institutions, Sc hools and teaching Departments.  
(5)Witho ut prejudice to the powers of the Vice -Chancellor, the Principals and other persons specified 
in clause ( 4), detailed rules of discipline and proper conduct shall be made by the University. The 
Principals of colleges, institutions, Deans of Schools of Stud ies and Heads of teaching Departments in the 
University may also make the supplementary rules as they deem necessary for the aforesaid purpose.  
(6) At the time of admission, every student shall be required to sign a declaration to the effect that he 
submit s himself to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Vice -Chancellor and other authorities of the 
University.  
33. Maintenance of discipline among Students of colleges, etc .—All powers relating to discipline 
and disciplinary action in relation to students of a  college or an institution, not maintained by the 
University, shall vest in the Principal of the college or institution, as the case may be, in accordance with 
the procedure prescribed by the Ordinances.  
34. Admission of colleges, etc., to the privilege of  the University .—(1) Colleges and other 
institutions situated within the jurisdiction of the University may be admitted to such privileges of the 
University as the Executive Council may decide on the following conditions, namely: — 
(i) Every such college or  institution shall have a regularly constituted Governing Body, consisting 
of not more than fifteen persons approved by the Executive Council and including among others, two 
teachers of the University to be nominated by the Executive Council and three repr esentatives of the 
teaching staff of whom the Principal of the college or institution shall be one. The procedure for 
appointment of members of the Governing Body and other matters affecting the management of a 
college or an institution shall be prescribed  by the Ordinances:  
Provided that the said condition shall not apply in the case of colleges and institutions maintained 
by Government which shall, however, have an Advisory Committee consisting of not more than 
fifteen persons which shall consist of among  others, three teachers including the Principal of the 
college or institution, and two teachers of the University nominated by the Executive Council.  
(ii) Every such college or institution shall satisfy the Executive Council on the following matters, 
namel y:— 
(a) the suitability and adequacy of its accommodation and equipment for teaching;  
(b) the qualifications and adequacy of its teaching staff and the conditions of their service;  
(c) the arrangements for the residence, welfare, discipline and supervision  of students;  
(d) the adequacy of financial provision made for the continued maintenance of the college or 
institution; and  
(e) such other matters as are essential for the maintenance of the standards of University 
education.  
(iii) No college or institution shall be admitted to any privileges of the University except on the 
recommendation of the Academic Council made after considering the report of a Committee of 
Inspection appointed for the purpose by the Academic Council.  35 
 (iv) Colleges and insti tutions desirous of admission to any privileges of the University shall be 
required to intimate their intention to do so in writing so as to reach the Registrar not later than the 
15th August, preceding the year from which permission applied for is to have  effect.  
(v) A college or an institution shall not, without the previous permission of the Executive Council 
and the Academic Council, suspend instruction in any subject or course of study which it is 
authorised to teach and teaches.  
(2) Appointment to the  teaching staff and Principals of colleges or institutions admitted to the 
privileges of the University shall be made in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to colleges and institutions maintained by 
Government.  
(3) The service conditions of the administrative and other non -academic staff of every college or 
institution referred to in clause  (2) shall be such as may be laid down in the Ordinances:  
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to colle ges and institutions maintained by 
Government.  
(4) Every college or institution admitted to the privilege of the University shall  be inspected at least 
once in every two academic years by a Committee appointed by the Academic Council, and the report of 
the Committee shall be submitted to the Academic Council, which shall forward the same to the 
Executive Council with such recommendations as it may deem fit to make.  
(5) The Executive Council, after considering the report and the recommendations, if any, of t he 
Academic Council, shall forward a copy of the report to the Governing Body of the college or institution 
with such remarks, if any, as it may deem fit for suitable action.  
(6) The Executive Council may, after consulting the Academic Council, withdraw an y privileges 
granted to a college or an institution, at any time it considers that the college or institution does not satisfy 
any of the conditions on the fulfilment of which the college or institution was admitted to such privileges:  
Provided that before  any privileges are so withdrawn, the Governing Body of the college or 
institution concerned shall be given an opportunity to represent to the Executive Council why such action 
should not be taken.  
(7) Subject to the conditions set forth in clause ( 1), the  Ordinances may prescribe — 
(i) such other conditions as may be considered necessary;  
(ii) the procedure for the admission of colleges and institutions to the privileges of the University 
and for the withdrawal of those privileges.  
(8) the constitution of B oard of affiliation and recognition and the terms of office of its members shall 
be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
35. Convocations .—Convocations of the University for the conferring of degrees or for other 
purposes shall be held in such manner as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
36. Acting Chairman of meetings .—Where no provision is made for a President or Chairman to 
preside over a meeting of any authority of the University or any Committee of such authority or when the 
President or Chairman so provi ded for is absent, the members present shall elect one from among 
themselves to preside at such meeting.  
37. Resignation .—Any member, other than an ex officio  member of the Court, the Executive 
Council, the Academic Council or any other authority of the Un iversity or any committee of such 
authority may resign by letter addressed to the Registrar and the resignation shall take effect as soon as 
such letter is received by the Registrar.  
38. Disqualifications .—(1) A person shall be disqualified for being chose n as, and for being, a 
member of any of the authorities of the University, — 
(i) if he is of unsound mind;  36 
 (ii) if he is an undischarged insolvent; and  
(iii) if he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving moral turpitude and 
sentenced in  respect thereof to imprisonmen t for not less than six months.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of the 
disqualifications mentioned in clause ( 1), the question shall be referred to the Visitor and his decisio n 
shall be final and no suit or other proceeding shall lie in any civil court against such decision.  
39. Residence condition for membership and office .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Statutes, a person who is not ordinarily resident in India sha ll be eligible to be an officer of the University 
or a member of any authority of the University.  
40. Membership of authorities by virtue of membership of other bodies .—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Statutes, a person who holds any post in the University or is a member of any 
authority or body of the University in his capacity as a member of a particular authority or body or as the 
holder of a particular appointment shall hold such office or membership only for so long as he continues 
to be a me mber of that particular authority or body or the holder of that particular appointment, as the 
case may be.  
41. Alumni Association .—(1) There shall be an Alumni Association for the University.  
(2) The subscription for membership of the Alumni Association s hall be prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(3) No member of the Alumni Association shall be entitled to vote or stand for election unless he has 
been a member of the Association for at least one year prior to the date of the election and is a degree 
holder of t he University of at least five years standing:  
Provided that the condition relating to the completion of one year's membership shall not apply in the 
case of the first election.  
42. Students' Council .—(1) There shall be constituted in the University, a Stu dents' Council for 
every academic year, consisting of — 
(i) the Dean of Students' Welfare, who shall be the Chairman of the Students' Council;  
(ii) all students who have won prizes in the previous academic year in the fields of studies, fine 
arts, sports an d extension work;  
(iii) ten students to be nominated by the Academic Council on the basis of merit in studies, sports 
activities and all -round development of personality:  
Provided that any student of the University shall have the right to bring up any matt er concerning the 
University before the Students' Council if so permitted by the Chairman, and he shall have the right to 
participate in the discussions at any meeting when the matter is taken up for consideration.  
(2) The functions of the Students' Counci l shall be to make suggestions to the appropriate authorities 
of the University in regard to the programmes of studies, students' welfare and other matters of 
importance in regard to the working of the University in general and such suggestions shall be ma de on 
the basis of consensus of opinion.  
(3) The Students' Council shall meet at least once in an academic year preferably in the beginning of 
that year.  
43. Ordinances how to be made .—(1) The first Ordinances made under sub -section ( 2) of section 30 
may b e amended, repealed or added to at any time by the Executive Council in the manner specified 
below.  
(2) No Ordinance in respect of the matters enumerated in section 30 other than those enumerated in 
clause ( n) of sub -section ( 1) thereof, shall be made by the Executive Council unless a draft of such 
Ordinance has been proposed by the Academic Council.  37 
 (3) The Executive Council shall not have power to amend any draft of any Ordinance proposed by the 
Academic Council under clause ( 2), but may reject the propo sal or return the draft to the Academic 
Council for re -consideration, either in whole or in part, together with any amendment which the 
Executive Council may suggest.  
(4) Where the Executive Council has rejected or returned the draft of an Ordinance propos ed by the 
Academic Council, the Academic Council may consider the question afresh and in case the original draft 
is reaffirmed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting and more than 
half the total number of members of the  Academic Council, the draft may be sent back to the Executive 
Council which shall either adopt it or refer it to the Visitor whose decision shall be final.  
(5) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall come into effect immediately.  
(6) Every Ord inance made by the Executive Council shall be submitted to the Visitor within two 
weeks from the date of its adoption. The Visitor shall have the power to direct the University within four 
weeks of the receipt of the Ordinance to suspend the operation of a ny such Ordinance and he shall, as 
soon as possible, inform the Executive Council about his objection to the proposed Ordinance. The 
Visitor may, after receiving the comments of the University, either withdraw the order suspending the 
Ordinance or disallow  the Ordinance, and his decision shall be final.  
44. Regulations .—(1) The authorities of the University may make Regulations consistent with the 
Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the following matters, namely: — 
(i) laying down the procedure to be observed at their meetings and the number of members 
required to form a quorum;  
(ii) providing for all matters which are required by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances to be 
prescribed by Regulations; and  
(iii) providing for all other matters solely c oncerning such authorities or committees appointed by 
them and not provided for by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the giving of notice to the 
members of such authority of the dates of meeting and of the business to be considered at meetings and 
for the keeping of a record of the proceedings of meetings.  
(3) The Executive Council may direct the amendment in such manner as it may specify, of any 
Regulation made under the Stat utes or the annulment of any such Regulation.  
45. Delegation of powers .—Subject to the provisions of the Act and the Statutes, any officer or 
authority of the University may delegate his or its powers to any other officer or authority or person under 
his o r its respective control and subject to the condition that overall responsibility for the exercise of the 
powers so delegated shall continue to vest in the officer or authority delegating such powers.  
46. Equivalence Committee .—(1) Keeping in view the outs tanding nature of qualification in 
maritime discipline, Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, Government of India 
constituted an “Equivalence Committee ” with a view to consider relativity of the existing teaching posts 
in four Government Maritime Institutes (Marine Engineering and Research Institute, Kolkata and 
Mumbai,  Lal  Bahadur  Shastri College of Advanced Maritime Studies and Research,  Mumbai,  Training   38 
 Ship Chanakya, Navi Mumbai), presently under Indian Institute of Maritime Stud ies with equivalent posts 
in the proposed University. The recommendation of the committee is given in the Table below:  
TABLE  
(1) (2) 
Name of the present posts and pay scale  and 
recruitment rules as per the Gazette  notification  Recommendation by the 'Equivalence  
Committee' for recognition of post in   
University  
Captain Superintendent/Principal/ Director  
(Rs.18400 -500-22400)  Professor  
Vice Principal/Deputy/Chief Officer/Senior Engineer 
Officer/Senior  Nautical Officer  
(Rs.14300 -400-18300)  Associate  Professor  
Engineer Officer/Nautical Officer   
(Rs.12000 -375-16500)  Assistant  Professor  
Senior Lecturer  
(Rs.12000 -375-16500)  Assistant  Professor  
Senior Lecturer (MERI)  
(Rs.10000 -325-15000)  Senior Lecturer  
Lecturer  
(Rs.8000 -275-13500)  Lecturer  
(2) In the absence of Post -graduate and Doctoral studies in maritime discipline, the existing posts in 
the Institutes are deemed to be equivalent to the University posts in the appropriate scale.  
(3) The qualifications for future direct recruitments shall be gove rned by separate Ordinances to be 
framed by the University.  
47. Review of fees .—The Fees shall be reviewed after every three years.  
_________  
--------------------------The Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry, Act 2008--------------------------
1 
 THE JAWAHARLAL INSTITUTE OF POST -GRADUATE MEDICAL  
EDUCATION AND RESEARCH, PUDUCHERRY ACT, 2008  
__________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration of Jawaharlal Institute of Post -Graduate Medical Education and  Research  
Puducherry, as an institution of national importance.  
3. Definitions.  
4. Incorporation of Institute.  
5. Composition of Institute.  
6. Term of office of, and vacancies among members.  
7. President of Institute, his powers and functions.  
8. Allowa nces of President and members.  
9. Meeting of Institute.  
10. Governing Body and other committees of Institute.  
11. Staff of Institute.  
12. Objects of Institute.  
13. Functions of Institute.  
14. Vesting of property.  
15. Payment to Institute.  
16. Fund of Institute.  
17. Budget of Institute.  
18. Accounts and audit.  
19. Annual report.  
20. Pension and provident funds.  
21. Authentication of orders and instruments of Institute.  
22. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc.  
23. Grant of medical degrees, diplomas , etc., by Institute.  
24. Recognition of medical qualifications granted by Institute.  
25. Control by Central Government.  
26. Resolution of differences.  
27. Returns and information.  
28. Transfer of service of existing employees.  
29. Power to make rules.  
30. Power to make regulations.  
31. Laying  of rules and regulations befor e Parliament.  
32. Power to remove difficulties.  
 
 
  2 
 THE JAWAHARLAL INSTITUTE OF POST -GRADUATE MEDICAL  
EDUCATION AND RESEARCH, PUDUCHERRY ACT, 2008  
ACT NO. 19 OF 2008  
[16th May, 2008 .] 
An Act  to declare the Institution known  as the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical 
Education and Research, Puducherry, to be an institution of national importance and to provide 
for its incorporation and matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -ninth Year of the Republic of India as foll ows:— 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Jawaharlal Institute of  
Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry Act, 2008.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration of Jawaharlal Institute of Post -Graduate  Medical Education and Research  
Puducherry, as  an institution  of national importance .—Whereas the objects of the instit ution known 
as the Jawaharlal Institute of Post -Graduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry in the  
Union territory of Puducherry are such as to make the institution one of national importance, it is hereby 
declared that the institution known as the Jawaharlal Institute of Post -Graduate Medical Education and 
Research, Puducherry is an institution of national importance.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Fund ” means the Fund of the Institute referred to in se ction 16;  
(b) “Governing Body ” means the Governing Body of the Institute;  
(c) “Institute ” means the institution known as the Jawaharlal Institute of Post -Graduate Medical 
Education and Research, Puducherry, incorporated under this Act;  
(d) “member ” means a member of the Institute;  
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(f) “specified ” means specified by regulations made under this Act.  
4. Incorporation of Institute .—The Jawaharlal Institute of Post -Graduate Medical Education and 
Research, Puducherry, an Institute functioning under the Union Ministery of Health and Family Welfare, 
is hereby constituted a body corporate by the name aforesaid and as such body corporate, it shall have 
perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold 
and dispose of property and to contract and shall, by that name, sue and be  sued. 
5. Composition of Institute .—(1) The Institute shall consist of  the following members, namely: — 
(a) Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry or Department of Health and Family 
Welfare, ex officio ; 
(b) the Vice -Chancellor of the Puducherry University, ex officio ; 
(c) the Vice -Chancellor of the Tam il Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University,Tamil Nadu,  
ex officio ; 
(d) the Director -General of Health Services, Government of India, ex officio ; 
(e) the Director of the Institute, ex officio ; 
(f) Chief Secretary, Government of Puducherry, ex officio ; 
                                                           
1. 14th July, 2008, vide notification No. S.O. 1672(E), dated 14th July, 2008, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, s ec. 
3(ii). 3 
 (g) Secretary to the Government of India or his nominee (not below the rank of Joint Secretary) in 
the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, ex officio ; 
(h) Secretary to the Government of India or his nominee (not below the rank of Joint Secretary)  in 
the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development, ex officio;  
(i) seven persons of whom one shall be a non -medical scientist representing the Indian Science 
Congress Association, to be nominated by the Central Government in su ch manner as may be 
prescribed;  
(j) four representatives of the medical faculties of Indian Universities to be nominated by the 
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed; and  
(k) three Members of Parliament of whom two shall be elected from among themselves by the 
members of the House of the People and one from among themselves by the members of the Council 
of States.  
(2) It is hereby declared that the office of member of the Institute shall not disqualify its holder for 
being chosen as, or f or being, a member of either House of Parliament.  
6. Term of office of, and vacancies among members .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this 
section, the term of office of a member shall be five years from the date of his nomination or election.  
(2) The term of office of a member elected under clause ( k) of sub -section ( 1) of section 5 shall come 
to an end as soon as he becomes a Minister or Minister of State or Deputy Minister or the Speaker or the 
Deputy Speaker of Lok Sabha or the Deputy Chairman of Ra jya Sabha or ceases to be a member of the 
House from which he was elected.  
(3) The term of office of an ex officio  member shall continue so long as he holds the office by virtue 
of which he is such a member.  
(4) The term of office of a member nominated or elected to fill a casual vacancy shall continue for the 
remainder of the term of the member in whose place he is nominated or elected.  
(5) An out -going member other than a member elected under clause ( k) of sub -section ( 1) of section 5 
shall continue in of fice until another person is nominated as a member in his place or for a period of three 
months, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that the Central Government shall nominate a member in place of an out -going member 
within the said period of three months.  
(6) An out -going member shall be eligible for re -nomination or re -election.  
(7) A member may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government 
but he shall continue in office until his resignation is accepted by that Government.  
(8) The manner of filling vacancies among members shall be such as may be prescribed.  
7. President of Institute, his powers and functions .—(1) There shall be a President of the Institute 
who shall be nominated by the Central Government from among the member s other than the Director of 
the Institute.  
(2) The President shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as are laid down in this Act 
or as may be prescribed.  
8. Allowances of President and members .—The President and other members shall receive such 
allowances from the Institute as may be prescribed.  
9. Meetings of Institute .—The Institute shall hold its first meeting at such time and place as may be 
appointed by the Central Government and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the 
transaction of business at the first meeting as may be laid down by that Government; and thereafter, the 
Institute shall meet at such times and places and observe such rules of procedure in regard to the 
transaction of business including quorum at i ts meetings as may be specified.  4 
 10. Governing Body and other committees of Institute .—(1) There shall be a Governing Body of 
the Institute which shall be constituted by the Institute in such manner as may be specified:  
Provided that the number of persons who are not members of the Institute shall not exceed one -third 
of the total membership of the Governing Body.  
(2) The Governing Body shall be the executive committee of the Institute and shall exercise such 
powers and discharge such functions as the Insti tute may specify in this behalf.  
(3) The President of the Institute shall be the Chairperson of the Governing Body and as Chairperson 
thereof he shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as may be specified.  
(4) The procedure to be followed i n exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions by the 
Governing Body, and the term of office of, and the manner of filling vacancies among the members of the 
Governing Body shall be such as may be specified.  
(5) Subject to such control and restric tions as may be prescribed, the Institute may constitute as many 
standing committees and as many ad hoc  committees as it thinks fit for exercising any power or 
discharging any function of the Institute or for inquiring into, or reporting or advising upon, any matter 
which the Institute may refer to them.  
(6) The Chairperson and members of the Governing Body and the Chairperson and the members of a 
standing committee or an ad hoc  committee shall receive such allowances, as may be specified.  
11. Staff of Institute .—(1) There shall be a chief executive officer of the Institute who shall be 
designated as the Director of the Institute and shall, subject to such rules as may be prescribed, be 
appointed by the Institute:  
Provided that the first Director of the Institute shall be appointed by the Central Government.  
(2) The Director shall act as the Secretary to the Institute as well as the Governing Body.  
(3) The Director shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his 
office  or until he attains the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier.  
(4) The Director shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as may be specified, or as 
may be delegated to him by the Institute or the President of the Institute or the Go verning Body or the 
Chairperson of the Governing Body.  
(5) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, the Institute may appoint such number of other 
officers and employees as may be necessary for the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions 
and may determine the designations and grades of such other officers and employees.  
(6) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, the Director and other officers and employees of the 
Institute shall be entitled to such salary and allowances and shall be g overned by such conditions of 
service in respect of leave, pension, provident fund and other matters as may be specified.  
12. Objects of Institute .—The objects of the Ins titute shall be — 
(a) to develop patterns of teaching in undergraduate and postgraduate medical education in all its 
branches so as to demonstrate a high standard of medical education;  
(b) to bring together, as far as may be, in one place educational facilities of the highest ord er for 
the training of personnel in all important branches of health activity; and  
(c) to attain self -sufficiency in postgraduate medical education to meet the country's needs for 
specialists and medical teachers.  
13. Functions of Institute .—With a view to  the promotion of the objects specified i n section 12, the 
Institute may — 
(a) provide for undergraduate and postgraduate teaching in the science of modern medicine and 
other allied sciences, including physical and biological sciences;  
(b) provide  facilities for research in various branches of such sciences;  5 
 (c) provide for the teaching of humanities;  
(d) conduct experiments in new methods of medical education, both undergraduate and 
postgraduate, in order to arrive at satisfactory standards of suc h education;  
(e) specify courses and curricula for both undergraduate and postgraduate studies;  
(f) notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being i n force, establish and 
maintain— 
(i) one or more medical colleges with different departments, including a department of 
preventive and social medicine, sufficiently staffed and equipped to undertake not only 
undergraduate medical education but also postgraduate medical education in different subjects,  
(ii) one or more well -equipped hos pitals,  
(iii) a dental college with such institutional facilities for the practice of dentistry and for the 
practical training of students as may be necessary,  
(iv) a nursing college sufficiently staffed and equipped for the training of nurses,  
(v) rural a nd urban health organisations which will form centres for the field training of the 
medical, dental and nursing students of the Institute as well as for research into community health 
problems, and  
(vi) other institutions for the training of different type s of health workers, such as 
physiotherapists, occupational therapists, pharmacists, drug analysts and medical technicians of 
various kinds;  
(g) train teachers from different medical colleges in India;  
(h) hold examinations and grant such degrees, diplomas  and other academic distinctions and titles 
in undergraduate and postgraduate medical education as may be laid down in the regulations;  
(i) institute, and appoint persons to, professorships, readerships, lecturerships and posts of any 
description in accord ance with regulations;  
(j) receive grants from the Government and gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests and transfers 
of properties, both movable and immovable, from donors, benefactors, testators or transferors, as the 
case may be;  
(k) deal  with any property belonging to, or vested in, the Institute in any manner which is 
considered necessary for promoting the objects specified in section 12;  
(l) demand and receive with the prior approval of the Central Government such fees and other 
charges  as may be specified:  
Provided that such fees and other charges payable by the students shall in no case exceed the fees 
and other charges specified by a medical Institute of the Central Government;  
(m) reserve at least twenty seats out of every seventy -five seats in undergraduate courses in the 
institute for local applicants;  
(n) provide free treatment to the poor patients in the same manner as are being provided by a 
medical Institute of the Central Government;  
(o) construct  quarters for its staff and allot such quarters to the staff in accordance with such 
regulations as may be made in this behalf;  
(p) borrow money, with the prior approval of the Central Government, on the security of the 
property of the Institute;  
(q) do al l such other acts and things as may be necessary to further the objects specified in  
section 12.  6 
 14. Vesting of property .—The properties of the Jawaharlal Institute of Post -Graduate Medical 
Education and Research, Puducherry which vested in the Central Go vernment shall, on the 
commencement of this Act, vest in the Institute.  
15. Payment to Institute .—The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Institute in each financial year such sums of money and in 
such manner as may be considered necessary by that Government for the exercise of its powers and 
discharge of its functions under this Act.  
16. Fund of Institute .—(1) The Institute shall maintain a Fund to which shall be credited — 
(a) all moneys pro vided by the Central Government;  
(b) all fees and other charges received by the Institute;  
(c) all moneys received by the Institute by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests 
or transfers; and  
(d) all moneys received by the Institute in any other manner or from any other source.  
(2) All moneys credited to the Fund shall be deposited in such banks or invested in such manner as 
the Institute may, with the approval of the Central Government, decide.  
(3) The Fund shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of the Institute including expenses 
incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions under section 13.  
17. Budget of Institute .—The Institute shall prepare in such form and at such  time every year a 
budget in respect of the financial year next ensuing showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the 
Institute and shall forward to the Central Government such number of copies thereof as may be 
prescribed.  
18. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Institute shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the balance -sheet in such form as the Central 
Government may, by rules prescribe, and in accordance with such general directio ns as may be issued by 
that Government, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Institute shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and 
any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Institute to the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Institute shall have the  same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India has in connection with the 
audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, acc ounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the offices of the 
Institute as well as of the institutions established and maintained by it.  
(4) The Accounts of the Institute as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of I ndia or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before both 
Houses of Parliament.  
19. Annual report .—The Institute shall prepare for every year a report of its activities during that 
year and submit the report to the Central Government in such form and on or before such date as may be 
prescribed and a copy of this report shall be laid before both Houses of  Parliament within one month of its 
receipt.  
20. Pension and provident funds .—(1) The Institute shall constitute for the benefit of its officers, 
teachers and other employees in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be specified by 
regulations,  such pension and provident funds as it may deem fit.  7 
 (2) Where any such pension or provident fund has been constituted, the Central Government may 
declare that the provisions o f the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925)  shall apply to, such fund as if it 
were a Government Provident Fund.  
21. Authentication of orde rs and instruments of Institute .—All orders and decisions of the 
Institute shall be authenticated by the signature of the Director or any other member authorise d by the 
Institute in this behalf and all other instruments shall be authenticated by the signature of such officers as 
may be authorised by the Institute.  
22. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc .—No act done or proceeding 
taken by  the Institute, Governing Body or any standing or ad hoc  committee under this Act shall be 
questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the 
Institute, Governing Body or such standing or ad hoc  commit tee. 
23. Grant of medical degrees, diplomas, etc., by Institute .—Notwithstanding  anything contained in 
any other law for the time being in force, the Institute shall have the power to grant medical, dental, 
nursing degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions and titles under this Act.  
24. Recognition of medical qualifications gr anted by Institute .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956  (102 of 1956) the Dentist Act, 1948 (16 of 1948)  the 
Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947 (48 of 1947)  the medical degrees and diplomas, dental degrees and 
nursing d egrees granted by the Institute under this Act shall be recognised medical qualifications for the 
purposes of the Acts aforesaid and shall be deemed to be included in the Schedules to the respective Acts.  
25. Control by Central Government .—The Institute sh all carry out such directions as may be issued 
to it from time to time by the Central Government for the efficient administration of this Act.  
26. Resolution of differences .—If in, or in connection with, the exercise of its powers and discharge 
of its func tions by the Institute under this Act, any dispute arises between the Institute and the Central 
Government, the decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final.  
27. Returns and information .—The Institute shall furnish to the Central Government such reports, 
returns and other information as that Government may require from time to time.  
28. Transfer o f service of existing employees .—(1) On and from the date of commencement of this 
Act, every employee holding a post in the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and 
Research, Puducherry, before that date, shall hold the post in the Institute by the same tenure, and upon 
the same terms and conditions of service including remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement and 
other termi nal benefits as he would have held such post as if this Act had not been passed and shall 
continue to do so as an employee of the Institute for a period of 1[three and one -half years] from the date 
of the commencement of this Act, unless he, within the sai d period of  1[three and one -half years] , opts not 
to be an employee of the Institute or until his tenure, remuneration or other terms and conditions of 
service are duly altered by the regulations:  
2[Provided that the employees, who have, or as the case may  be, who have not, exercised their option 
and not transferred out of the Institute as on the date of coming into force of the Jawaharlal Institute of 
Post-Graduate  Medical Education and Research, Puducherry (Amendment) Act, 2011 (10 of 2011), may 
exercise  their option afresh before the specified period:  
Provided further that] the officers of the Jawaharlal Institute of Post -Graduate Medical Education and 
Research, Puducherry belonging to the Central Health Service, who opts to be an employee of the 
Institu te then, his appointment, pay, allowances and other terms and conditions of service shall be such as 
may be prescribed.  
(2) Every person, who opts not to be an employee of the Institute within the period so specified, shall 
be governed by the rules and ord ers as are applicable to the Central Government officers and employees 
of equivalent rank.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2011, s. 2, for “one year” (w.e.f.  27-8-2011).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “Provided that” (w.e.f. 27 -8-2011).  8 
 (3) Subject to the provisions of this section, the tenure, remuneration and other terms and conditions 
of service including pension of any employee of the Institute shall not be altered to his disadvantage 
without the previous approval of the Central Government.  
29. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government, after consultation with the Institute, may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act:  
Provided that consultation with the Institute, shall not be necessary on the first occasion of making of 
rules under this section, but the Central Government shall take into consideration the suggestions which 
the Institute may make in relation to the amendment of such rules after they are made.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of nominatio n of members under clauses ( j) and ( k) of sub-section ( 1) of section 5;  
(b) the manner of filling vacancies under sub -section ( 8) of section 6;  
(c) the powers and functions to be exercised and discharged by the President of the Institute under 
section 7;  
(d) the allowances to be paid to the President and other members of the Institute under section 8;  
(e) the control and restrictions in relation to the constitution of standing and  ad hoc  committees 
under sub -section ( 5) of section 10;  
(f) the tenure of office, salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the Director and 
other officers and employees of the Institute appointed by the Institute under section 11;  
(g) the form in which, and the time at which, the budgets and reports shall be pr epared by the 
Institute under section 17;  
(h) the form of annual statement of accounts including balance -sheet under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 18;  
(i) the form of annual report under section 19;  
(j) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed by  rules.  
30. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Institute with the previous approval of the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and 
the rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of  this Act, and without prejudice to the generality of 
this power, s uch regulations may provide for — 
(a) the summoning and holding of meetings, other than the first meeting, of the Institute, the time 
and place where such meetings are to be held and the conduct of business at such meetings under 
section 9;  
(b) the manner of constituting the Governing Body and standing and ad hoc  committees, the term 
of office of, and the manner of filling vacancies therein, the allowances to be paid to the members and 
the procedure to be followed by the Governing Body; standing and ad hoc  committees in the conduct 
of their business, exercise of their powers, discharge of their functions under section 10;  
(c) the powers and duties of the Director and other officers and empl oyees of the Institute under 
sub-sections ( 3) and ( 4) and other conditions of service under  sub-section ( 5) of section 11;  
(d) the power of the Institu te under section 13, to specify — 
(i) courses and curricula for undergraduate and postgraduate studies;  
(ii) hold examination and grant degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions and titles 
under clause ( h); 
(iii) the professorships, readerships, lecturerships and other posts which may be instituted and 
persons who may be appointed to such posts under c lause ( i); 9 
 (iv) the management of the properties of the Institute under clause ( k); 
(v) the fees and other charges which may be demanded and received by the Institute under 
clause ( l); 
(e) the manner in which, and the conditions subject to which, pension and provident funds may be 
constituted for the benefit of officers, teachers and other employees of the Institute under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 20;  
(f) any other matter for which under this  Act provisions may be made by regulations.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the first regulations under this Act shall be 
made by the Central Government; and any regulations so made may be altered or rescinded by the 
Institute in  exercise of its powers under sub -section ( 1). 
31. Laying of rules and regulations befo re Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in ma king any modification in the rule or regulation or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall  thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that an y such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation.  
32. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provision 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this secti on, after the expiry of a period of two years 
from the date of commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.   
--------------------------The Nation Waterway (Kakinada-Puducherry Stretch of Canals and the Kaluvelly Tank, Bhadrachalam-Rajahmundry Stretch of River Dodavari and Wazirabad-Vijayawada Stretch of River Krishna) Act, 2008--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL WATERWAY (KAKINADA -PUDUCHERRY STRETCH  
OF CANALS AND THE KALUVELLY TANK, BHADRACHALAM - 
RAJAHMUNDRY STRETCH OF RIVER GODAVARI AND  
WAZIRABAD -VIJAYAWADA STRETCH OF  
RIVER KRISHNA) ACT, 2008  
ACT NO. 24 OF2008  
[17th November , 2008.]  
An Act to provide for the declaration of the Kakinada -Puducherry stretch of canals  comprising of 
Kakinada canal, Eluru canal, Commamur canal, Buckingham canal and the Kaluvelly tank, 
Bhadrachalam -Rajahmundry stretch of river Godavari and Wazirabad -Vijayawa da stretch of 
river Krishna in the States of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu and the Union territory of 
Puducherry to be a national waterway and also to provide for the regulation and development 
of the said stretch of the rivers and  the canals for the purpo ses of shipping and navigation on 
the said waterway and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -ninth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be ca lled the National Waterway (Kakinada -
Puducherry stretch of Canals and Kaluvelly Tank, Bhadrachalam -Rajahmundry stretch of River Godavari 
and Wazirabad -Vijayawada stretch of River Krishna) Act, 2008.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration of certain stretches of rivers an d canals as National Waterway .—The               
Kakinada -Puducherry stretch of canals comprising of Kakinada canal, Eluru ca nal, Commamur canal, 
Buckingham canal and the Kaluvelly tank, Bhadrachalam -Rajahmundry stretch of river Godavari and                         
Wazirabad -Vijayawada stretch of river Krishna, the limits of which are specified in the Schedule, is 
hereby declare d to be a National Waterway.  
3. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union of certain stretches of rivers and canals 
as National Waterway. —It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest that the Union 
should take under its con trol the regulation and development of Kakinada -Puducherry stretch of canal 
comprising of Kakinada canal, Eluru canal, Commamur canal, Buckingham canal and Kaluvelly tank, 
Bhadrachalam -Rajahmundry stretch of river Godavari and Wazirabad -Vijayawada stretch of river 
Krishna for the purposes of shipping and navigation on the national waterway to the extent provided in 
the Inland Waterways Authority of India Act, 1985  (82 o f 1985) . 
  
                                                           
1. 25th November, 2008, vide notification No. S.O.  2719(E), dated  25th November, 2008,  see Gazette of  India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3(ii). 2 
  
THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 2)  
LIMITS  OF THE  NATIONAL  WATERWAY  (KAKINADA -PUDUCHERRY STRETCH OF CANALS AND   
KALUVELLY  TANK , BHADRACHALAM -RAJAHMUNDRY  STRETCH OF RIVER  GODAVARI  AND             
WAZIRABAD -VIJAYAWADA  STRETCH OF RIVER  KRISHNA ) 
Kakinada -Puducherry canal  
(Canal system consisting of Kakinada canal, Eluru canal, Commamur canal and North Buckingham 
canal, portion of the Coovum river linking North and South Buckingham canals, South Buckingham canal 
and Kaluvelly tank)  
 
Northern limit  A line drawn across the Kakinada canal parallel 
to the Jagannadhapuram road bridge, Kakinada  at 
a distance of 5 00 metres down stream at Lat 16 º 
56’ 24” N, Lon 82 º 14’ 20” E. 
Southern limit  Junction of East Coast Highway and 
Chinnakalawari -Kanakachettikulam road at 
Kanakachettikulam which is the end point of the 
artificial canal l ink to Kaluvelly  tank at Lat 12 º 
02’ 36” N, Lon 79 º 52’ 12” E. 
  
River Godavari  
 
Western limit  Road bridge at Bhadrachalam across river 
Godavari at Lat 17 º 40’ 39” N, Lon 80 º 52’ 52” 
E. 
Eastern limit  Sir Arthur Cotton barrage across river Godavari 
at Dowl aiswaram, Rajahmundry at Lat 16 º 56’ 
05” N, Lon 81 º 45’ 32” E 
River Krishna  
 
Western limit  Road bridge at Wazirabad  across river Krishna at 
Lat 16º 40’ 50” N, Lon 79º 39’ 29” E. 
Eastern limit  Prakasam barrage across river Krishna at 
Vijayawada at Lat 16 º 30’ 18” N, Lon 80 º 36’ 
23” E. 
 
--------------------------The National Investigation Agency Act, 2008--------------------------
 
1 
 THE NATIONAL INVESTIGATION AGENCY ACT, 2008  
____________  
     ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and application.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
NATIONAL  INVESTIGATION  AGENCY  
 
3. Constitution of National Investigation Agency.  
4. Superinten dence of National Investigation Agency.  
5. Manner of constitution of Agency and conditions of service of members.  
 
 
CHAPTER II I 
INVESTIGATION  BY THE  NATIONAL  INVESTIGATION AGENCY  
6. Investigation of Scheduled Offences.  
7. Power to transfer investigation to State Government.  
8. Power to investigate connected offences . 
9. State Government to extend assistance to National Investigation Agency.  
10. Power of State Government to investigate  Scheduled Offences.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
SPECIAL  COURTS  
11. Power of Central Government to constitute Special Courts.  
12. Place of sitting.  
13. Jurisdiction of Special Courts.  
14. Powers of Special  Courts with respect to other offences.  
15. Public Prosecutors . 
16. Procedure and powers of Special Courts.  
17. Protection of witnesses.  
18. Sanction for pr osecution . 
19. Trial by  Special Court to have precedence . 
20. Power to transfer cases to regular courts.  
21. Appeals.  
22. Power of State Government to constitute Special Courts . 
   
2 
 CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS  
23. Power of High Courts to make rules.  
24. Power to remove difficulties.  
25. Power to make rules.  
26. Laying of rules.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
   
3 
 THE NATIONAL INVESTIGATION AGENCY ACT, 2008  
ACT NO. 34 OF 2008  
[31st December, 2008.]  
An Act to constitute an investigation agency at the national level to investigate and prosecute 
offences affecting the sovereignty, security and integrity of India, security of State, friendly 
relations with foreign States and offences under Acts enacted to implement international 
treaties, agreements, conventions and resolutions of the United Nation s, its agencies and 
other international organisations and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -ninth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short t itle, extent and application .—(1) This Act may be called the National Investigation 
Agency Act, 2008.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India and it app lies also— 
(a) to citizens of India outside India;  
(b) to persons in the se rvice of the Government wherever  they may be; and  
(c) to persons on ships and aircrafts registered in India wherever they may be.  
2. Definitions. —(1) In this Act, unless the context  otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Agency” means the National Investigation Agency constituted under section 3;  
(b) “Code” means the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973  (2 of 1974) ; 
(c) “High Court ” means the High Court within whose jurisdiction the Special Court is situated;  
(d) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules;  
(e) “Public Prosecutor ” means a Public Prosecutor or an Addit ional Public Prosecutor or a Special 
Public Prosecutor appointed under section 15;  
(f) “Schedule” means the Schedule to this Act;  
(g) “Scheduled Offence ” means an offence specified in the Schedule;  
(h) “Special Court ” means a Special Court constituted unde r section 11 or, as the case may be, 
under section 22;  
(i) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Code shall have the 
meanings respectively assigned to them in the Code.  
(2) Any reference in this Act to any enactment or any provision thereof shall, in relation to an area in 
which such enactment or such provision is not in force, be construed as a reference to the corresponding 
law or the relevant provision of the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area.  
CHAPTER I I 
NATIONAL  INVESTIGATION AGENCY  
3. Constitution of National Investigation Agency. —(1) Notwithstanding a nything in the Police Act, 
1861  (5 of 1861) , the Central Government may constitute a special agency to be called the National 
Investigation Agency for investigation and prosecution of offences under the Acts specified in the 
Schedule.  
   
4 
 (2) Subject to any orders which the Central Government may make  in this behalf, officers of the 
Agency shall have throughout India in relation to the investigation of Scheduled Offences and arrest of 
persons concerned in such offences, all the powers, duties, privileges and liabilities which police officers 
have in co nnection with the investigation of offences committed therein.  
(3) Any officer of the Agency of, or above, the rank of Sub -Inspector may, subject to any orders 
which the Central Government may make in this behalf, exercise throughout India, any of the powe rs of 
the officer -in-charge of a police station in the area in which he is present for the time being and when so 
exercising such powers shall, subject to any such orders as aforesaid, be deemed to be an officer -in-
charge of a police station discharging th e functions of such an officer within the limits of his station.  
4. Superinten dence of National Investigation Agency .—(1) The superintendence of the Agency 
shall vest in the Central Government.  
(2) The administration of the Agency shall vest in an officer designated as the Director -General 
appointed in this behalf by the Central Government who shall exercise in respect of the Agency such of 
the powers exercisable by a Director -General of Police in respect of the police force in a State, as the 
Central Gover nment may specify in this behalf.  
5. Manner of constitution of Agency and conditions of service of members .—Subject to the 
provisions of this Act, the Agency shall be constituted in such manner as may be prescribed and the 
conditions of service of persons employed in the Agency shall be such as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER II I 
INVESTIGATION  BY THE  NATIONAL  INVESTIGATION AGENCY  
6. Investigation of Scheduled Offences. —(1) On receipt of information and recording thereof under 
section 154 of the Code relating to any Scheduled Offence the officer -in-charge of the police station shall 
forward the report to the State Government forthwith.  
(2) On receipt of the report under su b-section ( 1), the State Government shall forward the report to 
the Central Government as expeditiously as possible.  
(3) On receipt of report from the State Government, the Central Government shall determine on the 
basis of information made available by th e State Government or received from other sources, within 
fifteen days from the date of receipt of the report, whether the offence is a Scheduled Offence or not and 
also whether, having regard to the gravity of the offence and other relevant factors, it is  a fit case to be 
investigated by the Agency.  
(4) Where the Central Government is of the opinion that the offence is a Scheduled Offence and it is a 
fit case to be investigated by the Agency, it shall direct the Agency to investigate the said offence.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, if the Central Government is of the opinion 
that a Scheduled Offence has been committed which is required to be investigated under this Act, it may, 
suo motu , direct the Agency to investigate the said off ence.  
(6) Where any direction has been given under sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 5), the State 
Government and any police officer of the State Government investigating the offence shall not proceed 
with the investigation and shall forthwith transmit the r elevant documents and records to the Agency.  
(7) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that till the Agency takes up the investigation of 
the case, it shall be the duty of the officer -in-charge of the police station to continue the investigation . 
7. Power to transfer investigation to State Government. —While investigating any offence under 
this Act, the Agency, having regard to the gravity of the offence and other relevant factors, may — 
(a) if it is expedient to do so, request the State Government to associate itself with the 
investigation; or  
(b) with the previous approval of the Central Government, transfer the case to the State 
Government for investigation and trial of the offence.  
   
5 
 8. Power to investigate c onnected offences .—While investigating any Scheduled Offence, the 
Agency may also investigate any other offence which the accused is alleged to have committed if the 
offence is connected with the Scheduled Offence.  
9. State Governmen t to extend assistance to National Investigation Agency .—The State 
Government shall extend all assistance and co -operation to the Agency for investigation of the Scheduled 
Offences.  
10. Power of State Government to investigate Scheduled Offences. —Save as otherwise provided 
in this Act, nothing contained in this Act shall affect the powers of the State Government to investigate 
and prosecute any Scheduled Offence or other offences under any law for the time being in force.  
CHAPTER IV  
SPECIAL  COURTS  
11. Powe r of Central Government to constitute Special Courts .—(1) The Central Government 
shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, for the trial of Scheduled Offences, constitute one or more 
Special Courts for such area or areas, or for such case or class or  group of cases, as may be specified in 
the notification.  
(2) Where any question arises as to the jurisdiction of any Special Court, it shall be referred to the 
Central Government whose decision in the matter shall be final.  
(3) A Special Court shall be pr esided over by a judge to be appointed by the Central Government on 
the recommendation of the Chief Justice of the High Court.  
(4) The Agency may make an application to the Chief Justice of the High Court for appointment of a 
Judge to preside over the Spec ial Court.  
(5) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 4), the Chief Justice shall, as soon as possible and 
not later than seven days, recommend the name of a judge for being appointed to preside over the Special 
Court.  
 (6) The Central Government may, if required, appoint an additional judge or additional judges to the 
Special Court, on the recommendation of the Chief Justice of the High Court.  
(7) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a judge or an additional judge of a Special 
Court unless he is, immediately before such appointment, a Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions 
Judge in any State.  
(8) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby provided that the attainment, by a person appointed as a 
judge or an additional judge of a Special  Court, of the age of superannuation under the rules applicable to 
him in the service to which he belongs shall not affect his continuance as such judge or additional judge 
and the Central Government may by order direct that he shall continue as judge unti l a specified date or 
until completion of the trial of the case or cases before him as may be specified in that order.  
(9) Where any additional judge or additional judges is or are appointed in a Special Court, the judge 
of the Special Court may, from time  to time, by general or special order, in writing, provide for the 
distribution of business of the Special Court among all judges including himself and the additional judge 
or additional judges and also for the disposal of urgent business in the event of h is absence or the absence 
of any additional judge.  
12. Place of sitting .—A Special Court may, on its own motion, or on an application made by the 
Public Prosecutor and if it considers it expedient or desirable so to do, sit for any of its proceedings at any 
place other than its ordinary place of sitting.  
13. Jurisdiction of Special Courts. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, every 
Scheduled Offence investigated by the Agency shall be tried only by the Special Court within whose local 
jurisdiction it was committed.  
   
6 
 (2) If, having regard to the exigencies of the situ ation prevailing in a State if, — 
(a) it is not possible to have a fair, impartial or speedy trial; or  
(b) it is not feasible to have the trial without occasioning the breach of peace or grave risk to the 
safety of the accused, the witnesses, the Public Prosecutor or a judge of the Special Court or any of 
them; or  
(c) it is not otherwise in the interests of justice,  
the Supreme Court may transfer any case pending before a Special  Court to any other Special Court 
within that State or in any other State and the High Court may transfer any case pending before a Special 
Court situated in that State to any other Special Court within the State.  
(3) The Supreme Court or the High Court, a s the case may be, may act under this section either on the 
application of the Central Government or a party interested and any such application shall be made by 
motion, which shall, except when the applicant is the Attorney -General for India, be supported  by an 
affidavit or affirmation.  
14. Powers of Special Courts with respect to other offences. —(1) When trying any offence, a 
Special Court may also try any other offence with which the accused may, under the Code be charged, at 
the same trial if the offenc e is connected with such other offence.  
(2) If, in the course of any trial under this Act of any offence, it is found that the accused person has 
committed any other offence under this Act or under any other law, the Special Court may convict such 
person o f such other offence and pass any sentence or award punishment authorised by this Act or, as the 
case may be, under such other law.  
15. Public Prosecutors .—(1) The Central Government shall appoint a person to be the Public 
Prosecutor and may appoint one or  more persons to be the Additional Public Prosecutor or  Additional 
Public Prosecutors:  
Provided that the Central Government may also appoint for any case or class or group of cases a 
Special Public Prosecutor.  
(2) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed as a Public Prosecutor or an Additional Public 
Prosecutor or a Special Public Prosecutor under this section unless he has been in practice as an Advocate 
for not less than seven years or has held any post, for a period of not less than seven year s, under the 
Union or a State, requiring special knowledge of law.  
(3) Every person appointed as a Public Prosecutor or an Additional Public Prosecutor or a Special 
Public Prosecutor under this section shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor within the m eaning of 
clause ( u) of section 2 of the Code, and the provisions of the Code shall have effect accordingly.  
16. Procedure and powers of Special Courts .—(1) A Special Court may take cognizance of any 
offence, without the accused being committed to it for t rial, upon receiving a complaint of facts that 
constitute such offence or upon a police report of such facts.  
(2) Where an offence triable by a Special Court is punishable with imprisonment for a term not 
exceeding three years or with fine or with both, th e Special Court may, notwithstanding anything 
contained in sub -section ( 1) of section 260 or section 262 of the Code, try the offence in a summary way 
in accordance with the procedure prescribed in the Code and the provisions of sections 263 to 265 of the 
Code shall, so far as may be, apply to such trial:  
Provided that when, in the course of a summary trial under this sub -section, it appears to the Special 
Court that the nature of the case is such that it is not desirable to try it in a summary way, the Sp ecial 
Court shall recall any witnesses who may have been examined and proceed to re -hear the case in the 
manner provided by the provisions of the Code for the trial of such offence and the said provisions shall 
apply to, and in relation to, a Special Court  as they apply to and in relation to a Magistrate:  
   
7 
 Provided further that in the case of any conviction in a summary trial under this section, it shall be 
lawful for a Special Court to pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year and  with 
fine which may extend to five lakh rupees.  
(3) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Special Court shall, for the purpose of trial of any 
offence, have all the powers of a Court of Session and shall try such offence as if it were a Court of 
Session so far as may be in accordance with the procedure prescribed in the Code for the trial before a 
Court of Session.  
(4) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, every case transferred to a Special Court under                  
sub-section ( 2) of section 13 shall be dealt with as if such case had been transferred under section 406 of 
the Code to such Special Court.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, but subject to the provisions of section 299 of 
the Code, a Special Court may, if i t thinks fit and for reasons to be recorded by it, proceed with the trial in 
the absence of the accused or his pleader and record the evidence of any witness, subject to the right of 
the accused to recall the witness for cross -examination.  
17. Protection o f witnesses. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, the proceedings 
under this Act may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, be held in camera  if the Special Court so 
desires.  
(2) On an application made by a witness in any proceeding before it or by the Public Prosecutor in 
relation to such witness or on its own motion, if the Special Court is satisfied that the life of such witness 
is in danger, it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, take such measures as it deems fit for keeping 
the identity and address of such witness secret.  
(3) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the 
measures which a Special Court may take und er that sub -section may include — 
(a) the holding of the proceeding s at a place to be decided by the Special Court;  
(b) the avoiding of the mention of the names and addresses of the witnesses in its orders or 
judgments or in any records of the case accessible to public;  
(c) the issuing of any directions for securing that the identity and address of the witnesses are not 
disclosed; and  
(d) a decision that it is in the public interest to order that all or any of the proceedings pending 
before such a Court shall not be published in any manner.  
(4) Any person who contravenes a ny decision or direction issued under sub -section ( 3) shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees.  
18. Sanction for prosecution. —No prosecution, suit or other legal proceedings shall be instituted in 
any court of law, except with the previous sanction of the Central Government, against any member of the 
Agency or any person acting on his behalf in respect of anything done or purported to be done in exercise 
of the pow ers conferred by this Act.  
19. Trial by Special Court to have precedence .—The trial under this Act of any offence by a 
Special Court shall be held on day -to- day basis on all working days and have precedence over the trial of 
any other case against the acc used in any other court (not being a Special Court) and shall be concluded in 
preference to the trial of such other case and accordingly the trial of such other case shall, if necessary, 
remain in abeyance.  
20. Power to tr ansfer cases to regular courts. —Where, after taking cognizance of any offence, a 
Special Court is of the opinion that the offence is not triable by it, it shall, notwithstanding that it has no 
jurisdiction to try such offence, transfer the case for the trial of such offence to any court having 
jurisdiction under the Code and the Court to which the case is transferred may proceed with the trial of 
the offence as if it had taken cognizance of the offence.   
8 
 21. Appeals. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, an appeal shall lie f rom any 
judgment, sentence or order, not being an interlocutory order, of a Special Court to the High Court both 
on facts and on law.  
(2) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be heard by a bench of two Judges of the High Court and 
shall, as far as poss ible, be disposed of within a period of three months from the date of admission of the 
appeal.  
(3) Except as aforesaid, no appeal or revision shall lie to any court from any judgment, sentence or 
order including an interlocutory order of a Special Court.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 3) of section 378 of the Code, an appeal shall 
lie to the High Court against an order of the Special Court granting or refusing bail.  
(5) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a peri od of thirty days from the date of 
the judgment, sentence or order appealed from:  
Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days 
if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not pre ferring the appeal within the period of 
thirty days:  
Provided further that no appeal shall be entertained after the expiry of period of ninety days.  
22. Power of State Government to constitute Special Courts .—(1) The State Government may 
constitute one or more Special Courts for the trial of offences under any or all the enactments specified in 
the Schedule.  
(2) The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the Special Courts constituted by the State 
Government under sub -section ( 1) and shall have effect su bject to the following modifications, namely — 
(i) references to “Central Government ” in sections 11 and 15 shall be construed as references to 
State Government;  
(ii) reference to “Agency” in sub -section ( 1) of section 13 shall be construed as a reference to the 
“investigation agency of the State Government ”; 
(iii) reference to “Attorney -General for India ” in sub -section ( 3) of section 13 shall be construed 
as reference to “Advocate -General of the State ”. 
(3) The jurisdiction conferred by this Act on a Special Court shall, until a Special Court is constituted 
by the State Government under sub -section ( 1) in the case of any offence punishable under this Act, 
notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, be e xercised by the Court of Session of the division in 
which such offence has been committed and it shall have all the powers and follow the procedure 
provided under this Chapter.  
(4) On and from the date when the Special Court is constituted by the State Go vernment the trial of 
any offence investigated by the State Government under the provisions of this Act, which would have 
been required to be held before the Special Court, shall stand transferred to that Court on the date on 
which it is constituted.  
CHAPT ER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Power of High Courts to make rule s.—The High Court may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make such rules, as it may deem necessary for carrying out the provisions of this Act relating to 
Special Courts within its territory.  
24. Power  to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as  may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty:   
9 
 Provided that no order shall be made, under this section after the expiration of two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid,  as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
25. Power to  make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality to the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of constitution of the Agency and the conditions of service of persons employed in 
the Agency under section 5;  
(b) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
26. Laying of rules .—Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessio ns aforesaid, 
both Houses agree s in making any modif ication in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not 
be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejud ice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule.  
   
10 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 2( 1) (f)] 
1. The Atomic Energy Act, 1962 (33 of 1962);  
2. The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (37 of 1967);  
3. The Anti -Hijacking Act, 1982 (65 of 1982) ; 
4. The Suppression of Unlawful Acts against Safety of Civil Aviation Act, 1982 (66 of 1982);  
5. The SAARC Convention (Suppression of Terrorism) Act, 1993 (36 of 1993);  
6. The Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against Safety of Maritime Navigation and Fixed Pl atforms on 
Continental Shelf Act, 2002 (69 of 2002);  
7. The Weapons of Mass Destruction and their Delivery Systems (Prohibition of U nlawful Activities) 
Act, 2005 ( 21 of 2005);  
8. Offences under — 
(a) Chapter VI of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) [sections 121 to 130 (both inclusive)];  
(b) Sections 489 -A to 489 -E (both inclusive) of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860).  
--------------------------The National Waterway (Talcher-Dhamra Stretch of Rivers, Geonkhali-Charbatia Stretch of East Coast Canal, Charbatia-Dhamra Stretch of Matai River and Mahanadi Delta Rivers) Act, 2008--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL WATERWAY (TALCHER -DHAMRA STRETCH OF  
RIVERS, GEONKHALI -CHARBATIA STRETCH OF EAST COAST  
CANAL, CHARBATIA -DHAMRA STRETCH OF MATAI RIVER  
AND MAHANADI DELTA RIVERS) ACT, 2008  
ACT NO. 23 OF 2008  
[17th November , 2008.]  
An Act to provide for the decl aration of the Talcher -Dhamra st retch of Brahmani -Kharsua -
Dhamra rivers, Geonkhali -Charbatia stretch of East Coast Canal, Charbatia -Dhamra 
stretch of Matai river and Mahanadi delta rivers between Mangalgadi and Paradip in the 
States of West Bengal and Orissa to be a national waterway and also to provide for the 
regulation and development of the said stretch of the rivers and the canals for the 
purposes of shipping and navigation on the said waterway and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental ther eto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -ninth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the National Waterway 
(Talcher -Dhamra Stretch of Rivers, Geonkhali -Charbatia Stretch of East Coast Ca nal, Charbatia -
Dhamra Stretch of Matai River and Mahanadi Delta Rivers) Act, 2008.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration of certain stretches of rivers and  canals as National Waterway .—The Talcher -
Dhamra stretch of Brahmani -Kharsua -Dhamra rivers, Geonkhali -Charbatia stretch of East Coast 
Canal, Charbatia -Dhamra stretch of Matai river and Mahanadi delta rivers between Mangalgadi and 
Paradip, the limits of which are specified in the Schedule, is hereby declared to be a  National 
Waterway . 
3. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union of certain stretches of rivers and 
canals for certain purposes .—It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the pub lic interest that the 
Union should take under its control the regulation and development of Talcher -Dhamra stretch of 
Brahmani -Kharsua -Dhamra rivers, Geonkhali -Charbatia stretch of East Coast Canal, Charbatia -
Dhamra stretch of Matai river and Mahanadi delt a rivers between Mangalgadi and Paradip for the 
purposes of shipping and navigation on the national waterway to the extent provided in the Inland 
Waterways Authority of India Act, 1985  (82 of 1985) .  
                                                           
1. 25th November , 2008, vide notification N o. S.O. 2718(E), dated 25th November, 2008, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii). 2 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 2)  
 
LIMITS  OF THE  NATIONAL WATE RWAY  (TALCHER -DHAMRA STRETCH  OF BRAHMA NI-KHARSUA -
DHAMRA RIVERS , GEONKHALI -CHARBATIA  STRETCH OF EAST COAST CANAL ,  
CHARBATIA  DHAMRA  STRETC H OF MATAI  RIVER A ND MAHANADI  DELTA R IVERS ) 
East Coast Canal and Matai river  
(Consisting of old Hijli tidal canal, Orissa coast canal and Matai river)  
Northern limit  Confluence point of Hooghly river and Hijli tidal 
canal at Geonkhali at Lat 22 º 12' 20” N, Lon      
88º  03' 07 ” E. 
Southern limit  Confluence of Matai river and Dhamra river near 
Dhamra Fishing harbour at  Lat 20º 47' 42 ” N, 
Lon 86º  53' 03 ” E. 
 
Brahmani -Kharsua -Dhamra river system  
(Consisting of Brahmani -Kharsua -Dhamra rivers)  
North -Western limit  Samal barrage across river Brahmani, Talcher at 
Lat 21º 04' 26 ” N, Lon 85 º 08' 05 ” E. 
South -Eastern limit  An imaginary line drawn across Dhamra river at 
East Point  of Kalibhanj Dian Reserved Forest 
near Chandnipal  at Lat 20 º 46' 26 ” N, Lon 86 º 
57' 15 ” E. 
 
Mahanadi delta rivers  
(Consisting of Hansua river, Nuna nala, Gobri nala, Kharnasi river and Mahanadi river)  (Alternate 
route -Hansua river enters into Bay of Bengal through northern point of False point bay, then 
enters river Kharnasi at southern end of False point bay, river Atharabanko, a northernly 
distributory of river Mahanadi)  
Northern limit  Confluence of Kharsua river with Brahmani 
river at Ramchandrapur at Lat 20 º 36' 55 ” N, 
Lon 86º 45' 05 ” E. 
Southern limit  An imaginary line in continuation to the 
Northern break  water structure across the 
entrance channel at Paradip Port at  Lat 20º 15' 
38” N, Lon 86 º 40' 55 ” E 
 
--------------------------The Unorganised Workers Social Security Act, 2008--------------------------
1 
 THE UNORGANISED WORKERS’  SOCIAL  SECURITY ACT, 2008  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
SOCIAL  SECURITY  BENEFITS  
3. Framing of scheme . 
4. Funding of Central Government Schemes . 
CHAPTER III  
NATIONAL  SOCIAL  SECURITY  BOARD FOR  UNORGANISED WORKERS  
5. National Social Security Board  
CHAPTER IV  
STATE  SOCIAL  SECURITY BOARD FOR  UNORGANISED WORKERS  
6. State Social Security Board . 
7. Funding of State Government Schemes . 
8. Record keeping by District Administration . 
9. Workers facilitation centres . 
CHAPTER V  
REGISTRATION  
10. Eligibility for registration and social security benefits.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
11. Power of Central Government to give directions . 
12. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings . 
13. Power to make rules by Central Government . 
14. Power to make rules by State Government . 
15. Laying of rules . 
16. Saving of certain laws . 
17. Power to remove difficulties . 
SCHEDULE I.  
SCHEDULE II.  
 
  2 
 THE UNORGANISED WORKERS’  SOCIAL  SECURITY ACT, 2008  
ACT NO. 33 OF 2008  
[30th December , 2008.]  
An Act to provide for the social security and welfare of unorganised workers and for other 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -ninth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short ti tle, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be  called the Unorganised Workers’  
Social Security Act, 2008.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the contex t otherwise requires, — 
(a) “employer ” means a person or an association of persons, who has engaged or employed an 
unorganised  worker either directly or otherwise for remuneration;  
(b) “home -based worker ” means a person engaged in the production of goods or services for an 
employer in his or her home or other premises of his or her choice other than the workplace of the 
employer,  for remuneration, irrespective of whether or not the employer provides the equipment, 
materials or other inputs;  
(c) “identity card ” means a card, document or certificate issued to an unorganised worker by the 
District Administration under sub -section ( 3) of section 10;  
(d) “National Board ” means the National Social Security Board for unorganised workers 
constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 5;  
(e) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(f) “organised sector'' means a n enterprise which is not an unorganised sector;  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act by the Central Government or the 
State Government, as the case may be;  
(h) “registered worker ” means an unorganised work er registered under sub -section (3) of section 
10; 
(i) “Schedule ” means the Schedule annexed to the Act;  
(j) “State Board ” means the (name of the State) State Social Security Board for unorganised 
workers constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(k) “self-employed worker ” means any person who is not employed by an employer, but engages 
himself or herself in any occupation in the unorganised sector subject to a monthly earning of an 
amount as may be notified by the Central Government or the State Gov ernment from time to time or 
holds cultivable land subject to such ceiling as may be notified by the State Government;  
(l) “unorganised sector ” means an enterprise owned by individuals or self -employed workers and 
engaged in the production or sale of goods  or providing service of any kind whatsoever, and where 
the enterprise employs workers, the number of such workers is less than ten;  
                                                           
1. 16th May, 2009, vide notification N o. S.O. 1220(E) , dated 14 th May, 2009, s ee Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 
3(ii). 3 
 (m) “unorganised worker ” means a home -based worker, self -employed worker or a wage worker 
in the unorganised sector and inc ludes a worker in the organised sector who is not covered by any of 
the Acts mentioned in Schedule II to this Act; and  
(n) “wage worker ” means a person employed for remuneration in the unorganised sector, directly 
by an employer or through any contractor, irrespective of place of work, whether exclusively for one 
employer or for one or more employers, whether in cash or in kind, whether as a home -based worker, 
or as a temporary or casual worker, or as a migrant worker, or workers employed by households 
including domestic workers, with a monthly wage of an amount as may be notified by the Central 
Government and State Government, as the case may be.  
CHAPTER II  
SOCIAL  SECURITY  BENEFITS  
3. Framing of scheme. —(1) The Central Government shall formulate and notify, from time to time, 
suitable welfare schemes for unorganised  workers on matters relating to — 
(a) life and disability cover;  
(b) health and maternity benefits;  
(c) old age protection; and  
(d) any other ben efit as may be determined by the Central Government.  
(2) The schemes included in the Schedule 1 to this Act shall be deemed to be the welfare schemes 
under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, amend the Schedules annexed to thi s Act.  
(4) The State Government may formulate and notify, from time to time, suitable welfare schemes for 
unorganised workers , including schemes relating to — 
(a) provident fund;  
(b) employment injury benefit;  
(c) housing;  
(d) educational  schemes for children;  
(e) skill upgradation of workers;  
(f) funeral assistance; and  
(g) old age homes.  
4. Funding of Central Government Schemes .—(1) Any scheme notified b y the Central 
Government may be — 
(i) wholly funded by the Central Government; or  
(ii) partly funded by the Central Government and partly funded by the State Government; or  
(iii) partly  funded by the Central Government, partly funded by the State Government and partly 
funded through contributions collected from the beneficiaries of the scheme or the employers as may 
be prescribed in the scheme by the Central Government.  
(2) Every scheme notified by the Central Government shall provide for such matters that are 
necessary for the efficient implementation of the scheme including the matters rel ating to,— 
(i) scope of the scheme;  
(ii) beneficiaries of the scheme;  
(iii) resources of the scheme ; 
(iv) agency or agencies that will implement the scheme;  4 
 (v) redressal of grievances; and  
(vi) any other relevant matter.  
CHAPTER III  
NATIONAL  SOCIAL  SECURITY  BOARD FOR  UNORGANISED WORKERS  
5. Na tional Social Security Board .—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a 
National Board to be known as the National Social Security Board to exercise the powers conferred on, 
and to perform the functions assigned to, it under this Act.  
(2) The National Board shall consist of the following me mbers, namely: — 
(a) Union Minister for Labour and Employment -Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(b) the Director General (Labour Welfare) -Member -Secretary, ex officio ; and  
(c) thirty -four members to be nominated by the C entral Government, out of whom — 
(i) seven repr esenting unorganised sector workers;  
(ii) seven representing employers of unorganised sector;  
(iii) seven representing eminent persons from civil society;  
(iv) two representing members from Lok Sabha and one from Rajya Sabha;  
(v) five  representing Central Government Ministries and Departments concerned; and  
(vi) five representing State Governments.  
(3) The Chairperson and other members of the Board shall be from amongst persons of eminence in 
the fields of labour welfare, management, f inance, law and administration.  
(4) The number of persons to be nominated as members from each of the categories specified in 
clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2), the term of office and other conditions of service of members, the procedure 
to be followed in the discharge of their functions by, and the manner of filling vacancies among the 
members of, the National Board shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that adequate representation shall be given to persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, 
the Schedul ed Tribes, the Minorities and Women.  
(5) The term of the National Board shall be three years.  
(6) The National Board shall meet at least thrice a year, at such time and place and shall observe such 
rules of procedure relating to the transaction of business  at its meetings, as may be prescribed.  
(7) The members may receive such allowances as may be prescribed for attending the meetings of the 
National Board.  
(8) The National Board shall perform the follow ing functions, namely: — 
(a) recommend  to the Central Government suitable schemes for different sections of unorganised 
workers;  
(b) advise the Central Government on such matters arising out of the administration of this Act as 
may be referred to it;  
(c) monitor such social welfare schemes for  unorganised workers as are administered by the 
Central Government;  
(d) review the progress of registration and issue of identity cards to the unorganised workers;  
(e) review the record keeping functions performed at the State level;  
(f) review  the expenditure from the funds under various schemes; and  5 
 (g) undertake such other functions as are assigned to it by the Central Government from time to 
time.  
CHAPTER IV  
STATE  SOCIAL  SECURITY BOARD FOR  UNORGANISED WORKERS  
6. State Social  Security Board. —(1) Every State Government shall, by notification, constitute a 
State Board to be known as (name of the State) State Social Security Board to exercise the powers 
conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act.  
(2) The State Board  shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) Minister of Labour and Em ployment of the concerned State —Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(b) the Principal Secreta ry or Secretary (Labour) —Member—Secretary, ex officio ; and  
(c) twenty -eight members to be nominated by th e State Government, out of whom — 
(i) seven representing the unorganised workers;  
(ii) seven representing employers of unorganised workers;  
(iii) two representing members of Legislative Assembly of the concerned State;  
(iv) five  representing eminent persons from civil society; and  
(v) seven representing State Government Departments concerned.  
(3) The Chairperson and other members of the Board shall be from amongst persons of eminence in 
the fields of labour welfare, management, f inance, law and administration.  
(4) The number of persons to be nominated as members from each of the categories specified in 
clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2), the term of office and other conditions of service of members, the procedure 
to be followed in the discharge of their functions by, and the manner of filling vacancies among the 
members of, the State Board shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that adequate representation shall be given to persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, 
the Scheduled Tribes, the Minorities and Women.  
(5) The term of the State Board shall be three years.  
(6) The State Board shall meet atleast once in a quarter at such time and place and shall observe such 
rules of procedure relating to the transaction of business at its  meetings, as may be prescribed.  
(7) The members may receive such allowances as may be prescribed for attending the meetings of the 
State Board.  
(8) The State Board shall perform t he following functions, namely: — 
(a) recommend the State Government in formu lating suitable schemes for different sections of the 
unorganised sector workers;  
(b) advise the State Government on such matters arising out of the administration of this Act as 
may be referred to it;  
(c) monitor such social welfare schemes for unorganise d workers as are administered by the State 
Government;  
(d) review the record keeping functions performed at the District level;  
(e) review the progress of registration and issue of cards to unorganised sector workers;  
(f) review  the expenditure from the funds under various schemes; and  
(g) undertake such other functions as are assigned to it by the State Government from time to 
time.  
  6 
 7. Funding  of State Government Schemes. —(1) Any scheme notified  by the State Government may 
be— 
(i) wholly funded by the State Government; or  
(ii) partly funded by the State Government, partly funded through contributions collected from 
the beneficiaries of the scheme or the employers as may be prescribed in the scheme by the State 
Government.  
(2) The State Government may seek financial assistance from the Central Government for the 
schemes formulated by it.  
(3) The Central Government may provide such financial assistance to the State Governments for the 
purpose of schemes for such period and on such  terms and conditions as it may deem fit.  
8. Record keeping by District Administration .—The record keeping functions for the purpose of 
this Act shall be performed by the District Administration:  
Provided that the State Government may direct that the reco rd keeping  function shall be performed 
by— 
(a) the District Panchayat in rural areas; and  
(b) the Urban Local Bodies in urban areas.  
9. Workers facilitation centres. —The State Government may set up such Workers' facilitation 
centres  as may be considered necessary from time to time to perform the following f unctions, namely: — 
(a) disseminate information on available social security schemes for the unorganised workers;  
(b) facilitate the filling, processing and forwarding of applicatio n forms for registration of 
unorganised workers;  
(c) assist unorganised worker to obtain registration from the District Administration;  
(d) facilitate the enrollment of the registered unorganised workers in social security schemes.  
CHAPTER V  
REGISTRATION  
10. Eligibility for registration and social security benefits .—(1) Every unorganised worker shall be 
eligible for registration subject to the fulfilment of th e following conditions, namely: — 
(a) he or she shall have completed fourteen years of age; and  
(b) a self -declaration by him or her confirming that he or she is an unorganised worker.  
(2) Every eligible unorganised worker shall make an application in the prescribed form to the District 
Administration for registration.  
(3) Every unorganised worker shal l be registered and issued an identity card by the District 
Administration which shall be a smart card carrying a unique identification number and shall be portable.  
(4) If a scheme requires a registered unorganised worker to make a contribution, he or she  shall be 
eligible for social security benefits under the scheme only upon payment of such contribution.  
(5) Where a scheme requires the Central or State Government to make a contribution, the Central or 
State Government, as the case may be, shall make the  contribution regularly in terms of the scheme.  
  7 
 CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
11. Power of Central G overnment to give directions .—The Central Go vernment may give 
directions to — 
(i) the National Board; or  
(ii) the Government of a State or the State Board of that State,  
in respect of matters relating to the implementation of the provisions of this Act.  
12. Vacancies, etc., n ot to invalidate proceedings .—No proceedings of the National Board or any 
State Board shall b e invalid on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the 
constitution of the National Board or, as the case may be, the State Board.  
13. Power to make  rules by Central Government .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make  rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the contributions to be collected from the benef iciaries of the scheme or the employers under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 4;  
 (b) the number of persons to be nominated, the term of office and other conditions of service of 
members, the procedure to be followed in the discharge of functions by, and the ma nner of filling 
vacancies of, the National Board under sub - section ( 4) of section 5;  
(c) the rules of procedure relating to the transaction of the business at the meeting of the National 
Board under sub -section ( 6) of section 5;  
(d) the allowances for att ending the meetings of the National Board under sub -section ( 7) of 
section 5;  
(e) the form for making an application for registration under sub -section ( 2) of section 10; and  
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
14. Power to  make rules by State Government .—(1) The State Government may, by notification, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the number of persons to be nominated, the term of office and other conditions of service of 
members, the procedure to be followed in the discharge of functions by, and the manner of filling 
vacancies of, the State Board  under sub -section ( 4) of section 6;  
(b) the rules of procedure relating to the transaction of business at the meetings of the State Board 
under sub -section ( 6) of section 6;  
(c) the allowances for attending the meetings of the State Board under sub -sectio n (7) of section 
6; 
(d) the contributions to be collected from the beneficiaries of the scheme or the employers under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 7;  
(e) the form in which the application for registration shall be made under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 10; and 
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
  8 
 15. Laying of rules .—(1) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in ma king any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule.  
(2) Every rule made under this Act by State Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
notified, before the State Legislature.  
16. Saving of certain laws. —Nothing c ontained in this Act shall affect the operation of any 
corresponding law in a State providing welfare schemes which are more beneficial to the unorganised 
workers than those provided for them by or under this Act.  
17. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessa ry for re moving the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of two years 
from the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, befo re each 
House of Parliament.  
  9 
  
SCHEDULE I  
[See sections 2( i) and (3)]  
SOCIAL SECURITY  SCHEMES FOR THE  UNORGANISED  WORKERS  
S. No.  Name of the Scheme  
1. Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme.  
2. National Family Benefit Scheme.  
3. Janani Suraksha Yojana.  
4. Handloom Weavers’  Comprehensive Welfare Scheme.  
5. Handicraft Artisans’  Comprehensive Welfare Scheme.  
6. Pension to Master craft persons.  
7. National Scheme for Welfare of Fishermen and Training and Extension.  
8. Janshree Bima Yojana.  
9. Aam Admi Bima Yojana . 
10. Rashtriya S wasthya Bima Yojana.  
  10 
 SCHEDULE II  
[See section 2( m)] 
  
S. No.  Name of the Act  
1. The Workmen’ s Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923) . 
2. The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947).  
3. The Employees’  State Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of 1948).  
4. The Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 (19 of 1952).  
5. The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 (53 of 1961).  
6. The Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 (39 of 1972).  
 
 
____  
