--------------------------The Central Universities Act, 2009--------------------------
1 
 THE CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 2009  
_______________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Establishment of Universities.  
3A. Special provision with respect to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
3B. Specia l provision with respect to State of Bihar.  
4. Effect of establishment of Universities.  
5. Objects of University.  
6. Powers of University.  
7. University open  to all castes, creed, race or class.  
8. Visitor of University.  
9. Officers of University.  
10. Chancellor.  
11. Vice -Chancellor.  
12. Pro-Vice -Chancellor.  
13. Deans of Schools.  
14. Registrar.  
15. Finance Officer.  
16. Controller of Examinations.  
17. Librarian.  
18. Other officers.  
19. Authorities of University.  
20. The Court.  
21. Executive Cou ncil. 
22. Academic Council.  
23. Boards of Studies.  
24. Finance Committee.  
25. Other authorities of University.  
26. Powers to make  Statutes.  
27. Statutes, how to be made.  
28. Power to make Ordinances.  
29. Regulations.  
30. Annual report.  
31. Annual accounts.  
32. Returns and information.  
33. Conditions of service of employees, etc.  
34. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students.  
35. Right to appeal.  
36. Provident and pension funds.  
37. Disputes as to constitution of authorities and bodies.  
38. Filling of casual vacancies.  
39. Proceedings of authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.  
40. Protection of action taken in good fait h. 
41. Mode of proof of University record.  
42. Power to remove difficulties.   2 
 SECTIONS  
43. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be  laid before 
Parliament.  
44. Transitional provisions.  
45. Amendment of Madhya Pradesh Act 22 of 1973.  
46. Amendment of President’s Act 10 of 1973.  
47. Repeal and savings.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE .  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
  3 
 THE CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 2009  
ACT NO. 25 OF 2009  
[20th March,  2009.]  
An Act to establish and incorporate universities for teaching and research in the various States 
and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of Indi a as follows: – 
1. Short title and commencement. –(1) This Act may be called the Central Universities Act, 2009.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come in to force on the 15 th day of January, 2009.  
2. Definitions. –In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder,  unless t he context otherwise 
requires, – 
(a) “Academic Council” means the Academic Council of the University;  
(b) “academic staff” means such categories of staff as are designated as academic staff by the 
Ordinances;  
(c) “Board of Studies” means the Board of Studies of a Department of the University;  
(d) “College” means a college maintained by the University;  
(e) “Chancellor”,  “Vice -Chancellor ” and “ Pro-Vice -Chancellor” mean, respectively, the 
Chancellor, Vice -Chancellor and Pro -Vice-Chancellor of the University ; 
(f) “Court” means the Court of the University;  
(g) “Department” means a Department of Studies and include s a Centre of Studies;  
(h) “distance education system” means the system of imparting education through any means of 
communication, such as broadcasting, telecasting, internet, correspondence courses, seminars, contact 
programmes or the combination of any two or more such means;  
(i) “employee ” means any person appointed by the  University and include teachers and other staff 
of the U niversity ; 
(j) “Executive Council” means the Executive Council of the University;  
(k) “Hall” means a unit of residence or of corporate life  for the student  of the University, or of a 
College or an Institution, maintained by the University;  
(l) “Institution” means an academic institution, not  being a College, maintained by the University;  
(m) “Principal” means the Head of a College or an  Institution maintaine d by the University and 
include s, where there is no principal, the person for the time being duly appointed to act as Principal, 
and in the absence of the Principal, or the acting Principal, a Vice - Principal duly appointed as such;  
(n) “Regulations” means  the Regulations made by  any authority of the University under this Act 
for the time being in force;  
(o) “School” means a School of Studies of the  University;  
(p) “Statutes” and “Ordinances” mean, respectively,  the Statutes and the Ordinances of the 
University for the time being in force;  
(q) “teachers of the University” means Professors,  Associate Professors, Assistant Professors and 
such other persons as may by appointed for imparting instruction or conducting research in the 
University or in any College or Institution maintained by the Universit y and are designated as 
teachers by the Ordinances; and  
(r) “University” means a University established and  incorporated as a University under this Act.  
  4 
 3. Establishment of Univ ersities. –(1)The Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya in the  State of 
Chhattisgarh and Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya  in the  State of  Madhya  Pradesh, established 
under the Madhya Pradesh Vishwavidyalaya Adhiniyam, 1973  (Madhya Pradesh Act 22 of 1973) , and 
Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna  Garhwal University  in the  State of Uttarakhand, established under the Utt ar 
Pradesh State Universities  Act,1973  (President’s Act 10 of 1973) , shall be established as bodies corporate 
under this Act by the same names of “Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya”,  “Doctor Harisingh  Gour  
Vishwavidyalaya”  and “Hemvati  Nandan  Bahuguna Garhwal University ”, respectively.  
(2) The headquarters of Guru Ghasidas Vish wavidyalaya, Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya 
and Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University, shall be at Bilaspur, Sagar and Srinagar, 
respectively.  
(3) The jurisdiction of Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya, Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya 
and Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University shall ex tend to the Bilaspur,  Raigarh and Surguja 
districts of the State of Chhattisgarh, the Sagar, Tikamgarh, Chhatarpur, Panna, Chhindwara and Damoh 
districts of the State of Madhya Pradesh, and the Chamoli, De hradun, Garhwal, Hardwar, Rudraprayag, 
Tehri Garhwal and Uttarkashi distric ts of the State of Uttarakhand, respectively.  
(4) There shal l be established, the Universities  in the various States as bodies corporate, by such 
names and territorial jurisdiction,  as specified in the First Schedule to this Act.  
(5) The headquarters  of each of the  University,  referred in sub -section  (4), shall be such as may be 
specified by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette.  
(6) The first Chancellor,  the first Vice -Chancellor  and the first members of the Court, the Executive 
Counc il and the Academic Council of e ach University, and all persons who may hereafter become such 
officers or members, so long as they continue to hold such office or membership, are  hereby constituted a 
body corporate by the name of the University.  
(7) The University shall have perpetual succession  and a common seal, and shall sue and be sued by 
the said name.  
1[3A. Special provision with respect to the State of Jammu and Kashmir. –(1) The Central 
University of Jammu and Kashmir established under sub -section ( 4) of section 3 shall be known as the 
Central University of Kashmir and its territorial jurisdiction shall be limited to the Kashmir Division of 
the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(2) There shall be established a university, which shall be a body corporate, to be known as the 
Central University of Jammu having its territorial jurisdiction extending to the Jammu Division of the 
State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) All assets and liabilities  of the Central University of Jammu and Kashmir in respect of the 
territory of Jammu Division of the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall stand transferred to be the assets 
and liabilities of the Central University of Jammu.  
(4) Anything done or any action tak en by the University of Jammu and Kashmir in respect of the 
territory of Jammu Division of the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall be deemed to have been done or 
taken by the Central University of Jammu.  
(5) Any suit or legal proceedings instituted or continu ed by or against the Central University of 
Jammu and Kashmir in respect of the territory of Jammu Division of the State of Jammu and Kashmir 
shall be deemed to have been instituted or continued by or against the Central University of Jammu ]. 
2[3B. Special provision with respect to State of Bihar. –(1) The Central University of Bihar 
established under sub -section ( 4) of section 3 shall be known as the Central University of South Bihar, 
having its territorial jurisdiction extending to the territory in  the south of River Ganges in the State of 
Bihar, as specified in the First Schedule to this Act.  
(2) There shall be established a University, which shall be a body corporate, to be known as the 
                     
1. Ins. by Act 38 of 2009, s. 2 (w.e.f.  20-10-2009).  
2. Section 3B shall stand inserted (dat e to be notified) by Act 35 of 2014, s. 2.  5 
 Mahatma Gandhi Central University, having its territorial jur isdiction extending to the territory in the 
north of the River Ganges in the State of Bihar, as specified in  the First Schedule to this Act ]. 
4. Effect of establishment of Universities. –On and from the dat ed of commencement of this Act, – 
(a) any reference to Guru  Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya,  Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya 
or Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University, in any contract or other instrument shall be 
deemed as a reference to Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya, Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalay a, 
and Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University, respectively, established under this Act;  
(b) all properties, movable and immovable, of or belonging to Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya, 
Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya and Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University, shall 
vest in Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya, Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya or Hemvati 
Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University, as the case may  be, established under this Act;  
(c) all rights and liabilities of Guru Ghasidas  Vishwavidy alaya,  Doctor  Harisingh Gour  
Vishwavidyalaya and Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University, shall be transferred to, and be 
the rights and  liabilities  of, Guru Ghasidas  Vishwavidyalaya, Doctor Harisingh  Gour  
Vishwavidyalaya and Hemvati  Nandan  Bahuguna Garhwal University,  respectively,  established 
under this Act;  
(d) every person employed by Guru Ghasidas  Vishwavidyalaya,  Doctor  Harisingh  Gour  
Vishwavidyalaya and Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal  University, immediately before the 
commencement of this Act shall hold his office or service in Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya, Doctor 
Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya and Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University, respectively, 
established under this Act by the same tenure, at the same remun eration and upon the same terms and 
conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension, leave, gratuity, provident fund and 
other matters as he would have held the same if this Act had not been enacted and shall continue to do 
so unless and u ntil his employment is terminated or until such tenure, remuneration and terms and 
conditions a re duly altered by the Statutes:  
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee, his employment may 
be terminated by the University i n accordance with the terms of the contract with the employee or, if 
no provision is made therein in this behalf, on payment, to him by the University, of compensation 
equivalent to three months' remuneration in case of permanent employees and one month's 
remuneration in the case of other employees:  
Provided further that every person employed before the commencement of this Act, pending the 
execution of a contract under section 33, shall be deemed to have been appointed in accordance with 
the provisions of a contract consistent with the provisions of this Act and the Statutes:  
Provided also that any reference, by whatever form of wo rds, to the Vice-Chancellor and        
Pro-Vice -Chan cellor of Guru Ghasidas Vishwa vidyalaya, Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwa vidyal aya or 
Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University, in any law for the time being in force, or in any 
instrument or other document, shall be Construed  as a reference to th e Vice -Chancellor and the     
Pro-Vice -Chancellor of Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya , Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya or 
Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University, as the case may be, established under this Act.  
(e) the Vice -Chancellor s of Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya and Doctor Harisingh Gour 
Vishwavidyalaya, appointed under the provisions of the Madhya Pradesh Vishwavidyalaya  
Adhiniyam, 1973  (Madhya Pradesh Act 22 of 1973) , and the Vice-Chancellor of Hemvati Nandan 
Bahuguna Garhwal University, appointed under the provisions of the Uttar Pradesh State Univers ities 
Act, 1973  (Presi dent’s Act 10 of 1973) , shall be deemed to have been appointed as the Vice -
Chancellor under this Act and sha ll hold office for a period of three months or till such time the first 
Vice -Chancellor is appointed under section 44 of the Act whichever is earlier; and  
(f) all colleges, Institutions, Schools or Fac ulties, and Departments affiliated to, or admitted to the 
privileges of, or maintained by, Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya, Doctor Harisingh Gour 
Vishwavidyalaya and Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal U niversity shall stand affiliated to or 
admitted to the privileges of, or maintained by, Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya, Doctor Harisingh 6 
 Gour Vishwavidyalaya and Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University, respectively, established 
under this Act.  
5. Object s of University. –The object s of the University shall be to disseminate and advance 
knowledge by providing instructional and research facilities in such branches of learning as it may deem 
fit; to make special provision s for integrated courses in humanities , social sciences, science and  
technology in its educational p rogrammes; to take appropriate measures for pro moting innovations in 
teaching -learning process and inter -disciplinary studies and research; to educate and train manpower for 
the development of the country; to establish linkages with industries for the promot ion of science and 
technology; and to pay special attention to the improvement of the social and economic conditions and 
welfare of the people, their intellectual, academic and cultural devel opment.  
6. Powers of University. –The University shall have the following powers,  namely: – 
(i) to provide for instructions in such branches  of learning like natural sciences, social sciences, 
humanities, engineering, technology and medicine as the University may, from time  to time, 
determine and to make provision s for research and  for the advancement and dissemination of 
knowledge;  
(ii) to grant, subject to such conditions as the  University may determine, diplomas  or certificates 
to, and confer degr ees or other academic distinctions on, persons, on the basis of examination, 
evaluation or any other method of testing, and to withdraw any such  diplomas,  certificates, degrees  
or other  academic  distinction for good  and sufficient cause;  
(iii) to organis e and to undertake extramural studies, training and extension services;  
(iv) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the ma nner prescribed by the Statutes ; 
(v) to provide facilities through the distance education system to such persons as it may 
determine;  
(vi) to institute Principalships, Professorships, Associate Professorships, Assistant Professorships 
and other teaching or academic positions, required by the Un iversity and to appoint persons such 
Principalships, Professorship s, Associate Professorship s, Assistant Professorships or other teaching or 
academic positions;  
(vii) to recogni se an institution of higher learning  for such purposes as the University may 
determine a nd to withdraw such recognition ; 
(viii) to appoint persons working in any other University or academic institution, including those 
located outside the country, as teachers of the University for a specified period;  
(ix) to create administrative,  ministerial and other posts and to make appointment s thereto;  
(x) to co-operate or collaborate or associate with any other University or authority or institution of 
higher learning, including those located outside the country, in such manner and for such purposes as 
the University may determine ; 
(xi) to establish such cent ers and speciali sed laboratories or other units for research and 
instruction as are, in the opinion of the University, necessary for the furtherance of its objects;  
(xii) to institute  and award fellowships,  scholarship s, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(xiii) to establish and maintain colleges,  Institutions and Halls;  
(xiv) to make provision for research and  advisory services and for that purpose to enter into such 
arrangements with other institutions, industrial or other organi sations, as the University may deem 
necessary;  
(xv) to organise and conduct refresher courses,  workshops, seminars and other  programmes for 
teachers, evaluators and other academic staff;  
(xvi) to appoint on contract or otherwise visiting  Professors, Emeritus Profess ors, Consultants and 
such other persons  who may contribute to the advancement of the objects  of the  University;   7 
 (xvii) to confer autonomous status on a College or an Institution or a Department, as the case may 
be, in accordance with the  Statutes ; 
(xviii) to determine standards of admission to the University, which may include examination, 
evaluation or any other method of testing;  
(xix) to demand and receive payment of fees and other charges;  
(xx) to supervise the residences of the students of the University and to make arrangements for 
promoting t heir health and general welfare ; 
(xxi) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, including their code of 
conduct;  
(xxii) to regulate  and enforce discipline among the students and the employees, and to take such 
disciplinary measures in this regard as may be deemed by the University to be necessary;  
(xxiii) to make arrangements for promoting the health and general welfare of the employees;  
(xxiv) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold and manage, and to 
dispose of, with the previous approval of the Central Government, any property, mo vable or 
immovable, including trust and endowment properties, for the purposes of the University;  
(xxv) to borrow, with the previous approval of the Central Government, on the security of the 
Property of the University, money for the purposes of the Univer sity; and  
(xxvi) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the 
attainment of all or any of its objects.  
(2) in exercising  its powers referred to in sub -section  (1), it shall be the endeavour of the  University to 
maintain an all -India character and high standards of teaching and research, and the University shall, 
among other measures which may be necessary for the said purpose, take, in particular, t he following 
measures, namely: – 
(i) admission  of students and recruitment o f faculty shall be made on all -India basi s; 
(ii) admissions of students shall be made on merit, either through Common Entrance Tests 
conducted individually by the University or in combination with other Universities, or on the  basis of 
marks obtained in the qualifying examination in such courses where t he intake of students is small;  
(iii) inter-University mobility of faculty, with portable pensions and protection of seniority, shall 
be encouraged;  
(iv) semester system, cont inuous evaluation and choice -based credit system shall be introduced 
and the University shall enter into agreements with other Universities and academic institutions for 
credit transfer and joint degree programm es; 
(v) innovative courses and programme s of studies shall be introduced with a provision for 
periodic review and restructuring;  
(vi) active participation of students shall be ensured in all academic activities of the University, 
including evaluation of teach ers; 
(vii) accreditation  shall be obtained from the National Assessment and Accreditation Council or 
any other accrediting ag ency at the national level; and  
(viii) e-governance shall be introduced with an effective management information system.  
7. University open to all castes, creed, race or class. –The University shall be open to the persons of 
either sex and of whatever caste, creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt 
or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or professi on in order to entitle him to be 
appointed as a teacher of the University or to hold any other office therein or to be admitted as a student 
in the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof:  
  8 
 Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University from making special 
provision for the employment or admission of women, persons with disabilities or of persons belonging to 
the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled Cast es, the Scheduled Tribes and 
the other socially and educationally  backward classes of citizens:  
Provide further that no such special provision shall be made on the ground of domicile.  
8. Visitor of University. –(1) The President of India shall be  the Visito r of the University.  
(2) The Visitor may, from time to time, appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress 
of the University, including Colleges and Institutions maintained by it, and to submit a report thereon; and 
upon receipt of that report, the Visitor may, after obtaining the views of the Executive Co uncil thereon 
through the Vice -Chancellor, take such action and issue such directions, as he considers necessary, in 
respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report and the Univer sity shall abide by such action and be 
bound to comply with such d irections.  
(3) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made by such person or persons, as he 
may direct, of the University, its buildings, libraries, laboratories and e quipment, and of any College or 
Institution maintained by the University; and also of the examinations, teaching and other work conducted 
or done by the University and to cause an inquiry to be made in like manner in respect of any matter 
connected with th e administration or finances of the University, College or Institutions.  
(4) The Visitor shall, in every matter referred to in sub -section ( 3), give notice of his intention to 
cause an inspection or inquiry to be made, to the University, and the University  shall have the right to 
make such representation s to the Visitor, as it may consider necessary.  
(5) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University, the Visitor may cause to be 
made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in sub - section  (3). 
(6) Where any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the University shall 
be entitled to appoint a representative, who shall have the right to be present and be heard at such 
inspection or inquiry.  
(7) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of the University or any College or 
Institution main tained by it, address the Vice -Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or 
inquiry together with such views and advice with regard to  the action to be taken thereon, as the Visitor 
may be pleased to offer, and on receipt of address made by the Visitor, the Vice -Chancellor shall 
communicate, to the Executive Council, the views of the Visitor with such advice as the Visitor may offer 
upon  the action to be taken thereon.  
(8) The Executive Council shal l communicate through the Vice -Chancellor to the Visitor such action, 
if any, as it proposes to take or has been taken upon the result of such inspection or inquiry.  
(9) Where, the Executive Council does not, within a reasonable time, take action to the satisfaction of 
the Visitor, the Visitor may, after considering any explanation furnished or representation made by the 
Executive Council, issue such direction s, as he may think fit, and the Executive Council shall comply 
with such direction s. 
(10) Without prejudice to the foregoing provision s of this section, the Visitor may, by order in 
writing, annul any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with this Act, the Statutes or 
the Ordinances:  
Provided that before making any such order, he shall call upon the Registrar to show cause why such 
an order should not be made, and, if any cause is shown within a reasonable time, he shall consider the 
same.  
(11) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
  9 
 9. Officers of University. –The following shall be the officers of the University, namely: – 
1. The Chancellor;  
2. The Vice -Chancellor;  
3. The Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
4. The Deans of Schools;  
5. The Registrar;  
6. The Finance Officer;  
7. The Controller of Examination;  
8. The Librarian; and  
9. Such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be the officers of the University.  
10. Chancellor. –(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the head of the University and shall, if present, 
preside at the Convocations of the University held for  conferring degrees and meetings of the Court.  
11. Vice -Chancellor. –(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner as 
may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer  of the University and 
shall exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of the University and give effect to the 
decision s of all authorities of the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may, if he is of the opinion that immediate action is ne cessary on any matter, 
exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under this Act and shall report to 
such authority at its next meeting the act ion taken by him on such matter:  
Provided that if the authority concerned is of the op inion that such action ought not to have been 
taken, it may refer the matter to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final:  
Provided further that any person in the service of the University who is aggrieved by the action taken 
by the Vice -Chancellor  under this sub -section shall have the right to represent against such action to the 
Executive Council within three months from the date on which decision on such action is communicated 
to him and thereupon the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reve rse the action taken by the  
Vice -Chancellor.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that any decision of any authority of the University is 
beyond the power s of the authority conferred by the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances 
or that any decision taken is not in the interest of the University, may ask the authority concerned to 
review its decision within sixty days of such decision and if the authority refuses to review the decision 
either in whole or in part or no d ecision is taken by it within the said period of sixty days, the matter shall 
be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be 
prescribed by t he Statutes or the Ordinances.  
12. Pro -Vice -Chancellor. –The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed in such manner and on such 
terms and condition of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
13. Deans of Schools. –Every Dean of School shall be appointed in such manner, and shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
  10 
 14. Registrar .–(1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner, and on such terms and 
conditions of service, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreements, sign documents and authenticate 
records on behalf of the University, and shall exercise such power s and perform such duties, a s may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
15. Finance Officer. –The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner, and shall exercise such 
powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
16. Controller of Examination. –The Controller of Examination shall be appointed in such manner 
and shall exercise such power and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statu tes. 
17. Librarian .–The Librarian  shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and conditions of 
service, and shall  exercise such power s and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
18. Other officers. –The manner of appointment and powers and duties of other officers of the 
University shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
19. Authorities of University. –The following shall be the authorities of the University, namely: – 
(1) the Court;  
(2) the Executive Council;  
(3) the Academic Council;  
(4) the Board of Studies;  
(5) the Finance Committee; and  
(6) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statu tes to be the authorities of the 
University.  
20. The Court .–(1) The constitution of the Court and the term of office of its members shal l be 
prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that such number of members, as may be prescribed by the Statutes, shall be elected from 
among the teachers, employees and students of the University.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall have the followin g powers and functions, 
namely: – 
(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of t he University, and to 
suggest measures for the improvement an d development of the University ; 
(b) to consider and pass resolutions on the annual report and the annual accounts of the University 
and the  audit report on such accounts;  
(c) to advise the Visitor in respect of any matter which may be  referred to it for advise; and  
(d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
21. Executive Council. –(1) The Executive Council shall be the principal executive bod y of the 
University.  
(2) The constitution of the Executive Council, the term of office of its members and its powers and 
functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that such number of members as may be prescribed by the Statutes shall be from a mong the 
elected members of the Court.  
22. Academic Council. –(1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the 
University and shall, subject to the provision s of this Act, the S tatutes and the Ordinances, c o-ordinate 
and exercise general supe rvision over the academic policies  of the University . 
  11 
 (2) The constitution of the Academic Co uncil, the term of office of members and its powers and 
function s shall  be prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that such number of members as may be  prescribe d by the Statutes shall be from among the 
elected members of the Court.  
23. Boards of Studies. –The constitution, powers and function of the Boards of Studies shall be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
24. Finance Committee. –The constitution, powers and  functions of the Finance Committee shall be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
25. Other authorities of University. –The constitution, powers and functions of other authorities, as 
may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the University, shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
26. Powers to make Statutes. –Subje ct to the provision of this Act,  the Statutes may provide for all or 
any of the following  matters, namely: – 
(a) the  constitution, powers and functions of authorities and other bodies of the University, as 
may be constituted from time to time;  
(b) the appointment and continuance in office of the members of the said authorities and bodies, 
the filling up of vacancies of members, and all other matters relating to those authorities and other 
bodies for which it may be necessary or desirable to provide;  
(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the University and their emoluments;  
(d) the appointment of teach ers, academic staff and other employees of the University, their 
emolument s and conditions of service;  
(e) the appointment of teachers and academic staff working in any other University or 
organisation for a specific period for undertaking  a joint project;  
(f) the conditions of service of employees including provisions for pension, insurance, provident 
fund, the manner of termination of s ervice and disciplinary action;  
(g) the principles governing the seniority of service of t he employees of the University;  
(h) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or students and the 
University;  
(i) the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council by any employee or student against the 
action of any officer or authority of the University.  
(j) the conferment of autonomous status on a College or an Institution or a Department;  
(k) the establishment and abolition of Schools, Departments, Centres, Ha lls, Colleges and 
Institutions;  
(l) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(m) the withdrawal of degree s, diplomas, certificates and other ac ademic distinctions;  
(n) the management of Colleges and Institutions  established by the University;  
(o) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities  or officers of the University;  
(p) the maintenance of discipline a mong the employees and students ; and 
(q) all other matters which by this Act are to be, or may be, provided for by the Statutes.  
  12 
 27. Statu tes, how to be made. –(1) The first Statutes are those set out in the Second Schedule to this 
Act. 
(2) The Executive Council may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend or 
repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that the Executive Council shall not make, amend or repeal any Statutes affecting the s tatus, 
powers or constitution of any authority of the University until such authority has been given an 
opportunity of expressing an opinion in writing on the proposed changes, and any opinion so expressed 
shall be considered by the Executive Council.  
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require 
the assent of the Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold assent or remit to the Executive Council for 
re-consideration.  
(4) A new Statute or a Statute a mending or repea ling an existing Statute shall h ave no validity unless 
it has been assented to by the Visitor.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may make new or 
additional Statutes or amend or repeal the Stat utes referred to in sub -section  (1) during the period of three 
years immediately afte r the commencement of this Act:  
Provided that the Visitor may, on the expiry of the said period of three years, make, within one year 
from the date of such expiry, such de tailed Statutes as he may consider necessary and such detailed 
Statutes shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Visitor may direct the University to make 
provisions in the Statutes in resp ect of any matter specified by him and if the Executive Council is unable 
to implement such direction within sixty days of its receipt, the Visitor may, after considering the reasons, 
if any, communicated by the Executive Council for its inability to compl y with such direction, make or 
amend the Statutes s uitably.  
28. Power to make Ordinances. –(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the 
Ordinances may provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely: – 
(a) the admission of students to the Universi ty and their enrolment as such;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of the 
University;  
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;  
(d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions, the qualifications 
for the same and the means to be taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the same;  
(e) the  fees  to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission to 
examinations, degrees and diplomas to the University;  
(f) the conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(g) the conduct of examinatio n, including the term of office and manner of appointment and the 
duties of examining b odies, examiners and moderators ; 
(h) the conditions of residence of the students of the University;  
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the resid ence and teaching of women 
students and the prescribing of speci al courses of studies for them;  
(j) the establishment of Centres of Studies, Boards of Studies, Specialised Lab oratories and other 
Committees;  
(k) the  manner of co -operation and collaboration with other Universities, Institution s and other 
agencies including learned bodies or associations;  13 
 (l) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is considered necessary for 
improving the acade mic life of the University;  
(m) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(n) the setting up of machinery for redressal of griev ances of employees and students ; and  
(o) all o ther matters which by this Act, or, the Statu tes, are to be, or may be provided for by the 
Ordinances.  
(2) The first Ordina nces shall be made by the Vice -Chancellor with the previous approval of the 
Executive Council and the Ordinances so made may also be amended, repealed or added to at any time by 
the Executive Council in the man ner prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that in the case of Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya and Doctor Harisingh Gour 
Vishwavidyalaya, and Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University, till such time as the first 
Ordinances are  not so made, in respect of the matters that are to be provided for by the Ordinances under 
this Act and the Statutes, the relevant provisions of the Statutes and the Ordinances made immediately 
before the commencement of this Act under the provisions of t he Madhya Pradesh Vishwavidyalaya 
Adhiniyam, 1973  (Madhya Pradesh Act 22 of 1973) , and the Utter  Pradesh State Universities Act, 1973                 
(President’s Act 10 of 1973) , respectively, shall be applicable in so for as they are not inconsistent with  
the provision s of this Act and the Statutes.  
29. Regulations. –The authorities of the University may make Regula tions, consistent with this Act,  
the Statutes and the Ordinances, for the conduct of their own business and that of the Committees, if any, 
appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances, in the manner 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
30. Annual report. –(1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of 
the Executive Council, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the University 
towards the fulfilment of its objects and shall be submitted to the Court on or  before such date as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes and the Court shall consider the report in its annual meeting.  
(2) The Court shall submit the annual report to the Visitor along with its comments, if any.  
(3) A copy of the annual report, as prepared  under sub -section  (1), shall also be submitted to the 
Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid b efore both Houses of 
Parliament.  
31. Annual accounts. –(1) The annual accounts and balance -sheet of the University shall be prepared 
under the direction of the Executive Council and shall, once at least every year and at intervals of not 
more them fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General  of India or by such persons 
as he may authorise in this behalf.  
(2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report thereon shall be submitted to the 
Court and the Visitor along with the observation s of the Executive Council.  
(3) Any observat ions made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall be brought to the notice of the 
Court and the observations of the Court, if any, shall, after being considered by the Executive Counci l, be 
submitted to the Visitor.  
(4) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report, as submitted to the Visitor, shall also 
be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid be fore 
both Houses of Parliament.  
(5) The audited annual accounts after having been la id before both Houses of Parliament shall be 
published in the Gazette of India.  
32. Returns and information. –The University shall furnish to the Central Government such returns 
or other information with respect to its property or activities as the Central Government may, from time to 
time, require, within such period as may be specified by the Central Government.  14 
 33. Conditions of service of employees, etc. –(1) Every employee of the University shall be 
appointed under a written contract, which shall be lodg ed with the University and a copy of which shall 
be furnished to the employee concerned.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any employee shall, at the 
request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration con sisting of one member appointed by 
the Executive Council, one member nominated by the employee concerned and an u mpire appointed by 
the Visitor.  
(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final and no suit shall lie in any civil court in respect of the 
matters decided by the Tribunal:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall preclude the employee from availing of the judicial 
remedies available under articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution.  
(4) Every request made by the employee under sub -section (2) shall be deemed to be a submission to 
arbitration upon the terms of this section within the meaning of the Arbitrat ion and Conciliation Act,  1996  
(26 of 1996) . 
(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
34. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students. –(1) Any student 
or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed from the rolls of the University by the 
orders or resolution of the Vice -Chancellor, Discipline Comm ittee or Examination Committee, as the case 
may be, and who has been debarred from appearing at the examinations of the University for more than 
one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt of such orders or copy of such resolution by him, 
appeal to the Executive Council and the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the decision 
of the Vice -Chancellor or the Committee, as the case may be.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against a student sha ll, 
at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of sub -sections 
(2), (3), (4) and ( 5) of section 33 shall, as far as may be, apply to a reference made under this sub -section.  
35. Right to appeal. –Every employee or student of the University or of a College or Institution 
maintained by the University shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, have a right to appeal 
within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes, to the Executive Council against the decision of 
any officer or authority of the University, or, the Principal or the management of any College or an 
Institution, as the case may be, and thereupon the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the 
decision appealed against.  
36. Provident and pension funds. –(1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its 
employees such provident or pension fund or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit in such 
manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Where such provident fund or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central Government may 
declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925  (19 of 1925) , shall apply to such fund, as if it 
were a Government provident fund.  
37. Disputes as to constitution of authorities and bodies. –If any question arises as to  whether any 
person has been dul y elected or appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority or other body 
of the University, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.  
38. Filling of casual vacancies. –All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio  
members) of any authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the 
person  or body who appoints, elects or co -opts the member whose place has become vacant and the 
person appointed, elected or co -opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority or body for 
the residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member.  
39. Proceedings of authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies. –No act or proceedings of 
any authority or other body of the University shall be invalid merely by reason of the existence of a 
vacancy or vacancies among  its members.  15 
 40. Protection of action taken in good faith. –No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against any 
officer or other employee of the University for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done in pursuance of any of the prov isions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
41. Mode of proof of University record. –Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian 
Evidence Act,1872  (1 of 1872)  or in any other law for the time being in force, a copy of any receipt, 
application, notice, order, proce eding or resolution of any authority or other body of the University, or 
any other document in possession of the University, or any entry in any regis ter dul y maintained by the 
University, if certified by the Registrar, shall be received as prima facie  evidence of such receipt, 
application, notice, order, proceeding, resolution or document or the existence of entry in the register and 
shall be admitted as evid ence of the matters and transactions therein where the original thereof would, if 
produced, have been admissible in evidence.  
42. Power to remove difficulties. –(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Governm ent may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such pr ovisions, not 
inconsistent with  the provision s of this Act, as appear to it  to be necessary or expedi ent for removing the 
difficulty : 
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under sub -section  (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty d ays which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive session s aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the order or b oth Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have  effect 
only in such modified f orm or be  of no effect, as the case may be; so , however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order.  
43. Statu tes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid 
before Parliament. –(1) Every Statute, Ordinances or Regulation made under this Act shall be published 
in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute, Ordinances or Regulation made under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Hou ses agree in 
making any modification in the Statute, Ordinances or Regulation or both Houses agree that the Statute, 
Ordinances or Regulation should not be made, the Statute, Ordinances or Regulation shall thereafter have  
effect only in such modified f orm or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that Statute, Ordinances or Regulation.  
(3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shall include the power to give 
retrospective effect, from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the Statutes, 
Ordinances or Regulation or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any Statutes, 
Ordina nces or Regulations so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such Statutes, 
Ordinances or Regulations may be applicable . 
44. Transitional provisions. –Notwithstanding anything contained  on this Act and the Statutes, – 
(a) the first Chancellor and the first Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such 
manner and on such conditions as may be deemed fit and each of the said officers shall hold office for 
such term, not exceeding five years, as m ay be specified by the Visito r; 
(b) the first Registrar  and the first Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Visitor and each of 
the said officers  shall hold office for a term of three years;  16 
 (c) the first Court and the first Executive Council shall consist of not more than thirty -one 
members and eleven members, respectively, who shall be nominated by the Central Government and 
shall hold office  for a term of three years; and  
(d) the first Academic Council shall consist of not more than twenty -one members, who shall be 
nominated by the Central Government and shall hold of fice for a term of three years:  
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or authorities, the same shall be filled by 
appointment by the Visitor or nomination by the Central Government, as the case may  be, and the person 
so appointed or nominated shall hold office for so long as the officer or member in whose place he is 
appointed or nominated would have held office, if such vacancy had not occurred.  
45. Amendment of Madhya Pradesh Act 22 of 1973. –(1) In the Madhya Pradesh Vishwavidyalaya 
Adhiniyam, 1973, in the Second Schedule, the entries relating to Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya and 
Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya shall be omitted.  
(2) Notwithstanding such omission ,–  
(a) all appointments made, orders issued, degrees and other academic distinctions conferred, 
diplomas and certificates awarded, privileges granted, or other things done under the Madhya Pradesh 
Vishwavidyalaya Adhiniyam,  1973  (Madhya Pradesh Act 22 of 1973) , shall be deemed to have been 
respectively made , issued, conferred, awarded, granted or done under the corresponding provisions of 
this Act and, except as otherwise provided by this Act or the Statutes, continue  in force unless and 
until they are supersede d by any order made  under this Act or the Statutes;  and 
(b) all proceedings of Selection Committees for the appointment or promotion of teachers that 
took place before the commencement of this Act and all actions of the Executive Council in respect of 
the recommendations of such Selection Committees where no orders of appointment on the basis 
thereof were passed before the commencement of this Act shall, notwithstanding that the procedure 
for selection has been modified by this Act, be  deemed to have been v alid but further proceeding in 
connection with such pending selections shall be taken in accordance with the provisions of this Act 
and be continued from the stage where they stood immediately before such commencement, except if 
the concerned authorities t ake, with the approval of the Visitor, a decision to the contrary.  
46. Amendment of President’s Act 10 of 1973 .–(1) In the Uttar Pradesh State Universities Act,  
1973, – 
(a) in sub -section  (1) of section 4, the words, figures and brackets “and a University of Garhwal 
which shall from April 25, 1989 be called the Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University at 
Srinagar  (Dist rict Garhwal)” shall be omitted;  
(b) in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 20, the words  “ the Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna 
Garhwal University” shall be  omitted;  
(c) in sub -section  (2) of section 52, for the words “the Universities of Kumaun and Garhwal” the 
words “ the University of  Kumaun” shall be substituted ; 
(d) section  72B shall be omitted;  
(e) in the Schedule, Seri al No. 8 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted.  
(2) Notwithstanding the omission and substitution  referred to in sub -section ( 1),– 
(a) all appointments made, orders issued, degrees and other academic distinctions conferred, 
diplomas and certificates awarded, privileges granted, or other things done under the Uttar Pradesh 
State Universities Act, 1973  (Presid ent’s Act 10 of 1973) , shall be deemed to have been respectively 
made, issued, conferred, awarded, granted or done under the corresponding provisions of this Act 
and, except as otherwise provided by this Act or the Statutes, continue in force unless and until they 
are supersed ed by and order made  under this Act or the Statutes;  and 
(b) all proceedings of Selection Committees for the appointment or promotion of teachers that 
took place before the commencement of this Act and all actions of the Executive Council in respect of 
the recommendations of such Selection Committees where no orders of appointment on the basis 
thereof were passed before the commencement of this Act shall, notwithstanding that the procedure 17 
 for selectio n has been modified by this Act , be deemed to have been valid but further proceeding in 
connection with such pending selections shall be taken in accordance with the provisions of this Act 
and be continued from the stage where they stood immediately before such commencement, except if 
the concerned authorities take, with the approval of the Visitor, a decision to the contrary.  
47. Repeal and savings. –(1) The Central Universities Ordinance, 2009  (Ord.  3 of 2009)  is hereby 
repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act, and – 
(a) all appointments made, orders issued, degrees and other academic d istinctions conferred, 
diplomas and certificates awarded, privileges granted, or other things done under the Central 
Universities Ordinance, 2009 (Ord.  3 of 2009) , shall be deemed to have been respectively made, 
issued, conferred, awarded, granted or done under the corresponding provisions of this Act and, 
except as otherwise provided by, or under this Act or the Statutes, continue in force unless and until 
they are superseded by any order made under this Act o r the Statutes;  and 
(b) all proceedings of Selection Committees for the appointment or promotion of teachers that 
took place before the commencement of this Act and all actions of the Executive Council in respec t of 
the rec ommendations of such Selection Committees where no orders of appointment on the basis 
thereof were passed before the commencement of this Act shall, notwithstanding that the procedure 
for selection has been modified by this Act, be deemed to ha ve been valid but further proceeding in 
connection with such pending selection s shall be taken in accordance with the provisions of this Act 
and be continued from the stage where they stood immediately before such commencement, except if 
the concerned auth orities take, with  the approval of the Visitor, decision to the contrary.   18 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 3( 4)] 
 
Serial 
No.  Name of the State  Name of the University  Territorial jurisdiction  
    
1[1. Bihar  Central University of Biha r Whole of  the State of Bihar]  
 2.  Gujarat  Central University of Gujarat  Whole of the State of Gujarat  
 3.  Haryana  Central University of Haryana  Whole of the State of Haryana  
 4.  Himachal Pradesh  Central University of Himachal 
Pradesh  Whole of the State of Himachal 
Pradesh  
 2[5.  Jammu and Kashmir  Central University of Kashmir  Kashmir Division of the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir  
5A. Jammu and Kashmir  Central University of Jammu  Jammu Division of the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir]  
 6.  Jharkhand  Central University of Jharkhand  Whole of the State of Jharkhand  
 7.  Karnataka  Central University of Karnataka  Whole of the State of Karnataka  
 8.  Kerala  Central University of Kerala  Whole of the State of Kerala  
 9.  Orissa  Central University of Orissa  Whole of the State of Orissa  
10.  Punjab  Central University of Punjab  Whole of the State of Punjab  
11. Rajasthan  Central University of Rajasthan  Whole of the State of Rajasthan  
12.  Tamil Nadu  Central University of Tamil Nadu  Whole of the State of Tamil Nadu  
    
    
  
                     
1.Sl. No.1 and  the entries relating thereto shall stand substituted (date to be notified) by Act 35  of  2014, s. 3, to read as under: - 
 “1.  Bihar  Central University of South Bihar  Territory in the South of the River Ganges in the State of Bihar  
   1A. Bihar  Mahatma Gandhi Central University  Territory in the north of the River Ganges in the State of Bihar”.  
2. Subs by Act 28 of 2009, s. 3, for “serial number 5 and the correspondin g entries against it” (w.e.f. 20 -10-2009).  19 
  
 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 27)  
The Statutes of the University  
1. Chancellor .–(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less than 
three persons recommended by the Executive Council from amongst persons of eminence in the academic  
or public life of the country:  
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons so recommended, he may call for 
fresh recommendations  from the Executive Council.  
(2) The Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years and shall not be eligible for                    
re-appointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office, the Chancellor shall continue to hold 
office u ntil his su ccessor enters upon his office.  
2. Vice -Chancellor. –(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from out of a panel 
recommended by a Committee as constituted under clause ( 2): 
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve any of the persons included in the panel, he may ca ll for 
an extended fresh panel.  
(2) The Committee referred to in clause ( 1) shall consist of five persons, out of whom three shall be 
nominated by the Executive Council and two by the Visitor, and one of the nomi nees of the Visitor shall 
be the convener of the Committee:  
Provided that none of the members of the Committee shall be an employee of the University or a 
College or an Institution maintained by the University or a member of a ny authority of the University . 
(3) The Vice -Chancellor shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters 
upon his office, or until he attains the age of seventy years, whichever  is earlier, and he shall not  be 
eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of five years, he shall continue in office 
until his successor in appoin ted and enters upon his office:  
Provided further that the Visi tor may direct any Vice -Chancellor after his term h as expired, to 
continue in office for such period, not exceeding a total period of one ye ar, as may be specified by him.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause  (4), the Visitor may, at any time after the          
Vice -Chancellor has entered upon his office, by ord er in writing, remove the Vice -Chancellor from office 
on grounds of incapacity, misconduct or vio lation of statutory provisions:  
Provided that no such ord er shall be made by the Visitor unless the Vice -Chancellor has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken against him:  
Provided further that the Visitor shall consult the Chancellor  also before making such order:  
Provided also that the Visitor may, at any time before making such order, place the Vice -Chancellor 
under suspension, pending enquiry.  
(6) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Vice -Chancellor shall be as follows: – 
(i) The Vice -Chancellor shall be paid a monthly salary and allowances, other than house rent 
allowance, at the rates fixed by the Central Government from time to time and he shall be entitled, 
without payment of rent, to use a furnished residence throughout his te rm of office and no charge 
shall fall on the Vice -Chancellor in respect of the maintenance of such residence.  
(ii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to such terminal benefits and allowances as may be 
fixed by the Centra l Government from time to time:  20 
 Provided that where an employee of the University, or a College or an Institution maintained by 
the University, or of any other University or any College or Institution maintained by or admitted to 
the privileges of, such other University , is appointed as t he Vice -Chancellor, he may be allowed to 
continue to contribute to any provident fund of which he is a member and the University shall 
contribute to the account of such person in that provident fund at the same rate at which the person 
had been contributin g immediately before his appo intment as the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that where such employee had been a member of any pension scheme, the 
University shall make the necessa ry contribution to such scheme.  
(iii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled  to travelling allowance at such rates as may be fixed by 
the Executive Council.  
(iv) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full pay at the rate of thirty days in a 
calendar year and the leave shall be credited to his account in advance in two half-yearly instalments 
of fifteen days each on the first day of January and July every year:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor assumes or relinquishes charge of the office of the         
Vice -Chancellor during the currency of a half year, the leave shall be credited proportionately at the 
rate of two and -a-half days for each completed month of service.  
(v) In addition to the leave referred to in sub -clause ( iv), the Vice -Chancellor shall also be entitled 
to half -pay leave at the rate of twenty days for each completed year of service, and half -pay leave 
may also be availed of as commuted leave on f ull pay on medical certificate:  
Provided that when such commuted leave is availed of, twice the amount of half -pay leave shall 
be debi ted against half -pay l eave due.  
(7) If the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or otherwise, or if he 
is unable to perform his duties due to ill -health or any other cause, the Pr o-Vice -Chancellor shall perform 
the duties of the Vice -Chancellor : 
Provided that if the Pro -Vice -Chancellor is not available, the senior -most Professor shall perform the 
duties of the Vice -Chancellor until a new Vice -Chancellor assum es office or the existing Vice -Chancellor 
resumes the duties of his office, as the case may be.  
3. Powers and duties of Vice -Chancellor. –(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be ex officio  Chairman of 
the Executive Council, the Academic Council and the Finance Committee and shall, in the absence of the 
Chancellor, preside at the Convocations held for  conferring degrees and at meetings of the Court.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and address, any meeting of any authority 
or other body of the University, but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he is a me mber of such  
authority or body.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice -Chancellor to see that this Act, the Statutes, the Ordinances and the 
Regulations are duly observed and he shall have all the powers necessary to ensure such observance.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall  have all the powers necessary for the proper maintenance of discipline 
in the University and he may delegate any such powers to such person or persons as he deems fit.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall have the power to convene or cause to be convened the mee tings of the 
Executive Council, the Academic Council and the Finance Committee.  
4. Pro-Vice-Chancellor. –(1) The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Executive Council 
on the recomme ndation of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that where the recommenda tion of the Vice -Chancellor is not accepted by the Executive 
Council, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor who may either appoint the person recommended by 
the Vice -Chancellor or ask the Vice -Chancellor to recommend another person to the Executive C ouncil:  
Provided further that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor, 
appoint a Professor to discha rge the duties of the Pro -Vice -Chancellor in addition to his own duties as a 
Professor.  
(2) The term of office of the Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be such as may be decided by the Executive 
Council but it shall not in any case exceed five years or until the expiration of the term of office of the 
Vice -Chanc ellor, whichever is earlier:  21 
 Provided tha t the Pro -Vice -Chancellor whose term of office has expired shall be eligible for             
re-appointment:  
Provided further t hat, in any case, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall retire on atta ining the age of seventy 
years:  
Provided also that the Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall, while discharging the duties of the Vice -Chancellor 
under clause  (7) of Statute  2, continue in office, notwithstanding the expiration of his term of office as 
Pro-Vice -Chancellor, until the Vice -Chancellor resumes office or a new Vice -Chancellor assu mes office, 
as the case may be.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditi ons of service of the Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be 
such as may be pre scribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall assist the Vice -Chancellor in respect of such matters as may be 
specified by the Vice -Chancellor in this behalf, from time to time, and shall also exercise such powers 
and perform such duties as may be assigned or delegated to him by the Vice -Chancellor.  
5. Deans of Schools. –(1) Every Dean of School shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor from 
amongst the Professors in the School by rotation in order of seniori ty for a period of three years:  
Provided that in case there is only one Professor or no Professor in a School, the Dean sh all be 
appointed, for the time being, from amongst the Professor, if any , and the Associate Professors in the 
School by rotation in the order of seniority:  
Provided further that a Dean on attaining the age of sixty -five years shal l cease to hold office as such.  
(2) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness, absence or any 
other cause, unable to perform duties of his office, the duties of the office sh all be performed by the 
senior -most Professor or Associate Professor, as the case may be, in the School.  
(3) The Dean shall be the Head of the School and shall be responsible for the conduct and 
maintenance of the standards of teaching and research in the School and shall have such other functions 
as may b e prescribed by the  Ordinances.  
(4) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at any meeting of the Boards of Studies 
or Committees of the School, as the case may be, but shall not have the right to vote thereat unless he is a 
member thereof.  
6. Registrar. –(1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the  recommendation 
of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and shall be whole -time salaried officer of the 
University.  
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five year s and shall b e eligible for re -appointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Registrar shall be such as may 
be prescribed by the Execu tive Council from time to time:  
Provided that the Registrar shall retire on attaining the age of six ty-two-years.  
(4) When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar is, by reason of illness, absence or 
any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by 
such person as the Vice -Chan cellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) (a) The Registrar shall have power to take disciplinary action against such of the employees, 
excluding teachers and other academic staff, as may be specified in the order of the Executive Council 
and to suspend them  pending inquiry, to administer warnings to them or to impose on them the penalty of 
censure or the withholding of increment:  
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against the action propose d to be taken in regard to him.  
(b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice -Chancellor against any order of the Registrar imposing any of the 
penalties specified in sub -clause  (a). 22 
 (c) In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyon d the power of the Registrar is called 
for, the Registrar shall, upon the conclusion of the inquiry, make a report to the Vice -Chancellor  along 
with his recommendation s: 
Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Executive Counci l against an order of the Vic e-Chancellor 
imposing any penalty.  
(6) The Registrar shall be ex officio  Secretary of the Executive Council and the Academic  Council , 
but shall not be deemed to be member of either of these authorities and he shall be ex officio         
Member -Secretary of the Court.  
(7) It shall b e the duty of the Registrar – 
(a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such other property of the University 
as the Executive Council shall commit to his charge;  
(b) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Court, the Executives Council, the Academic 
Council and of any Committees appointed by those authorities;  
(c) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council and of any Committees appointed by those authori ties; 
(d) to conduct the official correspondence of the Court, the Executive Co uncil and the Academic 
Council;  
(e) to supply to Visitor, copies of the agenda of the meetings of the authorities of the University 
as soon as they are issued and the minutes of  such meetings;  
(f) to represent the University in suits or proceedings by or against the University, sign powers of 
attorney and verify pleadings or depute his representative for  the purpose; and  
(g) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the  Statutes, the Ordinances or the 
Regulations or as may be required from time to time by the Executive Council or Vice -Chancellor.  
7. Finance Officer. –(1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the 
recommendations of Selection Committee con stituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time 
salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The Finance Officer shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for               
re-appointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and condit ions of service of the Finance Officer shall be such as 
may be prescr ibed by the Executive Council f rom time to time:  
Provided that the Finance Officer shall retire on attaining the age of six ty-two years.  
(4) When the office of the Finance  Officer is vacant or when the Finance Officer is, by reason of 
illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the  duties of his office, the duties of the office shall 
be performed by such person as the Vice -Chancell or may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) The Finance Officer shall be ex officio  Secretary of the Finance Committee, but shall not be 
deemed to  be a member of such Committee.  
(6) The Finance Officer shall – 
(a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the University and shall advise it a s regards its 
financial policy;  and 
(b) perform such other financial functions as may be assigned to him by the Executive Council or 
as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(7) Subject to the control of the Executive Counci l, the Finance Of ficer shall – 
(a) hold and manage the property and investments of the University includ ing trust and endowed 
property;  23 
 (b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Executive Council for recurring and non-recurring 
expenditure for a year are not exceeded and that all moneys are expended on the purpose for which 
they are granted or allotted;  
(c) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget of the University and for 
their present ation to the Executive Council ; 
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank balances a nd on the state of 
investments;  
(e) watch the progress of the collection of revenues and advise on the  methods of collection 
employed;  
(f) ensure that the registers of buildings, land , furniture and equipment are maintained up -to-date 
and that stock -checking is conducted, of equipment and other consumable materials in all offices, 
Departments, Centre s and Specialised Laboratories;  
(g) bring to the notice of the Vice -Chancellor unauthorised expenditure and other financial 
irregularities and suggest disciplinary actio n against persons at fault; and  
(h) call for from any office, Department, Centre, Laboratory, College or Institution maintained by 
the University any information or returns that he may consider necessary for the performance of his 
duties.  
(8) Any receipt given by the Finance Officer or the person or persons duly authorised in this behalf by 
the Executive Council for any money payable to the University shall be sufficient discharge for payment 
of such money.  
8. Controller of Examinations. –(1) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed by the 
Execu tive Council on the recommenda tions of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose an d he 
shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall b e eligible  for 
re-appointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Controller of Examinations shall 
be such as may be prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time;  
Provided that the Controller of Examinations shall retir e on attaining the age of sixty -two years.  
(4) When the office of the Controller of Examinations is vacant or when the Controller of 
Examinations is, by reason of illness, absence or any other cause,  unable to perform the duties of his 
office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such person as the Vice -Chancell or may appoint fo r 
the purpose.  
(5) The Controller of Examinations shall arrange for and superintend the examinations of the 
University in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances.  
9. Librarian. –(1) The Librarian shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendations 
of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the 
University.  
(2) The Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to him by 
the Executive Council.  
10. Meeting s of Court .–(1) An annual meeting of the Court shall be held on a date to be fixed by the 
Executive Council unless some other date has been fixed by the Court in respect of any year.  
(2) At an annual meeting of the Court, a report on the workin g of the University during the previous 
year, together with a statement of the receip ts and expenditure, the balance -sheet as audited, and financial 
estimates for the next year shall be presented.   24 
 (3) A copy of the statement of receipt s and expenditure, the balance -sheet and the financial estimates 
referred to in clause ( 2) shall be sent to every member of the Court at least seven days before the date of 
the annual meeting.  
(4) Special meetings of the Court may be convened by the Executive Council or the Vice -Chancellor 
or if there is no  Vice -Chancellor, the Pro -Vice -Chancel lor or if there is no Pro-Vice -Chancellor, by the 
Registrar.  
(5) Eleven members of the Court shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Court.  
11. Quorum for meeting o f Executive Council. –Seven member of the Executive Council shall form 
a quorum for a meeting of the Executive Council.  
12. Powers and functions of Executive Council. –(1) The Executive Council shall have the power of 
management and administration of the revenues and property of the University and the conduct of all 
administrative affairs of the University not otherwise provided for.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Executives Council 
shall, in addition to all other powers vested i n it, hav e the following powers, namely: – 
(i) to create teaching and other academic posts including Chairs, to determine the number and 
emoluments of such posts and to define the duties and conditions of service of Professors, Associate 
Professors, Assista nt Profe ssors and other academic staff:  
Provided that no action shall be taken by the Executive Council in respect of the number and 
qualifications of teachers and other academic staff otherwise than after consideration of the 
recommend ations of the Academ ic Council;  
(ii) to appoint such Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant Professors and other academic 
staff including Chairs, as may be necessary, on the recommendation of the Selection Committee 
constituted for the purpose and to fill  up temporary vacancies therein;  
(iii) to promote inter -facial research by making joint appointments of teaching staff in different 
Schools, Department s and Centres;  
(iv) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts and to define their d uties and 
conditions of their service and to make appointments thereto in the manne r prescribed by the 
Ordinances;  
(v) to grant leave of absence to any officer of the University other th an the Chancellor and the 
Vice -Chancellor, and to make necessary arrangements for the discharge of the functions of s uch 
officer during his absence;  
(vi) to regulate and enforce discipline among employees in accordance with the Statutes and the 
Ordinances;  
(vii) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, investments , property, business and all other 
administrative affairs of the University and for that purpose to appoint such agents as it may thin k fit;  
(viii) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non -recurring expenditure for a year on the 
recommend ation of the Finance Committee;  
(ix) to invest any money belonging to the University, including any unapplied income, in such 
stocks, funds, share or securities, from time to time, as it may think fit or in the purchase of 
immovable property in India, with  the like powers of varying such investment from time to time;  
(x) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immovable property  on behalf of the 
University;  
(xi) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus and other means needed for carrying  
on the work of the University;  
(xii) to enter into vary, carry out and cancel contra cts on behalf of the University ; 
  25 
 (xiii) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and if th ought fit, to redress any grievances of the employees 
and students of the University who may, for any reason, feel aggrieved;  
(xiv) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if necessary, to remove them, and to fix their fees, 
emoluments and travelling and other allowances, after c onsulting the Academic Council;  
(xv) to select a common seal for the University and pr ovide for the use of su ch seal;  
(xvi) to make such special arrangements as may be necessary for the residence of women 
students;  
(xvii) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(xviii) to provide for the appointment of Visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors, Consultants and 
Scholars and determine the terms and conditions of such a ppointments;  
(xix) to enter into partnership with industry and non -government agencies for the advancement of  
knowledge and establish a corpus of funds out of the profits of such partnership ; and  
(xx) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed 
on it by this Act or the Statutes.  
13. Quorum of meeting of Academic Coun cil.–Nine members of the Academic Council shall f orm 
a quorum for a meeting of the Academic Council.  
14. Powers and functions of Academic Council. –Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes 
and the Ordinances, the Academic Council shall, in addition to all other powers vested in it, hav e the 
following powers, namely: – 
(a) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University and to give 
directions regarding methods of instruction, co -ordination of teaching among the Col leges and the 
Institutions, evaluation of research and imp rovement of academic standards;  
(b) to bring abo ut and promote inter -School co -ordination and to establish or appoint such 
committees or boards as may de emed necessary for the purpose;  
(c) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own initiative, or on a reference 
by a School or the Executive Council, and to take appropriate action thereon; and  
(d) to frame such Regulations and rules consistent with the Statutes and the Ord inances regarding 
the academic functioning of the University, discipline, residence, admissions, award of fellowships 
and studentships, fees, concessions,  corporate life and attendance.  
15. Schools of Studies and Departments. –(1) The University shall have such Schools of Studies as 
may be specified in the Statutes.  
(2) Every School shall have a School Board and the members of the first School Board shall be 
nominated by the Executive Counc il for a period of three years.  
(3) The composition, powers and funct ions of a School Board shall b e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The conduct of the meetings of a School Board and the quorum required for such meetings shall 
be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(5) (a) Every School shall consist of such Departments as may b e assigned to it by the Ordinances : 
Provided that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic Council, establish 
Centres of Studies to which may be assigned such teachers of the University as the Executive Council 
may consider necessar y. 
(b) Each Department shall consist of the following members, namely: – 
(i) teachers of the Department;  
(ii) persons conducting re search in the Department;   26 
 (iii) Dean of the School;  
(iv) Honorary Professors, if any, attached to the Department; and  
(v) such other persons as may be members of the Department in accordance with t he provisions of 
the Ordinances . 
16. Board of Studies. –(1) Each Dep artment shall have a Board of Studies.  
(2) The constitution of the Board of Studies and the term of office of its members shall b e prescribed 
by the Ordinances.  
(3) Subject to the overall control and supervision of the Academic Council, the functions of a Board 
of Studies shall be to approve subjects for research for various degrees and other requirements of research 
degrees and to recommend to the concerned School Board in the mann er prescribed by the Ordinances – 
(a) courses of studies and appointment of examiners for courses, but excluding research degrees;  
(b) appointment o f supervisors for research; and  
(c) measures for the improvement of the st andard of teaching and research:  
Provided that the above functions of a Board of Studies shall, during the period of three years 
immediately after the commencement of this Act, be performed by the Department.  
17. Finan ce Committee. –(1) The Finance Committee shall consist of  the following members, 
namely: – 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor ; 
(ii) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(iii) one person to be no minated by the Court;  
(iv) three  persons to be nominated by the Executive Council, out of whom at least one shall be a 
membe r of the Executive Council; and  
(v) three persons  to be nominated by the Visitor . 
(2) Five members of the Finance Committee shall form a quorum for a me eting of the  Finance 
Committee.  
(3) All the members of the Finance Committee, other than ex officio members, shall hold of fice for a 
term of three years.  
(4) A member of the Finance Committee shall have the right to record a minute of dissent if he does 
not agree with  any dec ision of the Finance Committee.  
(5) The Finance Committee shall meet at least thrice every year to examine the accounts and to 
scrut inise proposals for expenditure.  
(6) All proposals relating to creation of posts, and those items which have not been included in the 
budget, shall be examined by the Finance Committee before they are consi dered by the Executive 
Council.  
(7) The annual account s and the financial estimates of the University prepared by the Finance Officer 
shall be laid before the Fina nce Committee for consideration and comments and thereafter submitted to 
the Executive Council for approval.  
(8) The Finance Committee shall recommend limits for the total recurring expenditure and the total 
non-recurring expenditure for the year, based on  the income and resources of the University  (which, in the 
case of productive works, may include the proceeds of loans).  
18. Se lection Committees. –(1) There shall be Selection Committees for making recommendations to 
the Executive Council for appointment to the post of Professor, Associate Professor, Assistant Professor, 
Registrar, Finance Officer, Controller of Examinatio ns, Librarian and Principals of College s and 
Institutions maintained by the University.  27 
 (2) The Selection Committee for appointment to t he posts specified in Column 1 of the Table below 
shall consist of the Vice -Chancellor, a nominee of the Visitor and the persons specified in the 
corresponding entry in Column 2 of the said Table:  
TABLE  
 
1 2 
Professor  (i) The Dean of the School.  
(ii) The Head of the Department, if he is a Professor.  
(iii) Three persons not in the service of the University, nominated by  
the Executive Council, out of a panel of names recommended by 
the Academic Council for their special knowledge of, or interest 
in, the subject with which the Professor will be concerned.  
Associate Professor/Assistant 
Professor   (i) The Head of the Department.  
(ii) One Professor nominated by the Vice -Chancellor.  
(iii) Two persons not in the service of the University, nominated by 
the Executive Council, out of a panel of names recommended by 
the  Academic Council for their special knowledge of,  or interest 
in, the subject with which the Associate Professor or Assistant 
Professor will be concerned.  
Registrar/Finance  
Officer/Controller of 
Examinations  (i) Two members of the Executive Council nominated by it.  
(ii) One person not in the service of the University nominated by the 
Executive Council.  
Librarian  (i) Two person s not in the service of the University who have special 
knowledge of the subject of the Library Science or Library 
Administration nominated by the Executive Council.  
(ii) One person not in the service of the University nominated by the 
Executive Council.  
Principal of College or Institution 
maintained by the University  Three persons not in the service of t he University of whom two shall 
be nominated by the Executive Counc il and one by  the Academic 
Council for their special knowledge of, or  interest in, a subject in 
which instruction is  being provided by the College or Institution.  
Note 1. – Where the appointment is being made for an inter -disciplinary project, the head of the 
project shall be deemed to be the Head of the Department concerned.  
Note 2. – The Professor to be nominated by th e Vice -Chancellor shall be a Professor concerned with 
the speciality for which the selection is being made and the Vice -Chancellor shall consult 
the Head of the Department and the Dean of School before nominating the Professor.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor, or in his absence the Pro -Vice -Chancellor, shall convene and preside at the 
meeting of the Selection Committee:  
Provided that the meeting of the Selection Committee shall be fixed after prior consultation with, and 
subject to the convenience of Visitor’s nomi nee and the experts nom inated by the Executive Council : 
Provided further that the proceedings of the Selection Commi ttee shall not be valid unless, – 
(a) where the number of Visitor’s nominee and the persons nominated by the Executive Council 
is four in all , at least three of them attend the meeting; and  
(b) where the number of Visitor’s nominee and the persons nominated by the Executive Council 
is three in all, at least two of them attend the meeting.   28 
 (4) The procedure to be followed by the Selection Committee shall be laid down in the Ordinances.  
(5) If the Executive Council is unable to accept the recommendations made by the Selection 
Committee, it shall record its reasons and submit the case to the Visitor for final orders.  
 (6) Appointments to temp orary posts shall be made  in the manner indicated below :– 
(i) If the temporary vacancy is for duration longer than one academic session, it shall be filled on 
the advice of the Selecti on Committee in accordance with  the procedure indi cated in the foregoing  
clauses:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor is satisfied that in the interests of work it is necessary to fill 
the vacancy, the appointment may be made on a purely temporary basis on the advice of a local 
Selection Committee referred to in sub-clause  (ii) for a period not exceeding six months.  
(ii) If the temporary vacancy is for a period less than a year, an appointment to such vacancy shall 
be made on the recommendation of a local Selection Committee consisting of the Dean of the School 
concerned, the Head of the Department and a nominee of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and the Head of the Department, 
the Selection Committee may contain two nominees of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that in th e case of sudden casual vacancies of teaching posts caused by death or 
any other reason, th e Dean may, in consultation wit h the Head of the Department concerned, make a 
temporary appointment for a month and report to the Vice -Chancellor and the Registrar a bout such 
appointment.  
(iii) No teacher appointed temporarily shall, if he is not recommended by a regular Selection 
Committee for ap pointment under the Statutes, be  continued in service on such temporary 
employment, unless he is subsequently selected by a local Selection Committee or a regular Selection 
Committee, for a temporary or permanent appointment, as the case may be.  
19. Special mo de of appointment. –(1) Notwi thstanding anything contained in Statute 18, the 
Executive Council may invite a person of high academic distinction and professional attainments to 
accept a post of Professor or Associate Professor or any other equivalent academic post in the University 
on such terms and conditions as it deems fit and on the person agreeing to do so appoint him to the post:  
Provided that the Executive Council may also create supernumerary post for a specified period for 
appointment of such persons:  
Provided further that the  number of supernumerary post so created should not exceed five per cent . of 
the total posts in the University.  
(2) The Executive Council may appoint a teacher or any other academic staff working in any other 
University or organistion  for undertaking a joint project in accordance with the manner laid down in the 
Ordinances.  
20. Appointment for fixed tenure. –The Executive Council may appoint a person selected in 
accordance with the procedure laid down in Statute 18 for a fixed tenure on  such terms and conditions as 
it deems fit . 
21. Committees. –(1) An authority of the University may appoint as many standing or special 
Committees as it may deem fit, and may appoint to such Committees persons who are  not members of 
such authority.  
(2) A Committee appointed under clause ( 1) may deal with any subject delegated to it subject to 
subsequent confirmation by the authority ap pointing it.  
22. Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of teachers, etc. –(1) All the teachers and 
other acade mic staff of the University shall, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, be governed 
by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as are specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances 
and the Regulations.  
  29 
 (2) The emoluments of members  of the academic staff shall be such as may b e prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(3) Every teacher and member of the academic staff of the University shall be appointed on a written 
contract, the form of which shall b e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) A copy of every contract referred to in clause ( 3) shall be  deposited with the Registrar.  
23. Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of  other employees .–(1) All the 
employees of the University, other than the teachers and other academic staff shall, in the absence of any 
contract to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as are 
specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations.  
(2) The manner of appointment and emoluments of employees, other than the teachers and other 
academic staff, shall be such as may b e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
24. Seniority list. –(1) Whenever, in accordance with the Statutes , any person is to hold an office or 
be a member of an authority of the University by rotation according to seniority, such seniority shall be 
determined according to the length of continuous service of such person in his grade and in accordance 
with such other principles as the Executive Council may , from time to time, prescribe.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain in respect of each class of persons to 
whom the provisions of these Sta tutes apply, a complete and up -to-date seniority list in accordance w ith 
the provisions of clause  (1). 
(3) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous service in a particular grade or the relative 
seniority of any person or persons in otherwise in doubt, the Registrar may, on his own  motion and shall, 
at the request of any such person, submit the matter to the Executive Council whose decision thereon shall 
be final.  
25. Removal of employee s of University. –(1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct against a 
teacher, a member of the academic staff or other  employee of the University, the Vice -Chancellor, in the 
case of the teacher or a member of the academic staff, and the authority competent to appoint (hereinaf ter 
referred to as the appointing  authority) in the case of other employee may, by order in writ ing, place such 
teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee, as the case may be, under suspension and shall 
forthwith report to the Executive Council the circumstances in which the order was made:  
Provided that the Executive Council may, if it is of the opinion, that the circumstances of the case do 
not warrant the suspension of the teacher or a member of the academic staff, rev oke such order.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of the contract of appointment or of any other 
terms and condition s of service of the employees, the Executive Council in respect of teachers and other 
academic staff, and the appointing authority in respect of other employees, shall have the power to 
remove a teacher or a member of the academic staff or o ther employee, as the case ma y be, on grounds of 
misconduct.  
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Executive Council, or as the case may be, the appointing authority, shall not 
be entitled to remove any teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee except f or a good 
cause and after giving three months’ notice or on payment of three months’ salary in lieu thereof.  
(4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall be removed under clause ( 2) or 
clause ( 3) unless he has been given a reasonabl e opportunity of showing cause against the action propose d 
to be taken in regard to him.  
(5) The removal of a teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall take effect from 
the date on whic h the order of removal is made:  
Provided that where  the teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee is under suspension 
at the time o f his removal, such removal shall take effect from the date on which he was placed under 
suspension.  
  30 
 (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in  the foregoing pro visions of this  Statute, a teacher, member 
of the academic sta ff or other employee may resign – 
(a) if he is permanent employee , only after giving three months ’ notice in writing to the 
Executive Council or the appointing authority, as the case may be, or b y paying three months’ salary 
in lieu thereof;  
(b) if he is not a permanent employ ee, only after given one month’s  notice in writing to the 
Executive Council or, as the case may be, the appointing authority or by paying one month’s salary in 
lieu thereof:  
Provide t hat such resignation shall take  effect only on the date on which the resignation is accepted by 
the Executive Council or the appointing  authority, as the case may be.  
26. Honorary degrees. –(1) The Executive Council may, on the recommendation of th e Academic 
Council and by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and 
voting, make proposals to the Visitor for the conferment of honorary degrees:  
Provided that in case of emergency, the Executive Council may, on its o wn motion, make such 
proposals.  
(2) The Executive Council may, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the 
members present and voting, withdraw, with the previous sanction of the Visitor, any honorary degree 
conferred by  the University.  
27. Withdrawal of degrees, etc. –The Executive Council may, by  a resolution passed by a majority of 
not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw a degree or academic distinction 
conferred on, or any certificate or diploma granted to, any person by the University  for good and 
sufficient cause:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been given to that person 
calling upon him to show cause within such time as may be specified in the notice as to why such a 
resolution should not be passed and until his object ions, if any, and any evidence he may produce in 
support of them, have been considered by the Executive Council.  
28. Maintenance of discipline amongst student s of University. –(1) All  powers relating to the 
maintenance of discipline and disciplinary action in relation to the students of the University shall vest in  
the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) There shall be a Proctor of the University to assist the Vice -Chancellor in the exercise of the 
powers referred to in clause ( 1), who shall be appointed by the Executive Council from amongst the 
Professors and Associate Professors in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may delegate all or any of the powers referred to in c lause ( 1), as he deems 
proper, to the Proctor and to such other officers as he may specify in this behalf.  
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to the maintenance of discipline and 
taking such action, as may seem to him appropriat e for the  maintenance of discipline, the Vice -Chancellor 
may, in exercise of such powers, by order, direct that any student or students be expelled or rusticated, for 
a specified period, or be not ad mitted to a course or  courses of  study in a College, Institution or 
Department or a School of the University for a stated period, or be punished with fine for an amount to be 
specified in the order, or be debarred from taking an examination or examinations conducted by the 
University, Co llege, Institution or Department or a School for one or more years, or that the results of the 
student or students concerned in the examination or examinations in which he or they have appeared be 
withheld or cancelled.  
(5) The Principals of Colleges, Inst itutions, Deans of Schools of Studies and Heads of teaching 
Departments in the University shall have the authority to exercise all such disciplinary powers over the 
students in their respective Colleges, Institutions, Schools and teaching Departments in th e University, as 
may be necessary for the proper conduct of such Colleges, Institution s, Schools and teaching 
Departments.   31 
 (6) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice -Chancellor and the Principals and other persons 
specified in clause ( 5), detailed ru les of discipline and proper conduct shall be made by the University and 
the Principals of Colleges, Institutions, Deans of Schools of Studies and Heads of teaching Departments 
in the University may also make such supplementary rules as they deem necessary  for the purposes stated 
therein.  
(7) At the time of admission, every student shall be required to sign a declaration to the effect that he 
submits himself to the discipl inary jurisdiction of the Vice -Chancellor and other  authorities of the 
University.  
29. Convocations. –Convocations of the University for the conferring of degrees or for other purposes 
shall be held in such manner as may b e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
30. Acting Chairman of meetings. –Where no provision is made for a President or Chairman to 
preside over a meeting of any authority of the University or any Committee of such authority or when the 
President or Chairman so provided for is absent, the members present shall elect one from amo ng 
themsel ves to preside at such meeting.  
31. Resignation .–Any member, other than an ex officio  member of the Court, the Executive Council, 
the Academic Council or any other authority of the University or any Committee of such authority may 
resign by letter addressed to the Registrar and the resignation shall take effect as soon as such letter is 
received by t he Registrar.  
32. Disqualifica tion.–(1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member 
of any of the authorities, or for being appointed as, and for being, an  officer, of the University if – 
(i) he is of unsound mind;  or 
(ii) he is an undischa rged insolvent; or  
(iii) he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving moral turpitude and 
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonmen t for not less than six months.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of the 
disqualifications mentioned in clause ( 1), the question shall be referred to the Visitor and his decision 
shall be final and no suit or other proceeding shall lie in any civ il court against such decision.  
33. Residence condition for membership and office. –Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Statutes, a person who is not ordinarily resident in India shall not be eligible to be an officer of the 
University or a member of a ny authority of the University.  
34. Membership of authorities by virtue of membership of other bodies. –Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Statutes, a person who holds any post in the University or  is a member of any 
authority or  body of the University in his capacity as a member of a particular authority or body or as the 
holder of a particular appointment shall hold such office or membership only for so long as he continues 
to be a member of that particular authority or body or the holder of that particular appointment, as the 
case ma y be.  
35. Alumni Association. –(1) There shall be an Alumni Association for the University.  
(2) The subscription for membership of the Alumni Association shall be prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(3) No member of the Alumni Association shall be entitled to vote or stand for election unless he has 
been a member of the Association for at least one year prior to the date of election and is a degree holder 
of the University o f at least five years standing:  
Provided that the condition relating to the completion o f one year’s membership shall not apply in the 
case of the first election.  
36. Students Council. –(1) There shall be constituted  in the University, a Students’ Council for every 
academ ic year, consisting of – 
(i) the Dean of Students’ Welfare who shall be the Cha irman of the Students’ Council;  32 
 (ii) twenty students to be nominated by the Academic Council on the basis of merit in studies, 
sports and e xtra-curricular activities; and  
(iii) twenty students to be elected by  the stu dents as their representatives:  
Provided that any student of the University shall have the right to bring up any matter concerning the 
University before the Students’ Council, if so permitted by the Chairman, and he shall have the right to 
particip ate in the discussions at any meeting when the matter  is taken up for consideration.  
(2) The functions of the Students’ Council shall be to make suggestions to the appropriate authorities 
of the University in regard to the programmes  of studies, students’ welfare and other matters of 
importance, in regard to the working of the University in general and such suggestions shall be made on 
the basis of consensus of opinion.  
(3) The Students’ Council shall meet at least twice in every acad emic year and the first meeting of the 
Council be held in the beg inning of the academic session.  
37. Ordinances how to be made .–(1) The first Ordinances made under sub -section ( 2) of section 28 
may be amended, repealed or added to at any time by the Execut ive Council in the manner specifie d in 
the following sub -clauses.  
(2) No Ordinances in respect of the matters enumerated in sub -section ( 1) of section 28 of this Act 
shall be made by the Executive Council unless a draft of such Ordinances has been proposed  by the 
Academic Council.  
(3) The Executive Council shall not have power to amend any draft of any Ordinances proposed by 
the Academic Council under clause ( 2), but may reject the proposal or return the draft to the Academic 
Council for re -consideration, either in whole or in part, together with any amendment which the  
Executive Council may suggest.  
(4) Where the Executive Council has rejected or returned the draft of an Ordinances proposed by the 
Academic Council, the Academic Council may consider the que stion afresh and in case the original draft 
is reaffirmed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting and more than 
half the total number of members of the Academic Council, the draft may be sent back to the Executive 
Counci l which shall either adopt it or refer it to the Visitor  whose decision shall be final.  
(5) Every Ordinance s made by the Executive Council shal l come into effect immediately.  
(6) Every Ordinances made by the Executive Council shall be submitted to the Visitor within two 
weeks  from the date of its adoption.  
(7) The Visitor shall have the power to direct the University to suspend the operation of any 
Ordinances.  
(8) The Visitor shall inform the Executive Council about his objection to the Ordinances referred to in 
clause ( 7) and may, after receiving the comments of the University, either withdraw the order suspending 
the Ordinances or disallow the Ordinances, a nd his decision shall be final.  
38. Regulations. –(1) The authorities of the University may m ake Regulation s consistent with this 
Act. the Statu tes and the Ordinances for  the following matters, namely: – 
(i) laying down the procedure to be observed at their meeting s and the number of mem bers 
required to form a quorum;  
(ii) providing for all matters  which are required by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances to be 
prescribed by Regulations; and  
(iii) providing for all other matters solely concerning such authorities or committees appointed by 
them and not provided for by this Act,  the Statu tes or the Ordinances.  
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the giving of notice to t he 
members of such authority of  the dates of meeting and of the business to be considered at meetings and 
for the keeping of a record of the  proceedings of me etings.   33 
 (3) The Executive Council may direct the amendment in such manner as it may specify of any 
Regulation made under the Statutes or the an nulment of any such Regulation.  
39. Delegation of Powers. –Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, any officer or 
authority of the University may delegate his or its powers to any other officer or authority or person under 
his or its respective control and subject to the condition that overall responsibility for the exercise of the  
power so delegated shall continue to vest in the officer or authority delegating such pow ers. 
 
--------------------------The Collection of Statistics Act, 2008--------------------------
1 THE COLLECTION OF STATISTICS ACT, 2008 
–––––––––– 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
–––––––––– 
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
SECTIONS 
1.Short title, extent and commencement. 
2.Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
COLLECTION OF STATISTICS
3.Collection of statistics. 
3A. Nodal officer. 
4.Powers of appropriate Government to appoint statistics officer, etc. 
5.Power of statistics officer to call for information. 
6.Duty of informants. 
7.All agencies to assist. 
8.Right of access to records or documents. 
CHAPTER III 
DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION IN CERTAIN CASES AND RESTRICTIONS OF THEIR USE
9.Security of information. 
10.Appropriate Government authorised to disclose certain information. 
11.Disclosure of information schedules for bona fide  research or statistical purposes. 
12.Disclosure of historical documents. 
13.Security of recorded information. 
14.Restrictions on use of information. 
CHAPTER IV 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
15.Penalty for neglect or refusal to supply particulars. 
16.Penalty for making false statement. 
17.Penalty for mutilation or defacement of information schedule. 
18.Penalty for obstruction of employees. 
19.Penalty for other offences. 
20.Penalty for failure to carry out duties and functions by employees. 
21.Penalty for impersonation of employee. 
22.General penalty. 
23.Offences by companies. 
24.Cognizance of offences. 
25.Sanction for prosecution for offence. 
26.Power of court to try cases summarily. 2 CHAPTER V 
POWER IN RESPECT OF CORE STATISTICS
SECTIONS
27.Power in respect of core statistics. 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS
28.Power to give directions. 
29.Public servants. 
30.Bar of jurisdiction. 
31.Protection of action taken in good faith. 
32.Overriding effect. 
33.Power to make rules. 
34.Repeal and savings.  3 THE COLLECTION OF STATISTICS ACT, 2008 
ACT No. 7 OF 2009 
[7thJanuary,  2009.] 
An Act to facilitate the collection of statistics on economic, demographic, social, scientific 
and environmental aspects, and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:– 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.— (1) This Act may be called the Collection of 
Statistics Act, 2008. 
1[(2) It extends to the whole of India:  
Provided that it shall apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir in so far as it relates to statistics 
pertaining to matters falling under any of the entries specified in List I (Union List) or List III 
(Concurrent List) in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution as applicable to that State.]. 
 (3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. Definitions.– In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,– 
(a) "agency" includes a person or persons engaged by the appropriate Government, directly or 
by outsourcing, for collection of statistics; 
(b) "appropriate Government" means– 
(i) any Ministry or Department in the Central Government; or 
(ii) any Ministry or Department in a State Government or Union territory Administration; or 
(iii) any local government that is to say, Panchayats or Municipalities, as the case may be, 
in relation to the collection of statistics under a direction issued by it under section 3; 
(c) "informant" means any person, who supplies or is required to supply statistical information 
and includes a owner or occupier or person in-charge or his authorised representative in respect of 
persons or a firm registered under the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (9 of 1932) or a co-operative 
society registered under any Co-operative Societies Act or a company registered under the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 
(21 of 1860) or any association recognised or registered under any law for the time being in force; 
(d) "information schedule" means any book, document, form, card, tape, disc or any storage 
media on which information required is entered or recorded or is required to be entered or recorded 
for statistical purposes under this Act; 
3[(da) "nodal officer" means the officer designated as a nodal officer under sub-section ( 1) of 
section 3A;]. 
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(f) "sampling" means a statistical procedure by which information relating to a particular field 
of inquiry is derived by applying statistical techniques to information obtained in respect of a 
proportion of the total number of persons or units concerned relevant to the field of inquiry; 
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 2017, s. 2 ( w.e.f. 3-10-2017) 
  2. 11th June, 2010, vide notification No. S.O. 1416(E), dated 9th June, 2010, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
3. Ins. by Act 21 of 2017, s. 3 (w.e.f. 3-10-2017). 4 (g) "statistical survey" means a census or a survey, whereby information is collected from all 
the informants in the field of inquiry or from a sample thereof, by an appropriate Government 
under this Act or any other relevant Act, wholly or primarily for the purposes of processing and 
summarising by appropriate statistical procedures; 
(h) "statistics" means statistics derived by collecting, classifying and using statistics, specially 
in or for large quantities or numbers by appropriate Government from statistical surveys, 
administrative and registration records, and other forms and papers, the statistical analysis of 
which are, whether in a published or unpublished form; 
(i) "statistics officer" means any officer appointed under section 4 for the purposes of any 
direction issued under section 3 of this Act.
CHAPTER II 
COLLECTION OF STATISTICS
3. Collection of statistics.– The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that the statistics on economic, demographic, social, scientific and environmental 
aspects shall be collected through a statistical survey or otherwise, and thereupon the provisions of 
this Act shall apply in relation to those statistics:  
Provided that– 
(a) nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to authorise a State Government or Union 
territory Administration or any local government to issue any direction with respect to the 
collection of statistics relating to any matter falling under any of the entries specified in List I 
(Union List) in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution; or 
(b) where the Central Government has issued any direction under this section for the collection 
of statistics relating to any matter, no State Government or Union territory Administration or any 
local government shall, except with the previous approval of the Central Government, issue any 
similar direction for so long as the collection of such statistics by the Central Government remain 
to be completed; or 
(c) where a State Government or Union territory Administration or any local government has 
issued a direction under this section for the collection of statistics relating to any matter, the 
Central Government shall not issue any similar direction for so long as the collection of such 
statistics by the State Government remain to be completed, except in cases where such statistics 
have to be collected with reference to two or more States or Union territories. 
1[3A. Nodal officer .–(1) The Central Government or a State Government or Union territory 
Administration shall designate one of its officers as a nodal officer for the purposes of statistics 
under this Act. 
 (2) The nodal officer shall coordinate and supervise such statistical activities in the Central 
Government or the State Government or Union territory Administration, as the case may be, in 
which he is designated, and shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties, as may 
be prescribed.]. 
4. Powers of appropriate Government to appoint statistics officer, etc.– (1) The appropriate 
Government may appoint or cause to appoint an officer to be the statistics officer for any geographical 
unit for the purpose of collecting any statistics directed by it. 
(2) The appropriate Government may appoint any agency or persons working in such agencies to 
take, or aid in, or supervise the collection of the statistics within any specified geographical unit and 
such agencies or persons, when so appointed, shall be bound to serve accordingly. 
(3) The appropriate Government may employ on contract basis any agency or company or 
organisation or association or person, on such terms and conditions and on such safeguards as may be 
prescribed, for the purpose of collecting the statistics directed by it. 
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 2017, s. 4 (w.e.f. 3-10-2017). 5 (4) The appropriate Government may delegate to any statistics officer, as it thinks fit, the power of 
appointing agencies or persons working in such agencies or employing on contract basis any agency 
or company or organisation or association of persons, conferred on it by sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3) 
within the geographical unit for which such statistics officer is appointed. 
(5) The appropriate Government may, by order specify the form, the particulars required or the 
interval within which, and the statistics officer to whom, the statistical information by the informants 
shall be furnished. 
(6) The appropriate Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, delegate to any 
statistics officer, as it thinks fit, any power conferred under sub-section ( 5) for the purpose of the 
collection of statistics under a direction issued by it under section 3. 
5. Power of statistics officer to call for information.– The statistics officer may, for the purpose 
of collection of statistics on any specified subject in any geographical unit for which the said officer 
was appointed– 
(a) serve or cause to be served on any informant a notice in writing asking him to furnish the 
information specified under sub-section ( 5) of section 4 or cause a information schedule to be 
given to any informant for the purpose of its being filled up; or 
(b) cause all questions relating to the subject to be asked from any informant; or 
(c) seek information through tele fax or telephone or e-mail or in any other electronic mode or 
in a combination of different modes for different sets of information so specified. 
6. Duty of informants.– The informants who are asked to furnish any information under the 
provisions of this Act shall be bound to furnish the information so asked in the prescribed manner to 
the best of knowledge or belief; and in cases where only a portion of a particular class or group of 
persons or units is asked to furnish information because of any sampling procedure, it shall not be a 
defence in failure on the part of any informant to furnish that information, if so asked. 
7. All agencies to assist.– Every agency shall render such help and assistance and furnish such 
information to the statistics officer or a person or an agency authorised by him in writing, as he may 
require for the discharge of his functions, and shall make available for inspection and examination of 
such records, plans and other documents, as may be necessary. 
8. Right of access to records or documents.– The statistics officer or any person authorised by 
him in writing in this behalf shall, for the purposes of collection of any statistics under this Act, have 
access to any relevant record or document in the possession of any informant required to furnish any 
information under this Act, and may enter at any reasonable time any premises where he believes such 
record or document is kept and may inspect or take copies of relevant records or documents or ask 
any question necessary for obtaining any information required to be furnished under this Act. 
CHAPTER III 
DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION IN CERTAIN CASES AND RESTRICTIONS OF THEIR USE 
9. Security of information.–1["(1) The statistics officer or any person or agencies authorised 
under this Act shall, for statistical purposes, use any information furnished under section 6 in such 
manner as may be prescribed.].  
(2) No person other than a person engaged in the work of collection of statistics under this Act or 
preparation of statistics resultant to such collection shall be permitted to see any information schedule 
or any answer to a question asked, except for the purposes of a prosecution under this Act. 
(3) No information contained in any information schedule and no answer to any question asked 
shall, except for the purposes of a prosecution under this Act, be separately published, or disclosed 
without suppressing the identification of informants to any agency. 
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 2017, s. 5, for “sub-section ( 1)” (w.e.f. 3-10-2017). 6 (4) All statistical information published by any agency shall be arranged in such a manner so as to 
prevent any particulars becoming identifiable by any person (other than the informant by whom those 
particulars were supplied) as the particulars relating to the informant who supplied it, even through 
the process of elimination, unless– 
(a) that informant has consented to their publication in that manner; or 
(b) their publication in that manner could not reasonably have been foreseen by the concerned 
agency or any employee thereof. 
(5) For the purposes of sub-section ( 4), the Central Government may make such rules or make 
such arrangement, as it may consider necessary. 
10. Appropriate Government authorised to disclose certain information.– Notwithstanding the 
provisions contained in section 9 of this Act, the appropriate Government may disclose the following 
information, namely:– 
(a) information supplied by informant in respect of which disclosure is consented to in writing 
by the informant or by any person authorised by the said informant; 
(b) information otherwise available to the public under any Act or as a public document; 
(c) information in the form of an index or list of the names and addresses of informants together 
with the classification, if any, allotted to them and the number of persons engaged. 
11. Disclosure of information schedules for bona fide  research or statistical purposes .–(1) 
Notwithstanding the provisions contained in section 9 of this Act, the appropriate Government may 
disclose individual returns or formats or information schedules to other agency or person or 
institutions or universities solely for bona fide  research or statistical purposes pursuant to their 
functions and duties. 
(2) No individual return or information schedule shall be disclosed pursuant to this section unless– 
(a) the name and address of the informant by whom the schedule or related information was 
supplied is deleted; 
(b) every agency or person or institutions or Universities involved in the research or statistical 
project makes a declaration to use the schedules disclosed to them only for bona fide  research or 
statistical purposes; and 
(c) the appropriate Government, making such disclosure is satisfied that the security of the 
schedules and any information contained therein shall not be impaired. 
(3) The published results of any research or statistical project shall not divulge any more 
information than what the agency authorised for collection of statistics could publish under this Act. 
(4) Every agency or person or institutions or universities to whom any individual return or 
information schedule is disclosed under this section shall comply with directions given by the agency 
authorised for collection of statistics making the disclosure relating to the schedules and any 
information contained therein. 
12. Disclosure of historical documents.– Notwithstanding anything contained in section 9 of this 
Act, the appropriate Government may release such documents relating to information schedules, 
which in its opinion have attained historical importance. 
13. Security of recorded information.– The statistics officer or any person or agency authorised 
for collection of statistics shall, while copying or recording any statistical information collected 
pursuant to this Act from individual returns, information schedules, worksheets or any other 
confidential source by means of cards, tapes, discs, film or any other method, whether using encoded 
or plain language symbols for processing, storage or reproduction of particulars, take and cause to 
take such steps as are necessary to ensure that the security provisions of this Act are complied with. 
14. Restrictions on use of information.– Save as otherwise provided under this Act,– 7 (a) no information obtained pursuant to this Act and no copy of the information in the 
possession of any informant shall be disclosed or used as evidence in any proceedings whatsoever; 
and 
(b) no person who has access to any information because of his official position in the 
collection of any statistics shall be compelled in any proceedings whatsoever to give oral 
testimony regarding the information or to produce any schedule, document, or record with respect 
to any information obtained in the course of administering this Act, 
except in the manner provided under this Act. 
CHAPTER IV 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
15. Penalty for neglect or refusal to supply particulars.– (1) Whoever, fails to produce any 
books of account, vouchers, documents or other business records or whoever neglects or refuses to fill 
in and supply the particulars required in any information schedule or return given or sent to him or 
whoever neglects or refuses to answer any question or inquiry addressed to him as may be required 
under or for the purposes of any provision of this Act and the rules made thereunder, shall be 
punishable with a fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or, in the case of a company, with a 
fine which may extend to five thousand rupees. 
(2) The conviction of a person or company for an offence shall not relieve him or it of the 
obligations under sub-section ( 1) and if after the expiry of fourteen days from the date of conviction, 
he or it still fails to give the required particulars or continues to neglect or refuses to fill in and supply 
the particulars or to answer the question or inquiry, then he or it shall be punishable with a further fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees or, in the case of a company, with a fine which may extend 
to five thousand rupees, for each day after the first during which the failure continues. 
16. Penalty for making false statement.– Whoever, wilfully makes any false or misleading 
statement or material omission in any information schedule or return filled in or supplied, or in answer 
to any question asked to him under this Act or the rules made thereunder, shall be punishable with 
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with a fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees or, in the case of a company, with a fine which may extend to five thousand 
rupees or with both. 
17. Penalty for mutilation or defacement of information schedule.– Whoever, destroys, defaces, 
removes, or mutilates any information schedule, form, or other document containing particulars 
collected under this Act or requesting any such particulars, shall be punishable with simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with a fine which may extend to two 
thousand rupees or, in the case of a company with a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or 
with both. 
18. Penalty for obstruction of employees.– Whoever, interferes with, hinders, or obstructs any 
employee in the exercise of any power or duty conferred by this Act, shall be punishable with simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with a fine which may extend to two 
thousand rupees or, in the case of a company with a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or 
with both. 
19. Penalty for other offences. –Whoever– 
(a) acts in contravention of or fails to comply with any provision of this Act or any requirement 
imposed under this Act; or 
(b) wilfully deceives or attempts to deceive any statistics officer or any agency or any employee 
thereof, 
shall be punishable with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with a 
fine which may extend to two thousand rupees or, in the case of a company, with a fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees or with both. 8 20. Penalty for failure to carry out duties and functions by employees.– If any person employed 
in the execution of any duty or functions under this Act,– 
(a) omits without lawful excuse to carry out his duty, or knowingly makes any false 
declaration, statement or return; or 
(b) pretends performance of his duties or obtains or seeks to obtain information which he is not 
authorised to obtain; or 
(c) fails to keep inviolate the secrecy of the information gathered or entered in the information 
schedules collected pursuant to this Act and, except as permitted under this Act, divulges the 
contents of any schedule filled in or any information furnished by any informant under this Act, 
shall be punishable with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with a 
fine which may extend to two thousand rupees or, in the case of a company, with a fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees or with both. 
21. Penalty for impersonation of employee.– Whoever, not being authorised to collect statistics 
under the provisions of this Act, by words, conduct or demeanor pretends that he is authorised to do 
so, shall be punishable with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with a 
fine which may extend to two thousand rupees or, in the case of a company, with a fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees or with both. 
22. General penalty.– Whoever, commits an offence under this Act for which no penalty is 
prescribed elsewhere than in this section, shall be punishable with simple imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months or with a fine which may extend to two thousand rupees or, in the 
case of a company, with a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both. 
23. Offences by companies.– (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, 
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge 
or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has 
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent 
or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation. –For the purpose of this section– 
(a) ''company'' means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of 
individuals; and 
(b) ''Director'', in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
24. Cognizance of offences.– No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except 
on a complaint made by the appropriate Government or an officer authorised in this behalf by such 
appropriate Government or, as the case may be, the statistics officer, and no court inferior to that of a 
Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable 
under this Act. 
25. Sanction for prosecution for offence.– No prosecution for an offence committed by any 
informant shall be instituted except by or with the sanction of the statistics officer, and no prosecution 
for an offence committed by persons other than informants shall be instituted except by or with the 
consent of the appropriate Government. 9 26. Power of court to try cases summarily.– Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), all offences under this Act shall be tried in a summary way by 
a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or by a Metropolitan Magistrate and the provisions of sections 
262 to 265 (both inclusive) of the said Code shall, as far as may be, apply to such trial: 
Provided that when in the course of, a summary trial under this section it appears to the Magistrate 
that the nature of the case is such that it is, for any reason, undesirable to try the case summarily, the 
Magistrate shall after hearing the parties, record an order to that effect and thereafter recall any 
witness who may have been examined and proceed to hear or rehear the case in the manner provided 
by the said Code. 
CHAPTER V 
POWER IN RESPECT OF CORE STATISTICS 
27. Power in respect of core statistics.– Without prejudice to the provisions contained in this Act, 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare from time to time any 
subject for the collection of statistics of national importance as ‘core statistics’ and make such 
arrangement, as it may consider necessary, for regulating the collection and dissemination of statistics 
on the subject so declared. 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
28. Power to give directions.– The Central Government may give directions to any State 
Government or Union territory Administration or to any local government that is to say Panchayats or 
Municipalities, as to the carrying into execution of this Act in the State or Union territory or 
Panchayats or Municipalities, as the case may be. 
29. Public servants.– Any statistics officer and any person authorised for the collection of statistics 
or preparation of official statistics under the provisions of this Act shall be deemed to be a public 
servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
30. Bar of jurisdiction.– No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding 
in respect of any matter which the appropriate Government or the statistics officer or the agency is 
empowered by or under this Act to determine, and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other 
authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or 
under this Act. 
31. Protection of action taken in good faith.– No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
the appropriate Government or agency or any statistics officer or other officers or employees in 
respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or the 
rules or directions issued thereunder. 
32. Overriding effect.– The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force except in relation to the 
conduct of human population census as per the directions, if any, issued under the Census Act, 1948 
(37 of 1948). 
33. Power to make rules.– (1) The Central Government may, 1[subject to the condition of previous 
publication] by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this 
Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the Central 
Government may make rules under this section for all or any of the following matters, namely:– 
(a) principles for coordinating as effectively as possible to achieve the objectives of section 3 
including nomination and registration of statistics officers by the Central Government and also to 
avoid unnecessary duplication in the collection of statistics; 
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 2017, s. 6 (w.e.f. 3-10-2017). 10 1[(aa) the coordination and supervision of statistical activities by the nodal officer and the 
powers and duties of the nodal officer under sub-section ( 2) of section 3A;]; 
(b) the terms, conditions and safeguards under which any person or agency or company or 
organisation or association may be engaged by the appropriate Government for the purpose of 
collection of statistics under sub-section ( 3) of section 4; 
(c) principles for prescribing the form and manner in which the information may be required to 
be furnished; 
(d) principles for prescribing the manner in which the right of access to documents and the right 
of entry conferred by section 8 may be exercised;  
1[(da) the manner of use of information under sub-section ( 1) of section 9;] and 
(e) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed under this Act. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
34. Repeal and savings.– (1) The Collection of Statistics Act, 1953 (32 of 1953) is hereby 
repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Act shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
(3) All rules made under the said Act shall continue to be in force and operate till new rules are 
made under this Act. 
______ 
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 2017, s. 6 (3-10-2017). 
--------------------------The Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2008--------------------------
1 
 THE GRAM  NYAYALAYAS ACT, 2008  
__________________  
  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
GRAM  NYAYALAYA  
3. Establishment of Gram Nyayalayas.  
4. Headquarters of Gram Nyayalayas.  
5. Appointment of Nyayadhikari.  
6. Qualifications for appointment of Nyayadhikari.  
7. Salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Nyayadhikari.  
8. Nyayadhikari not to preside over proceedings in which he is interested.  
9. Nyayadhikari  to hold mobile courts and conduct proceedings in villages.  
10. Seal of Gram Nyayalaya.  
 
CHAPTER III  
JURISDICTION , POWERS  AND  AUTHORITY  OF GRAM  NYAYALAYA  
11. Jurisdiction of Gram Nyayalaya.  
12. Criminal jurisdiction.  
13. Civil jurisdiction.  
14. Power to amend Schedules.  
15. Limitation.  
16. Transfer of pending proceedings.  
17. Duties of ministerial officers.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE IN CRIMINAL CASES  
18. Overriding effect of Act in criminal trial.  
19. Gram Nyayalaya to follow summary trial procedure.  
20. Plea bargaining before Gram Nyayalaya.  
21. Conduct of  cases in Gram Nyayalaya  and legal aid to parties.  
22. Pronouncement of judgment.  
 
CHAPTER V  
PROCEDURE IN CIVIL CASES  
23. Overriding effect of Act in civil proceedings.  
24. Special procedure in civil disputes.  2 
 SECTIONS  
25. Execution of decrees and orders or Gram  Nyayalaya.  
26. Duty of Gram Nyayalaya to make efforts for conciliation and settlement of civil disputes.  
27. Appointment of Conciliators.  
28. Transfer of civil disputes.  
CHAPTER VI  
PROCEDURE GENERALLY  
29. Proceedings to be in the official language of the State.  
30. Application of India n Evidence Act, 1872.  
31. Record of oral evidence.  
32. Evidence of formal character on affidavit.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
APPEALS  
33. Appeal in criminal cases.  
34. Appeal in civil cases.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
35. Assistance of police to Gram Nyayalayas.  
36. Nyayadhikaris and employees, etc., to be public servants.  
37. Inspection of Gram Nyayalayas.  
38. Power to remove difficulties.  
39. Power of High Court to make rules.  
40. Power of State Government to make rules.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE .  3 
 THE GRAM NYAYALAYAS  ACT, 2008  
 ACT NO. 4 OF 2009  
[7th January , 2009.]  
An Act to provide for the establishment of Gram Nyayalayas at the grass roots level for 
the purposes of providing access to justice to the citizens at their doorsteps and to 
ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen by reason of 
social, economic or other disabilities and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto.  
BE it enacted by  Parliament in the Fifty -ninth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short ti tle, extent and commencement .— (1) This Act may be called the Gram Nyayalayas Act, 
2008.  
 (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the State of Nagaland, 
the State of Arunachal Pradesh, the State of Sikkim and to the tribal areas.  
Explanation .—In this sub -section, the expression "tribal areas" means the areas specified in Parts I, 
II, IIA and III of the Table below paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution within the State 
of Assam, th e State of Meghalaya, the State of Tripura and the State of Mizoram, respectively.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification published in 
the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed fo r different States.  
2. Definitions .— In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) "Gram Nyayalaya" means a court established under sub -section ( 1) of section 3;  
(b) "Gram Panchayat" means an institution (by whatever name called) of self-government 
constituted, at the village level, under article 243B of the Constitution, for the rural areas;  
(c) "High Cour t" means,— 
(i) in relation to any State, the High Court for that State;  
(ii) in relation to a Union territory to which the jurisdi ction of the High Court for a State has 
been extended by law, that High Court;  
(iii) in relation to any other Union territory, the highest Court of criminal appeal for that 
territory other than the Supreme Court of India;  
(d) "notification" means a notifi cation published in the Official Gazette and the expression 
"notified" shall be construed accordingly;  
(e) "Nyayadhikari" means the presiding officer of a Gram Nyayalaya appointed under section 5;  
(f) "Panchayat at intermediate level" means an institution (by whatever name called) of self -
government constituted, at the intermediate level, under article 243B of the Constitution, for the rural 
areas in accordance with the provisions of Part IX of the Constitution;  
(g) "prescribed" means prescribe d by rules ma de under this Act;  
(h) "Schedule" means the Schedule appended to this Act;  
(i) "State Government", in relation to a Union territory, means the administrator thereof appointed 
under article 239 of the Constitution;  
                                                           
1. 2nd October , 2009, vide notification No. S.O. 2313 (E), dated 11th November , 2009 , see  Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, s ec. 3( ii). 4 
 (j) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908  (5 of 1908)  or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  shall have the meanings 
respectively assigned to them in those Codes.  
CHAPTER II  
GRAM  NYAYALAYA  
3. Est ablishment of Gram Nyayalayas .— (1) For the purpose of exercising the jurisdiction and 
powers conferred on a Gram Nyayalaya by this Act, the State Government, after consultation with the 
High Court, may, by notification, establish one or more Gram Nyayalayas for every Panchayat at 
intermediate level or a group of contiguous Panchayats at intermediate level in a district or where there is 
no Panchayat at intermediate level in any State, for a group of contiguous Gram Panchayats.  
(2) The State Government shall, after consultation with th e High Court, specify, by notification, the 
local limits of the area to which the jurisdiction of a Gram Nyayalaya shall extend and may, at any time, 
increase, reduce or alter such limits.  
 (3) The Gram Nyayalayas established under sub -section ( 1) shall be  in addition to the courts 
established under any other law for the time being in force.  
4. He adquarters of Gram Nyayalaya .— The headquarters of every Gram Nyayalaya shall be 
located at the headquarters of the intermediate Panchayat in which the Gram Nyayalaya is established or 
such other place as may be notified by the State Government.  
5. Appointment of Nyayadhikari .— The State Government shall, in consultation with the High 
Court, appoint a Nyayadhikari for every Gram Nyayalaya.  
6. Qualifications fo r appointment of Nyayadhikari .— (1) A person shall not be qualified to be 
appointed as a Nyayadhikari unless he is eligible to be appointed as a Judicial Magistrate of the first class.  
(2) While appointing a Nyayadhikari, representation shall be given to the members of the Scheduled 
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, women and such other classes or communities as may be specified by 
notification, by the State Government from time to time.  
7. Salary, all owances and other terms and con dition s of service of Nyayad hikari .— The salary 
and other allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, a Nyayadhikari shall be 
such as may be applicable to the Judicial Magistrate of the first class.  
8. Nyayadhikari not to preside over proceedin gs in which  he is interested .— The Nyayadhikari 
shall not preside over the proceedings of a Gram Nyayalaya in which he has any interest or is otherwise 
involved in the subject matter of the dispute or is related to any party to such proceedings and in such a 
case, the Nyayadhikari shall refer the matter to the District Court or the Court of Session, as the case may 
be, for transferring it to any other Nyayadhikari.  
9. Nyayadhikari to hold mobile courts and con duct proceedings in villages .— (1) The 
Nyayadhikari shall  periodically visit the villages falling under his jurisdiction and conduct trial or 
proceedings at any place which he considers is in close proximity to the place where the parties ordinarily 
reside or where the whole or part of the cause of action had ar isen:  
Provided that where the Gram Nyayalaya decides to hold mobile court outside its headquarters, it 
shall give wide publicity as to the date and place where it proposes to hold mobile court.  
(2) The State Government shall extend all facilities to the Gr am Nyayalaya including the provision of 
vehicles for holding mobile court by the Nyayadhikari while conducting trial or proceedings outside its 
headquarters.  
10. Seal of Gram Nyayalaya .— Every Gram Nyayalaya established under this Act shall use a seal of 
the court in such form and dimensions as may be prescribed by the High Court with the approval of the 
State Government.  
  5 
 CHAPTER III  
JURISDICTION, POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF GRAM  NYAYALAYA  
11. Ju risdiction of Gram Nyayalaya .— Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  or the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908)  or any other law 
for the time being in force, the Gram Nyayalaya shall exercise both civil and criminal jurisdiction in the 
manner and to the ext ent provided under this Act.  
12. Criminal jurisdiction .—  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  or any other law for the time being in force, the Gram Nyayalaya may take 
cognizance of an offence on a com plaint or on a police report and shall — 
(a) try all offences specified in Part I of the First Schedule; and  
(b) try all offences and grant relief, if any, specified under the enactments included in Part II of 
that Schedule.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Gram Nyayalaya shall also try all such 
offences or grant such relief under the State Acts which may be notified by the State Government under 
sub-section ( 3) of section 14.  
13. Civil jurisdiction .— (1) Notwithstanding any thing contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908  (5 of 1908)  or any other law for the time being in force, and subject to sub -section ( 2), the Gram 
Nyaya laya shall have jurisdiction to — 
(a) try all suits or proceedings of a civil nature falling under the classes of disputes specified in 
Part I of the Second Schedule;  
(b) try all classes of claims and disputes which may be notified by the Central Government under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 14 and by the State Government under sub -section ( 3) of the said  section.  
(2) The pecuniary limits of the Gram Nyayalaya shall be such as may be specified by the High Court, 
in consultation with the State Government, by notification, from time to time.  
14. Power to amend Schedules .— (1) Where the Central Government is  satisfied that it is necessary 
or expedient so to do, it may, by notification, add to or omit any item in Part I or Part II of the First 
Schedule or Part II of the Second Schedule, as the case may be, and it shall be deemed to have been 
amended accordingl y. 
(2) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.  
(3) If the State Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, in 
consultation with the High Court, by notification, add to any item in Part III of the First Schedule or Part 
III of the Second Schedule or omit from it any item i n respect of which the State Legislature is competent 
to make laws and thereupon the First Schedule or the Second Schedule, as the case may be, shall be 
deemed to have been amended accordingly.  
(4) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 3) shall be laid before the State Legislature.  
15. Limitation .— (1) The provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963  (36 of 1963)  shall be applicable to 
the suits triable by the Gram Nyayalaya.  
(2) The provisions of Chapter XXXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  shall be 
applicable in respect of the offences triable by the Gram Nyayalaya.  
16. Tr ansfer of pending proceedings .— (1) The District Court or the Court of Session, as the case 
may be, with effect from such date as may be notified by the High Court, may transfer all the civil or 
criminal cases, pending before the courts subordinate to it, to the Gram Nyayalaya competent to try or 
dispose of such cases.  
(2) The Gram Nyayalaya may, in its discretion, either retry the cases or proceed from the stage at 
which it was transferred to it.  6 
 17. D uties of ministerial officers .—  (1) The State Government shall determine the nature and 
categories of the officers and other employees required to assist a Gram Nyayalaya in the discharge of its 
functions and provide the Gram Nyayalaya with such officers and other employees as it may think fit.  
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other conditions of service of, the officers and other 
employees of the Gram Nyayalaya shall be such as may be prescribe d by the State Government.  
(3) The officers and other employees of a Gram Nyayalaya shall perform such duties as may, from 
time to time, be assigned to them by the Nyayadhikari.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE IN CRIMINAL CASES  
18. Overriding eff ect of Act in criminal trial .— The provisions of this Act shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  or any other 
law, but save as expressly provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code shall, in so far as they are not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, apply to the proceedings before a Gram Nyayalaya; and for 
the purpose of the said provi sions of the Code, the Gram Nyayalaya shall be deemed to be a Court of 
Judicial Magistrate of the first class.  
19. Gram Nyayalaya to fo llow summary trial procedure .—  (1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in sub -section ( 1) of section 260 or sub -section ( 2) of section 262 of the Co de of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) the Gram Nyayalaya shall try the offences in a summary way in accordance 
with the procedure specified in Chapter XXI of the said Code and the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 262  and sections 263 to 265 of the said Code, shall, so far as may be, apply to such trial.  
 (2) When, in the course of a summary trial, it appears to the Nyayadhikari that the nature of the case 
is such that it is undesirable to try it summarily, the Nyayadh ikari shall recall any witness who may have 
been examined and proceed to re -hear the case in the manner provided under the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
20. Plea barg aining before Gram Nyayalaya .— A person accused of an offence may file an 
application for plea bargaining in Gram Nyayalaya in which such offence is pending trial and the Gram 
Nyayalaya shall dispose of the case in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XXIA of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
21. Conduct of cases in Gram Nyayal aya and legal aid to parties .— (1) For the purpose of 
conducting criminal cases in the Gram Nyayalaya on behalf of the Government, the provisions of section 
25 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  shall apply.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), in a criminal proceeding before the Gram 
Nyayalaya, the complainant may engage an advocate of his choice at his expense to present the case of 
prosecution with the leave of the Gram Nyayalaya.  
(3) The State Legal Services Authority, constituted under section 6 of the Legal Services Authorities 
Act, 1987 (39 of 1987)  shall prepare a panel of advocates and assign at least two of them to be attached to 
each Gram Nyayalaya so that their services may be prov ided by the Gram Nyayalaya to the accused 
unable to engage an advocate.  
22. Pronouncement of j udgment .— (1) The judgment in every trial shall be pronounced by the 
Nyayadhikari in open court immediately after the termination of the trial or at any subsequen t time, not 
exceeding fifteen days, of which notice shall be given to the parties.  
(2) The Gram Nyayalaya shall deliver a copy of its judgment immediately to both the parties free of 
cost. 
CHAPTER V  
PROCEDURE IN CIVIL CASES  
23. Overriding effect  of Act in civil proceedings .— The provisions of this Act shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908)  or any other law, 7 
 but save as expressly provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code shall, in so far as they are not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, apply to the proceedings before a Gram Nyayalaya; and for 
the purpose of the said provisions of the Code, the Gram Nyayalaya shall be deemed to be a civil court.  
24. Special  procedure in civil disputes .— (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law 
for the time being in force, every suit, claim or dispute under this Act shall be instituted by making an 
application to the Gram Nyayalaya in such form, in such manner,  and accompanied by such fee, not 
exceeding rupees one hundred, as may be prescribed by the High Court, from time to time, in consultation 
with the State Government.  
 (2) Where a suit, claim or dispute has been duly instituted, a summons shall be issued by  the Gram 
Nyayalaya, accompanied by a copy of the application made under sub -section ( 1), to the opposite party to 
appear and answer the claim by such date as may be specified therein and the same shall  be served in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the High Court.  
(3) After the opposite party files his written statement, the Gram Nyayalaya shall fix a date for 
hearing and inform all the parties to be present in person or through their advocates . 
(4) On the date fixed for hearing, the Gram Nyayalaya shall  hear both the parties in regard to their 
respective contentions and where the dispute does not require recording of any evidence, pronounce the 
judgment; and in case where it requires recording of evidence, the Gram Nyayalaya shall proceed further.  
(5) The Gram Nyaya laya shall also have the power — 
(a) to dismiss any case for default or to proceed ex parte ; and  
(b) to set aside any such order of dismissal for default or any order passed by it for hearing the 
case ex parte .  
(6) In regard to any incidental matter that may arise during the course of the proceedings, the Gram 
Nyayalaya shall adopt such procedure as it may deem just and reasonable in the interest of justice.  
(7) The proceedings shall, as far as practicable, be consistent with the interests of j ustice and the 
hearing shall be continued on a day -to-day basis until its conclusion, unless the Gram Nyayalaya finds the 
adjournment of the hearing beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be recorded in 
writing.  
(8) The Gram Nyayalaya shal l dispose of the application made under sub -section ( 1) within a period 
of six months from the date of its institution.  
 (9) The judgment in every suit, claim or dispute shall be pronounced in open court by the Gram 
Nyayalaya immediately after conclusion o f hearing or at any subsequent time, not exceeding fifteen days, 
of which notice shall be given to the parties.  
(10) The judgment shall contain a concise statement of the case, the point for determination, the 
decision thereon and the reasons for such deci sion.  
 (11) A copy of the judgment shall be delivered free of cost to both the parties within three days from 
the date of pronouncement of the judgment.  
25. Execution of decrees and orders of Gram Nyayalaya .— (1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in th e Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) the judgment passed by a Gram Nyayalaya 
shall be deemed to be a decree and it shall be executed by a Gram Nyayalaya as a decree of the civil court 
and for this purpose, the Gram Nyayalaya shall have all the power s of a civil court.  
 (2) The Gram Nyayalaya shall not be bound by the procedure in respect of execution of a decree as 
provided in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908)  and it shall be guided by the principles of 
natural justice.  
(3) A decree may b e executed either by the Gram Nyayalaya which passed it or by the other Gram 
Nyayalaya to which it is sent for execution.  
26. Duty of Gram Nyayalaya to make efforts for conciliation and  settlement of civil disputes .— 
(1) In every suit or proceeding, endeavour shall be made by the Gram Nyayalaya in the first instance, 
where it is possible to do so, consistent with the nature and circumstances of the case, to assist, persuade 
and conciliate the parties in arriving at a set tlement in respect of the subject matter of the suit, claim or 8 
 dispute and for this purpose, a Gram Nyayalaya shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed by the 
High Court.  
(2) Where in any suit or proceeding, it appears to the Gram Nyayalaya at any stage that there is a 
reasonable possibility of a settlement between the parties, the Gram Nyayalaya may adjourn the 
proceeding for such period as it thinks fit to enable them to make attempts to effect such a settlement.  
(3) Where any proceeding is adjour ned under sub -section ( 2), the Gram Nyayalaya may, in its 
discretion, refer the matter to one or more Conciliators for effecting a settlement between the parties.  
(4) The power conferred by sub -section ( 2) shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of,  any other 
power of the Gram Nyayalaya to adjourn the proceeding.  
27. Appointment of Conciliators .— (1) For the purposes of section 26, the District Court shall, in 
consultation with the District Magistrate, prepare a panel consisting of the names of social workers at the 
village level having integrity for appointment as Conciliators who possess such qualifications and 
experience as may be prescribed by the High Court.  
(2) The sitting fee and other allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditi ons for 
engagement of, Conciliators shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
28. Transfer of civil disputes .— The District Court having jurisdiction may, on an application made 
by any party or when there is considerable pendency of cases  in one Gram Nyayalaya or whenever it 
considers necessary in the interests of justice, transfer any case pending before a Gram Nyayalaya to any 
other Gram Nyayalaya within its jurisdiction.  
CHAPTER VI  
PROCEDURE GENERALLY  
29. Proceedings to be in the official language o f the State .— The proceedings before the Gram 
Nyayalaya and its judgment shall, as far as practicable, be in one of the official languages of the State 
other than the English language.  
30. Application of Indian Evidence Act, 1872 .— A Gra m Nyayalaya may receive as evidence any 
report, statement, document, information or matter that may, in its opinion, assist it to deal effectually 
with a dispute, whether or not the same would be otherwise relevant or admissible under the Indian 
Evidence A ct, 1872  (1 of 1872) . 
31. Rec ord of oral evidence .—  In suits or proceedings before a Gram Nyayalaya, it shall not be 
necessary to record the evidence of witnesses at length, but the Nyayadhikari, as the examination of each 
witness proceeds, shall, record or cause to be recorded, a memorandum of substance o f what the witness 
deposes, and such memorandum shall be signed by the witness and the Nyayadhikari and it shall form 
part of the record.  
32. Evidence of f ormal character on affidavit .— (1) The evidence of any person where such 
evidence is of a formal char acter, may be given by affidavit and may, subject to all just exceptions, be 
read in evidence in any suit or proceeding before a Gram Nyayalaya.  
(2) The Gram Nyayalaya may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the application of any of the parties to the 
suit or proceeding, summon and examine any such person as to the facts contained in his affidavit.  
CHAPTER VII  
APPEAL S 
33. Appeal in criminal cases .— (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  or any other law, no appeal shall lie from any judgment, sentence or order of 
a Gram Nyayalaya except as provided hereunder.  
(2) No appeal shall lie where — 
(a) an accused person has pleaded guilty and has been convicted on such plea;  
(b) the Gram Nyayalaya has passed only a sentence of fine not exceeding one thousand rupees.  9 
 (3) Subject to sub -section ( 2), an appeal shall lie from any other judgment, sentence or order of a 
Gram Nyayalaya to the Court of Session.  
(4) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of thirty days from the date of 
judgment, sentence or order of a Gram Nyayalaya:  
Provided that the Court of Session may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty 
days if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the said 
period.  
(5) An appeal preferred under sub -section ( 3) shall be heard and disposed of by the Court of Session 
within six months from the date of f iling of such appeal.  
(6) The Court of Session may, pending disposal of the appeal, direct the suspension of the sentence or 
order appealed against.  
(7) The decision of the Court of Session under sub -section ( 5) shall be final and no appeal or revision 
shall lie from the decision of the Court of Session:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall preclude any person from availing of the judicial 
remedies available under articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution.  
34. Appeal in civil cases .— (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908  (5 of 1908)  or any other law, and subject to sub -section ( 2), an appeal shall lie from every judgment 
or order, not being an interlocutory order, of a Gram Nyayalaya to the District Co urt.  
(2) No appeal shall lie from any judgment or order passed by the Gram Nyayalay a— 
(a) with the consent of the parties;  
(b) where the amount or value of the subject matter of a suit, claim or dispute does not exceed 
rupees one thousand;  
(c) except on a  question of law, where the amount or value of the subject matter of such suit, 
claim or dispute does not exceed rupees five thousand.  
 (3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of thirty days from the date of 
the judgment or order of a Gram Nyayalaya:  
Provided that the District Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty 
days if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the said 
period.  
 (4) An appeal preferred under sub -section ( 1) shall be heard and disposed of by the District Court 
within six months from the date of filing of t he appeal.  
(5) The District Court may, pending disposal of the appeal, stay execution of the judgment or order 
appealed against.  
(6) The decision of the District Court under sub -section ( 4) shall be final and no appeal or revision 
shall lie from the decisi on of the District Court:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall preclude any person from availing of the judicial 
remedies available under articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
35. Assistance of police to Gram Nyayalayas .— (1) Every police officer functioning within the 
local limits of jurisdiction of a Gram Nyayalaya shall be bound to assist the Gram Nyayalaya in the 
exercise of its lawful authority.  
(2) Whenever the Gram Nyayalaya, in the discharge of its functions, directs a revenue officer or 
police officer or Government servant to provide assistance to the Gram Nyayalaya, he shall be bound to 
provide such assistance.  10 
 36. Nyayadhikaris and employees, etc., to be public se rvants .— The Nyayadhikaris and the  
officers and other employees of the Gram Nyayalayas shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act 
in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of 
the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
37. In spection of Gram Nyaya layas .— The High Court may authorise any judicial officer superior 
in rank to the Nyayadhikari to inspect the Gram Nyayalayas within his jurisdiction once in every six 
months or such other period as the High Court may prescribe and is sue such instructions, as he considers 
necessary and submit a report to the High Court.  
38. Power to remove difficulties .— (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or  expedient for 
removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of three years from 
the date of commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be  after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
39. Power  of High Court to make rules .— (1) The High Court may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the f oregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: —  
(a) the form and dimensions of the seal of the Gram Nyayalaya under section 10;  
(b) the form, the manner and the fee for institution of suit, claim or proceeding under sub -section 
(1) of section 24;  
(c) manner of service on opposite party under sub -section ( 2) of section 24;  
(d) procedure for conciliation under sub -section ( 1) of section 26;  
(e) qualifications and experience of Conciliators under sub -section ( 1) of section 27;  
(f) the period for inspection of Gram Nyayalayas under section 37.  
(3) Every notification issued by the High Court shall be published in the Official Gazette.  
40. Power of St ate Government to make rules .— (1) The State Government may, by notification, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
officers and other employees of the Gram Nyayalayas under sub -section ( 2) of section 17;  
(b) the sitting fee and other allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions fo r 
engagement of, Conciliators under sub -section ( 2) of section 27.  
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is 
made, before the State Legislature.   11 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See sections 12 and 14)  
PART  I 
OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN  PENAL  CODE (45 OF 1860), ETC. 
(i) offences not punishable with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term exceeding 
two years;  
(ii) theft, under section 379, section 380 or section 381 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), where 
the value of the property stolen does not exceed rupees twenty thousand;  
(iii) receiving or retaining stolen property, under section 411 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), 
where the value of the property does not exceed rupees twenty th ousand;  
(iv) assisting in the concealment or disposal of stolen property, under section 414 of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860), where the value of such property does not exceed rupees twenty thousand;  
(v) offences under sections 454 and 456 of the India n Penal Code (45 of 1860);  
(vi) insult with intent to provoke a breach of the peace, under section 504, and criminal intimidation, 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both, under 
section 506 of the I ndian Penal Code (45 of 1860);  
(vii) abetment of any of the foregoing offences;  
(viii) an attempt to commit any of the foregoing offences, when such attempt is an offence.  
PART II  
OFFENCES AND RELIEF UNDER THE OTHER  CENTRAL  ACTS  
(i) any offence constituted  by an act in respect of which a complaint may be made under section 20 of 
the Cattle -trespass Act, 1871(1 of 1871);  
(ii) the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936);  
(iii) the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (11 of 1948);  
(iv) the Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955 (22 of 1955);  
(v) order for maintenance of wives, children and parents under Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974);  
(vi) the Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976 (19 of 1976);  
(vii) the Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 (25 o f 1976);  
(viii) the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (43 of 2005).  
PART III  
OFFENCES AND RELIEF UNDER THE STATE  ACTS  
(To be notified by the State Government)   12 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See sections 13 and 14)  
PART I  
SUITS OF A CIVIL NATURE WITHIN THE JURISDICTION OF  GRAM  NYAYALAYAS  
(i) Civil Disputes:  
(a) right to purchase of property;  
(b) use of common pasture;  
(c) regulation and timing of taking water from irrigation channel.  
(ii) Property Disputes:  
(a) village and farm houses (Possession);  
(b) water channels;  
(c) right to draw water from a well or tube well.  
(iii) Other Disputes:  
(a) claims under the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936);  
(b) claims under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (11 of 1948);  
(c) money suits either arising  from trade transaction or money lending;  
(d) disputes arising out of the partnership in cultivation of land;  
(e) disputes as to the use of forest produce by inhabitants of Gram Panchayats.  
PART II  
CLAIMS  AND DISPUTES UNDER THE  CENTRAL  ACTS NOTIFIED UNDER  SUB -SECTION  (1) OF SECTION  14  
BY THE CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  
(To be notified by the Central Government)  
PART III  
CLAIMS AND DISPUTES UNDER THE  STATE  ACTS  NOTIFIED  UNDER SUB -SECTION (3) OF SECTION 14 BY  
THE  STATE  GOVERNMENT  
(To be notified by the State Government  
 
--------------------------The Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008--------------------------
1 
 THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP ACT, 2008  
__________ ______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________ ______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
NATURE OF LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP  
3. Limit ed liability partnership to be body corporate.  
4. Non-applicability of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932.  
5. Partners.  
6. Minimum number of partners.  
7. Designated partners.  
8. Liabilities of designated partners.  
9. Changes in designated partners.  
10. Punishment for contravention of sections 7, 8 and 9.  
 
CHAPTER III  
INCORPORATION OF LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP AND MATTERS INCIDENTAL THERETO  
11. Incorporation document.  
12. Incorporation by registration.  
13. Registered office of limited liability partnership and change therein.  
14. Effect of regis tration.  
15. Name.  
16. Reservation of name.  
17. Change of name of limited liability partnership.  
18. Application for direction to change name in certain circumstances.  
19. Change of registered name.  
20. Penalty for improper use of words “limited liability partnership” or “LLP”.  
21. Publication of name and limited liability.  
  2 
 CHAPTER IV  
PARTNERS AND THEIR RELATIONS  
SECTIONS  
22. Eligibility to be partners.  
23. Relationship of partners.  
24. Cessation of partnership interest.  
25. Registration of changes in partners.  
 
CHAPTER V  
EXTENT AND LIMITATION OF LIABILITY OF LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP AND PARTNERS  
26. Partner as agent.  
27. Extent of liability of limited liability partnership.  
28. Extent of liability of partner.  
29. Holding out.  
30. Unlimited liability in case of fraud.  
31. Whistle blowing.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
CONTRIBUTIONS  
32. Form of contribution.  
33. Obligation to contribute.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES  
34. Maintenance of books of account, other records and audit, etc.  
35. Annual return.  
36. Inspection of documents kept by Registrar.  
37. Penalty for false statement.  
38. Power of Registrar to obtain information.  
39. Compounding of offences.  
40. Destruction of old records.  
41. Enforcement of duty to make returns, etc.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSFER OF PARTNERSHIP RIGHTS  
42. Partner’s transferable interest.  
  3 
 CHAPTER IX  
INVESTIGATION  
SECTIONS  
43. Investigation of the affairs of limited liability partnership.  
44. Application by partners for investigation.  
45. Firm, body corporate or association not to be appointed as inspector.  
46. Power of inspectors to carry out investigation into affairs of related entities,  etc. 
47. Production of documents and evidence.  
48. Seizure of documents by inspector.  
49. Inspector’s report.  
50. Prosecution.  
51. Application for winding up of limited liability partnership.  
52. Proceedings for recovery of damages or property.  
53. Expenses of investigation.  
54. Inspect or’s report to be evidence.  
 
CHAPTER X  
CONVERSION INTO LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP  
55. Conversion from firm into limited liability partnership.  
56. Conversion from private company into limited liability partnership . 
57. Conversion from unlisted public company into l imited liability partnership.  
58. Registration and effect of conversion.  
 
CHAPTER XI  
FOREIGN LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIPS  
59. Foreign limited liability partnerships.  
 
CHAPTER XII  
COMPROMISE, ARRANGEMENT OR RECONSTR UCTION OF LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIPS  
60. Compromise ,or arrangement of limited liability partnerships.  
61. Power of Tribunal to enforce compromise or arrangement.  
62. Provisions for facilitating reconstruction or amalgamation of limited liability partnerships.  
 
CHAPTER XIII  
WINDING UP AND DISSOLUTION  
63. Winding up and dissolution.  
64. Circumstances in which limited liability partnership may be wound up by Tribunal.  
65. Rules for winding up and dissolution.  
 4 
 CHAPTER XIV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS  
66. Business transactions of partner with limited liability partnership.  
67. Application of the provisions of the Companies Act.  
68. Electronic filing of documents.  
69. Payment of additional fee.  
70. Enhanced punishment.  
71. Application of other laws not barred.  
72. Jurisdiction of Tribu nal and Appellate Tribunal.  
73. Penalty on non -compliance of any orde r passed by Tribunal.  
74. General penalties.  
75. Power of Registrar to strike defunct limited liability partnership off register.  
76. Offences to limited liability partnerships.  
77. Jurisdiction or Court.  
78. Power to alter Schedules.  
79. Power to make rules.  
80. Power to remove diff iculties.  
81. Transitional provisions.  
 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.  
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  5 
 THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP ACT, 2008  
ACTNO. 6 OF 2009  
[7th January , 2009.]  
An Act to make provisions for the formation and regulation of limited liability partnerships and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -ninth Year of the Republic of Indi a as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short ti tle, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Limited Liability 
Partnership Act, 2008.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming 
into force of that provision.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unl ess the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) "address", in relation to a partner of a limit ed liability partnership, means — 
(i) if an individual, his usual residential address; and  
(ii) if a body corporate, the address of its registere d office;  
(b) "advocate" means an advocate as defined in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of t he 
Advocates Act, 1961  (25 of 1961) ;  
 (c) "Appellate Tribunal" means the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal constituted under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 10FR of t he Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) ;  
(d) "body corporate" means a company as defined in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 
1956) and includes — 
(i) a limited liability partnership registered under this Act;  
(ii) a limited liability partnership incorporated outside India; and  
(iii) a company incorporated outside India,  
but does not include — 
(i) a corporation sole;  
(ii) a co -operative society registered under any law for the time being in force; and  
(iii) any other body corporate (not being a company as defined in section 3 of the Companies 
Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) or a limited liability partnership as defined in this Act), which the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf;  
(e) "business" includes ev ery trade, profession, service and occupation;  
(f) "chartered accountant" means a chartered accountant as defined in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949  (38 of 1949)  and who has obtained a certificate 
of practi ce under sub -section ( 1) of se ction 6 of that Act;  
                                                           
1. 31st March, 2009 , vide notification No. S.O. 891 (E), dated 31st March, 2009, seeGazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,  
Sec. 3( ii). 6 
 (g) "company secretary" means a company secretary as defined in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980  (56 of 1980)  and who has obtained a certificate of 
practice under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
 (h) "cost accountant" means a cost accountant as defined in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959  (23 of 1959)  and who has obtained a 
certificate of practice under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(i) "Court", with respect to any offence under this Act, means the Court having jurisdiction as per 
the provisions of section 77;  
(j) "designated partner" means any partner designated as such pursuant to section 7;  
(k) ''entity" means any body corporate and includes, for the purposes of sections 18, 46, 47, 48, 
49, 50, 52 and 53, a firm setup under the Indian Partnership Act, 1932  (9 of  1932) ; 
(l) "financial year", in relation to a limited liability partnership, means the period from the 1st day 
of April of a year to the 31st day of March of the following year:  
Provided that in the case of a limited liability partnership incorporated aft er the 30th day of 
September of a year, the financial year may end on the 31st day of March of the year next following 
that year;  
(m)"foreign  limited liability partnership" means a limited liability partnership formed, 
incorporated or registered outside India which establishes a place of business within India;  
(n) "limited liability partnership" means a partnership formed and registered under this Act;  
(o) "limited liability partnership agreement" means any written agreement between the partners of 
the li mited liability partnership or between the limited liability partnership and its partners which 
determines the mutual rights and duties of the partners and their rights and duties in relation to that 
limited liability partnership;  
(p) "name", in relation t o a partner of a limit ed liability partnership, means — 
(i) if an individual, his forename, middle name and surname; and  
(ii) if a body corporate, its registered name;  
(q) "partner", in relation to a limited liability partnership, means any person who becom es a 
partner in the limited liability partnership in accordance with the limited liability partnership 
agreement;  
(r) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(s) "Registrar" means a Registrar, or an Additional, a Joint, a Deputy or an A ssistant Registrar, 
having the duty of registering companies under the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) ; 
 (t) "Schedule'' means a Schedule to this Act;  
(u) "Tribunal" means the National Company Law Tribunal constituted under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 10FB of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) . 
(2) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 
of 1956)  shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
NATURE OF LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP  
3. Limited liability par tnership to be body corporate .—(1) A limited liability partnership is a body 
corporate formed and incorporated under this Act and is a legal entity separate from that of its partners.  
(2) A limited liability partnership  shall have perpetual succession.  
(3) Any change in the partners of a limited liability partnership shall not affect the existence, rights or 
liabilities of the limited liability partnership.  7 
 4. Non -appli cability of th e Indian Partnership Act, 1932 .—Save as otherwise provided, the 
provisions of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932  (9 of 1932) shall not apply to a limited liability 
partnership.  
5. Partners .—Any individual or body corporate may be a partner in a limited liability partnership:  
Provided that an i ndividual shall not be capable of becoming a partner of a li mited liability 
partnership, if — 
(a) he has been found to be of unsound mind by a Court of competent jurisdiction and the finding 
is in force;  
(b) he is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(c) he has applied to be adjudicated as an insolvent and his application is pending.  
6. Minimum number of partners .—(1) Every limited liability partnership shall have at least two 
partners.  
(2) If at any time the number of partners of a limited liability partnership is reduced below two and 
the limited liability partnership carries on business for more than six months while the number is so 
reduced, the person, who is the only partner of the limited liability partnership during the time that it so 
carries on business after those six months and has the knowledge of the fact that it is carrying on business 
with him alone, shall be liable personally for the obligations of the limited liability partnership incurred 
during that period.  
7. Designated partners .—(1) Every limi ted liability partnership shall have at least two designated 
partners who are individuals and at least one of them shall be a resident in India:  
Provided that in case of a limited liability partnership in which all the partners are bodies corporate or 
in w hich one or more partners are individuals and bodies corporate, at least two individuals who are 
partners of such limited liability partnership or nominees of such bodies corporate shall act as designated 
partners.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the term "resident in India" means a person who has 
stayed in India for a period of not less than one hundred and eighty -two days during the immediately 
preceding one year.  
(2) Subject to the  provisions of sub -section ( 1),— 
(i)if the incorporation  document — 
(a) specifies who are to be designated partners, such persons shall be designated partners on 
incorporation; or  
(b) states that each of the partners from time to time of limited liability partnership is to be 
designated partner, every such partn er shall be a designated partner;  
(ii) any partner may become a designated partner by and in accordance with the limited liability 
partnership agreement and a partner may cease to be a designated partner in accordance with limited 
liability partnership agr eement.  
(3) An individual shall not become a designated partner in any limited liability partnership unless he 
has given his prior consent to act as such to the limited liability partnership in such form and manner as 
may be prescribed.  
(4) Every limited liability partnership shall file with the registrar the particulars of every individual 
who has given his consent to act as designated partner in such form and manner as may be prescribed 
within thirty days of his appointment.  
(5) An indiv idual eligible to be a designated partner shall satisfy such conditions and requirements as 
may be prescribed.  
(6) Every designated partner of a limited liability partnership shall obtain a Designated Partner 
Identification Number (DPIN) from the Central G overnment and the provisions of sections 266A to 266G 8 
 (both inclusive) of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956)  shall apply mutatis mutandis  for the said 
purpose.  
8. Liabil ities of designated partners .—Unless expressly provided otherwise in this Act , a 
desig nated partner shall be — 
(a) responsible for the doing of all acts, matters and things as are required to be done by the 
limited liability partnership in respect of compliance of the provisions of this Act including filing of 
any document, return, statement  and the like report pursuant to the provisions of this Act and as may 
be specified in the limited liability partnership agreement; and  
(b) liable to all penalties imposed on the limited liability partnership for any contravention of 
those provisions.  
9. Changes in designated partners .—A limited liability partnership may appoint a designated 
partner within thirty days of a vacancy arising for any reason and provisions of sub -section ( 4) and  
sub-section ( 5) of section 7 shall apply in respect of such new designated partner:  
Provided that if no designated partner is appointed, or if at any time there is only one designated 
partner, each partner shall be deemed to be a designated partner.  
10. Punishment for contrave ntion of sections 7, 8 and 9 .—(1) If the li mited liability partnership 
contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 7, the limited liability partnership and its every 
partner shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may 
extend to five lakh  rupees.  
(2) If the limited liability partnership contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 4) and sub -section ( 5) 
of section 7, section 8 or section 9, the limited liability partnership and its every partner shall be 
punishable with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh 
rupees.  
CHAPTER III  
INCORPORATION OF LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP AND MATTERS INCIDENTAL THERETO  
11. Incorporation document .—(1) For a limited liability partnership to be incorporated, — 
(a) two or more persons associated for carrying on a lawful business with a view to profit shall 
subscribe their names to an incorporation document;  
(b) the incorporation document shall be filed in such manner and with such fees, as may be 
prescribed with the  Registrar of the State in which the registered office of the limited liability 
partnership is to be situated; and  
(c) there shall be filed along with the incorporation document, a statement in the prescribed form, 
made by either an advocate, or a Company Secretary or a Chartered Accountant or a Cost 
Accountant, who is engaged in the formation of the limited liability partnership and by any one who 
subscribed his name to the incorporation document, that all the requirements of this Act and the rules 
made th ereunder have been complied with, in respect of incorporation and matters precedent and 
incidental thereto.  
(2) The incorporation document sha ll— 
(a) bein a form as may be prescribed;  
(b) state the name of the limited liability partnership;  
(c) state the proposed business of the limited liability partnership;  
(d) state the address of the registered office of the limited liability partnership;  
(e) state the name and address of each of the persons who are to be partners of the limited liability 
partnership o n incorporation;  9 
 (f) state the name and address of the persons who are to be designated partners of the limited 
liability partnership on incorporation;  
(g) contain such other information concerning the proposed limited liability partnership as may be 
presc ribed.  
(3) If a person makes a statement under clause (c) of sub -section ( 1) which he — 
(a) knows to be false; or  
(b) does not believe to be true,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and with fine which 
shall not b e less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees.  
12. Incorporation by registration .—(1) When the requirements imposed by clauses ( b) and ( c) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 11 have been complied with, the Registrar shall retain the incorporation 
document and, unless the requirement imposed by clause ( a) of that sub -section has not been complied 
with, he shall, within a period of f ourteen days — 
(a) register the incorporation document; and  
(b) give a certificate that the limited liability partnership is incorporated by the name specified 
therein.  
(2) The Registrar may accept the statement delivered under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 11 
as sufficient evidence that the requirement imposed by clause ( a) of that sub -sectio n has been complied 
with.  
(3) The certificate issued under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) shall be signed by the Registrar and 
authenticated by his official seal.  
(4) The certificate shall be conclusive evidence that the limited liability partnership is incorporated by 
the name specified therein.  
13. Registered office of limited liability p artnership and change therein .—(1) Every limited 
liability partnership shall have a registered office to which all communications and notices may be 
addressed and where  they shall be received.  
(2) A document may be served on a limited liability partnership or a partner or designated partner 
thereof by sending it by post under a certificate of posting or by registered post or by any other manner, as 
may be prescribed, at  the registered office and any other address specifically declared by the limited 
liability partnership for the purpose in such form and manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) A limited liability partnership may change the place of its registered office and file  the notice of 
such change with the Registrar in such form and manner and subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed and any such change shall take effect only upon such filing.  
(4) If the limited liability partnership contravenes any provisions of th is section, the limited liability 
partnership and its every partner shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than two thousand 
rupees but which may extend to twenty -five thousand rupees.  
14. Effect of registration .—On registration, a limited liability partnership shall, by its name, be 
capable of — 
(a) suing and being sued;  
(b) acquiring, owning, holding and developing or disposing of property, whether movable or 
immovable, tangible or intangible;  
(c) having a common seal, if it decides to have  one; and  
(d) doing and suffering such other acts and things as bodies corporate may lawfully do and suffer.  
15. Name .—(1) Every limited liability partnership shall have either the words "limited liability 
partnership" or the acronym "LLP" as the last words of its name.  10 
 (2) No limited liability partnership shall be registered by a name which, in the opinion of the Central 
Government is — 
(a) undesirable; or  
(b) identical or too nearly resembles to that of any other partnership firm or limited liability 
partnership or body corporate or a registered trade mark, or a trade mark which is the subject matter 
of an application for registration of any other person under the Trade Marks Act, 1999  (47 of 1999) . 
16. Reservation of name .—(1) A person may apply in such form and manner and accompanied by 
such fee as may be prescribed to the Registrar for the reservation of a nam e set out i n the application as — 
 (a) the name of a proposed limited liability partnership; or  
 (b) the name to which a limited liability partnership proposes to change its name.  
 (2) Upon receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1) and on payment of the prescrib ed fee, the 
Registrar may, if he is satisfied, subject to the rules prescribed by the Central Government in the matter, 
that the name to be reserved is not one which may be rejected on any ground referred to in sub -section ( 2) 
of section 15, reserve the na me for a period of three months from the date of intimation by the Registrar.  
17. Change of name of l imited liability partnership .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
sections 15 and 16, where the Central Government is satisfied that a limited liability partnership has been 
registered (whether through inadvertence or otherwise and whether originally or by a change of name) 
under a name which — 
(a) is a name referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 15; or  
(b) is identical with or too nearly resembles the name of any other limited liability partnership or 
body corporate or other name as to be likely to be mistaken for it,  
the Central Government may direct such limited liability partnership to change its name, and the limited 
liability partners hip shall comply with the said direction within three months after the date of the direction 
or such longer period as the Central Government may allow.  
(2) Any limited liability partnership which fails to comply with a direction given under  
sub-section ( 1) shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which 
may extend to five lakh rupees and the designated partner of such limited liability partnership shall be 
punishable with fine which shall not be less than ten thous and rupees but which may extend to one lakh 
rupees.  
18. Application for direction to change n ame in certain circumstances .—(1) Any entity which 
already has a name similar to the name of a limited liability partnership which has been incorporated 
subsequently, may apply, in such manner as may be prescribed, to the Registrar to give a direction to any 
limited liability partnership, on a ground referred to in section 17 to change its name.  
(2) The Registrar shall not consider any application under su b-section ( 1) to give a direction to a 
limited liability partnership on the ground referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 17 unless 
the Registrar receives the application within twenty -four months from the date of registration of the 
limit ed liability partnership under that name.  
19. Change of registered name .—Any limited liability partnership may change its name registered 
with the Registrar by filing with him a notice of such change in such form and manner and on payment of 
such fees as m ay be prescribed.  
20. Penalty for improper use of words "limited liabilit y partnership" or "LLP" .—If any person 
or persons carry on business under any name or title of which the words "Limited Liability Partnership" 
or "LLP" or any contraction or imitation  thereof is or are the last word or words, that person or each of 
those persons shall, unless duly incorporated as limited liability partnership, be punishable with fine 
which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh r upees.   11 
  
21. Publication o f name and limited liability .—(1) Every limited liability partnership shall ensure 
that its invoices, official correspondence and publicati ons bear the following, namely: — 
(a) the name, address of its registered office and registr ation number of the limited liability 
partnership; and  
(b) a statement that it is registered with limited liability.  
(2) Any limited liability partnership which contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be 
punishable with fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees but which may extend to  
twenty -five thousand rupees.  
CHAPTER IV  
PARTNERS AND THEIR RELATIONS  
22. Eligibility to be partners .—On the incorporation of a limited liability partnership, the persons 
who subscribed their names to the incorporation document shall be its partners and any other person may 
become a partner of the limited liability partnership by and in accordance with the limited liability 
partnership agreement.  
23. Relationship of partners .—(1) Save as otherwise provided by this Act, the mutual rights and 
duties of the partners of a limited liability partnership, and the mutual rights and duties of a limited 
liability partnership and its partners, shall be governed  by the limited liability partnership agreement 
between the partners, or between the limited liability partnership and its partners.  
(2) The limited liability partnership agreement and any changes, if any, made therein shall be filed 
with the Registrar in such form, manner and accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.  
(3) An agreement in writing made before the incorporation of a limited liability partnership between 
the persons who subscribe their names to the incorporation document may impose obligat ions on the 
limited liability partnership, provided such agreement is ratified by all the partners after the incorporation 
of the limited liability partnership.  
(4) In the absence of agreement as to any matter, the mutual rights and duties of the partners and the 
mutual rights and duties of the limited liability partnership and the partners shall be determined by the 
provisions rela ting to that matter as are set -out in the First Schedule.  
24. Cess ation of partnership interest .—(1) A person may cease to be a  partner of a limited liability 
partnership in accordance with an agreement with the other partners or, in the absence of agreement with 
the other partners as to cessation of being a partner, by giving a notice in writing of not less than thirty 
days to th e other partners of his intention to resign as partner.  
(2) A person shall cease to be a partner of a limited liability partne rship— 
(a) on his death or dissolution of the limited liability partnership; or  
(b) if he is declared to be of unsound mind by a competent court; or  
(c) if he has applied to be adjudged as an insolvent or declared as an insolvent.  
(3) Where a person has ceased to be a partner of a limited liability partnership (hereinafter referred to 
as "former partner"), the former partner is to be regarded (in relation to any person dealing with the 
limited liability partnership) as still being a partner of the limited li ability partnership unless — 
(a) the person has notice that the former partner has ceased to be a partner of the limited liability 
partnership; or  
(b) notice that the former partner has ceased to be a partner of the limited liability partnership has 
been delivered to the Registrar.  12 
 (4) The cessation of a partner from the limited liability partnership does not by itself disch arge the 
partner from any obligation to the limited liability partnership or to the other partners or to any other 
person which he incurred while being a partner.  
(5) Where a partner of a limited liability partnership ceases to be a partner, unless otherwi se provided 
in the limited liability partnership agreement, the former partner or a person entitled to his share in 
consequence of the death or insolvency of the former partner, shall be entitled to receive from the limited 
liability partnership — 
(a) an am ount equal to the capital contribution of the former partner actually made to the limited 
liability partnership; and  
(b) his right to share in the accumulated profits of the limited liability partnership, after the 
deduction of accumulated losses of the li mited liability partnership, determined as at the date the 
former partner ceased to be a partner.  
(6) A former partner or a person entitled to his share in consequence of the death or insolvency of the 
former partner shall not have any right to interfere in the management of the limited liability partnership.  
25. Registr ation of changes in partners .—(1) Every partner shall inform the limited liability 
partnership of any change in his name or address within a period of fifteen days of such change.  
(2) A li mited liability partnership shall — 
(a) where a person becomes or ceases to be a partner, file a notice with the Registrar within thirty 
days from the date he becomes or ceases to be a partner; and  
(b) where there is any change in the name or address of a partner, file a notice with the Registrar 
within thirty days of such change.  
(3) A notice filed with the Registrar under sub -section ( 2)— 
(a) shall be in such form and accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed;  
(b) shall be signed by the designated partner of the limited liability partnership and authenticated 
in a manner as may be prescribed; and  
(c) if it relates to an incoming partner, shall contain a statement by such partner that he consents 
to becoming a partner, signed by him and authenticated  in the manner as may be prescribed.  
(4) If the limited liability partnership contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the limited 
liability partnership and every designated partner of the limited liability partnership shall be punishable 
with fine w hich shall not be less than two thousand rupees but which may extend to twenty -five thousand 
rupees.  
(5) If any partner contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1), such partner shall be punishable with 
fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupe es but which may extend to twenty -five thousand 
rupees.  
(6) Any person who ceases to be a partner of a limited liability partnership may himself file with the 
Registrar the notice referred to in sub -section ( 3) if he has reasonable cause to believe that th e limited 
liability partnership may not file the notice with the Registrar and in case of any such notice filed by a 
partner, the Registrar shall obtain a confirmation to this effect from the limited liability partnership unless 
the limited liability partn ership has also filed such notice:  
Provided that where no confirmation is given by the limited liability partnership within fifteen days, 
the registrar shall register the notice made by a person ceasing to be a partner under this section.  
CHAPTER V  
EXTENT AND LIMITATION OF LIABILITY OF LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP AND PARTNERS  
26. Partner as agent .—Every partner of a limited liability partnership is, for the purpose of the 
business of the limited liability partnership, the agent of the limited liability partnership, but not of other 
partners.  13 
 27. Extent of liability of l imited liability partnership .—(1) A limited liability partnership is not 
bound by anything done by a part ner in dealing with a person if — 
(a) the partner in fact has no authority to act fo r the limited liability partnership in doing a 
particular act; and  
(b) the person knows that he has no authority or does not know or believe him to be a partner of 
the limited liability partnership.  
(2) The limited liability partnership is liable if a part ner of a limited liability partnership is liable to 
any person as a result of a wrongful act or omission on his part in the course of the business of the limited 
liability partnership or with its authority.  
(3) An obligation of the limited liability partnership whether arising in contract or otherwise, shall be 
solely the obligation of the limited liability partnership.  
(4) The liabilities of the limited liability partnership shall be met out of the property of the limited 
liability partnership.  
28. E xtent of liability of partner .—(1) A partner is not personally liable, directly or indirectly for an 
obligation referred to in sub -section ( 3) of section 27 solely by reason of being a partner of the limited 
liability partnership.  
(2) The provisions of sub-section ( 3) of section 27 and sub -section ( 1) of this section shall not affect 
the personal liability of a partner for his own wrongful act or omission, but apartner shall not be 
personally liable for the wrongful act or omission of any other partner o f the limited liability partnership.  
29. Holding out .—(1) Any person, who by words spoken or written or by conduct, represents 
himself, or knowingly permits himself to be represented to be a partner in a limited liability partnership is 
liable to any perso n who has on the faith of any such representation given credit to the limited liability 
partnership, whether the person representing himself or represented to be a partner does or does not know 
that the representation has reached the person so giving credi t: 
Provided that where any credit is received by the limited liability partnership as a result of such 
representation, the limited liability partnership shall, without prejudice to the liability of the person so 
representing himself or represented to be a partner, be liable to the extent of credit received by it or any 
financial benefit derived thereon.  
(2) Where after a partner's death the business is continued in the same limited liability partnership 
name, the continued use of that name or of the deceas ed partner's name as a part thereof shall not of itself 
make his legal representative or his estate liable for any act of the limited liability partnership done after 
his death.  
30. Unlimite d liability in case of fraud .—(1) In the event of an act carried out by a limited liability 
partnership, or any of its partners, with intent to defraud creditors of the limited liability partnership or 
any other person, or for any fraudulent purpose, the liability of the limited liability partnership and 
partners who ac ted with intent to defraud creditors or for any fraudulent purpose shall be unlimited for all 
or any of the debts or other liabilities of the limited liability partnership:  
Provided that in case any such act is carried out by a partner, the limited liabili ty partnership is liable 
to the same extent as the partner unless it is established by the limited liability partnership that such act 
was without the knowledge or the authority of the limited liability partnership.  
(2) Where any business is carried on wit h such intent or for such purpose as mentioned in  
sub-section ( 1), every person who was knowingly a party to the carrying on of the business in the manner 
aforesaid shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and with fi ne 
which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees.  
(3) Where a limited liability partnership or any partner or designated partner or employee of such 
limited liability partnership has conducted the affairs of th e limited liability partnership in a fraudulent 
manner, then without prejudice to any criminal proceedings which may arise under any law for the time 
being in force, the limited liability partnership and any such partner or designated partner or employee 14 
 shall be liable to pay compensation to any person who has suffered any loss or damage by reason of such 
conduct:  
Provided that such limited liability partnership shall not be liable if any such partner or designated 
partner or employee has acted fraudulentl y without knowledge of the limited liability partnership.  
31. Whistle blowing .—(1) The Court or Tribunal may reduce or waive any penalty leviable against 
any partner or employee of a limited liability partn ership, if it is satisfied that — 
(a) such partner or employee of a limited liability partnership has provided useful information 
during investigation of such limited liability partnership; or  
(b) when any information given by any partner or employee (whether or not during investigation) 
leads to limited l iability partnership or any partner or employee of such limited liability partnership 
being convicted u nder this Act or any other Act.  
(2) No partner or employee of any limited liability partnership may be discharged, demoted, 
suspended, threatened, harassed or in any other manner discriminated against the terms and conditions of 
his limited liability partnership or employment merely because of his providing information or causing 
information to be provided pursuant to sub -section ( 1). 
CHAPTER VI  
CONT RIBUTIONS  
32. Form of contribution .—(1) A contribution of a partner may consist of tangible, movable or 
immovable or intangible property or other benefit to the limited liability partnership, including money, 
promissory notes, other agreements to contribut e cash or property, and contracts for services performed or 
to be performed.  
(2) The monetary value of contribution of each partner shall be accounted for and disclosed in the 
accounts of the limited liability partnership in the manner as may be prescribe d. 
33. Obligation to contribute .—(1) The obligation of a partner to contribute money or other property 
or other benefit or to perform services for a limited liability partnership shall be as per the limited liability 
partnership agreement.  
(2) A creditor of a limited liability partnership, which extends credit or otherwise acts in reliance on 
an obligation described in that agreement, without notice of any compromise between partners, may 
enforce the original obligation against such partner.  
CHAPTER VII  
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES  
34. Maintenance of books of account,  other records and audit, etc .—(1) The limited liability 
partnership shall maintain such proper books of account as may be prescribed relating to its affairs for 
each year of its existence on cash basis or accrual basis and according to double entry system of 
accounting and shall maintain the same at its registered office for such period as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every limited liability partnership shall, within a period of six months from the end o f each 
financial year, prepare a Statement of Account and Solvency for the said financial year as at the last day 
of the said financial year in such form as may be prescribed, and such statement shall be signed by the 
designated partners of the limited lia bility partnership.  
(3) Every limited liability partnership shall file within the prescribed time, the Statement of Account 
and Solvency prepared pursuant to sub -section ( 2) with the Registrar every year in such form and manner 
and accompanied by such fees  as may be prescribed.  
(4) The accounts of limited liability partnerships shall be audited in accordance with s uch rules as 
may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt any class 
or classes of  limited liability partnerships from the requirements of this sub -section.  15 
 (5) Any limited liability partnership which fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall be 
punishable with fine which shall not be less than twenty -five thousand rupee s but which may extend to 
five lakh rupees and every designated partner of such limited liability partnership shall be punishable with 
fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees.  
35. Annual return .—(1) Every limited liability partnership shall file an annual return duly 
authenticated with the Registrar within sixty days of closure of its financial year in such form and manner 
and accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed.  
(2) Any limited liability par tnership which fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall be 
punishable with fine which shall not be less than twenty -five thousand rupees but which may extend to 
five lakh rupees.  
(3) If the limited liability partnership contravenes the provisions of this section, the designated partner 
of such limited liability partnership shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand 
rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees.  
36. Inspection of  documents kept by Registrar .—The incorporation document, names of partners 
and changes, if any, made therein, Statement of Account and Solvency and annual return filed by each 
limited liability partnership with the Registrar shall be available for inspection by any person in such 
mann er and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed.  
37. Penalty for false statement .—If in any return, statement or other document required by or for the 
purposes of any of the provisions of this Ac t, any person makes a statement — 
(a) which is false in any  material particular, knowing it to be false; or  
(b) which omits any material fact knowing it to be material,  
he shall, save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to two years, and shall al so be liable to fine which may extend to five lakh rupees but 
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees.  
38. Power of Reg istrar to obtain information .—(1) In order to obtain such information as the 
Registrar may consider necessary for the purposes of ca rrying out the provisions of this Act, the Registrar 
may require any person including any present or former partner or designated partner or employee of a 
limited liability partnership to answer any question or make any declaration or supply any details or  
particulars in writing to him within a reasonable period.  
(2) In case any person referred to in sub -section ( 1) does not answer such question or make such 
declaration or supply such details or particulars asked for by the Registrar within a reasonable tim e or 
time given by the Registrar or when the Registrar is not satisfied with the reply or declaration or details or 
particulars provided by such person, the Registrar shall have power to summon that person to appear 
before him or an inspector or any other public officer whom the Registrar may designate, to answer any 
such question or make such declaration or supply such details, as the case may be.  
(3) Any person who, without lawful excuse, fails to comply with any summons or requisition of the 
Registrar u nder this section shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees 
but which may extend to twenty -five thousand rupees.  
39. Compounding of offences .—The Central Government may compound any offence under this 
Act which is punishable with fine only, by collecting from a person reasonably suspected of having 
committed the offence, a sum which may extend to the amount of the maximum fine prescribed for the 
offence.  
40. Destruction of old records .—The Registrar may destroy any document filed or registered with 
him in physical form or in electronic form in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed.  
41. Enforcement  of duty to make returns, etc .—(1) If any limited liability partnership is in default 
in complying with — 
(a) any  provisions of this Act or of any other law which requires the filing in any manner with the 
Registrar of any return, account or other document or the giving of notice to him of any matter; or  16 
 (b) any request of the Registrar to amend or complete and resubmit any document or to submit a 
fresh document,  
and fails to make good the default within fourteen days after the service on the limited liability 
partnership of a notice requiring it to be done, the Tribunal may, on application by the Registrar, make  an 
order directing that limited liability partnership or its designated partners or its partners to make good the 
default within such time as specified in the order.  
(2) Any such order may provide that all the costs of and incidental to the application sh all be borne by 
that limited liability partnership.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall limit the operation of any other provision of this Act or any other law 
imposing penalties in respect of any default referred to in this section on that limited liability  partnership.  
CHAPTER VIII  
ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSFER OF PARTNERSHIP RIGHTS  
42. Par tner's transferable interest .—(1) The rights of a partner to a share of the profits and losses 
of the limited liability partnership and to receive distributions in accordance w ith the limited liability 
partnership agreement are transferable either wholly or in part.  
(2) The transfer of any right by any partner pursuant to sub -section ( 1) does not by itself cause the 
disassociation of the partner or a dissolution and winding up of the limited liability partnership.  
(3) The transfer of right pursuant to this section does not, by itself, entitle the transferee or assignee to 
participate in the management or conduct of the activities of the limited liability partnership, or access 
information concerning the transactions of the limited liability partnership.  
CHAPTER IX  
INVESTIGATION  
43. Investigation of the affairs of l imited liability partnership .—(1) The Central Government shall 
appoint one or more competent persons as inspectors to  investigate the affairs of a limited liability 
partnership and to report thereon in such manner as it may direct if — 
(a) the Tribunal, either suomotu , or on an application received from not less than one -fifth of the 
total number of partners of limited liability partnership, by order, declares that the affairs of the 
limited liability partnership ought to be investigated; or  
(b) any Court, by order, declares that the affairs of a limited liability partnership ought to be 
investigated.  
(2) The Central Gov ernment may appoint one or more competent persons as inspectors to investigate 
the affairs of a limited liability partnership and to report on them in such manner as it may direct . 
(3) The appointment of inspectors pursuant to sub -section ( 2) may be made, — 
(a) if not less than one -fifth of the total number of partners of the limited liability partnership 
make an application along with supporting evidence and security amount as may be prescribed; or  
(b) if the limited liability partnership makes an applicati on that the affairs of the limited liability 
partnership ought to be investigated; or  
(c) if, in the opinion of the Central Government, the re are circumstances suggesting — 
(i) that the business of the limited liability partnership is being or has been conducted with an 
intent to defraud its creditors, partners or any other person, or otherwise for a fraudulent or 
unlawful purpose, or in a manner oppressive or unfairly prejudicial to some or any of its partners, 
or that the limited liability partnership was formed for any fraudulent or unlawful purpose; or  
(ii) that the affairs of the limited liability partnership are not being conducted in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act; or  17 
 (iii) that, on receipt of a report of the Registrar or any other inve stigating or regulatory 
agency, there are sufficient reasons that the affairs of the limited liability partnership ought to be 
investigated.  
44. Application b y partners for investigation .—An application by partners of the limited liability 
partnership unde r clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 43 shall be supported by such evidence as the 
Tribunal may require for the purpose of showing that the applicants have good reason for requiring the 
investigation and the Central Government may, before appointing an inspector, require theapplicants to 
give security, of such amount as may be prescribed, for payment of costs of the investigation.  
45. Firm, body corporate or association not to be appointed as inspe ctor.—No firm, body 
corporate or other association shall be appointed as an inspector.  
46. Power of inspectors to carry out investigation into affa irs of related entities, etc .—(1) If an 
inspector appointed by the Central Government to investigate the affairs of a limited liability partnership 
thinks it necessary for the purposes of his investigation to investigate also the affairs of an entity which 
has been associated in the past or is presently associated with the limited liability partnership or any 
present or former partner or designated partner of t he limited liability partnership, the inspector shall have 
the power to do so and shall report on the affairs of the other entity or partner or designated partner, so far 
as he thinks that the results of his investigation thereof are relevant to the invest igation of the affairs of 
the limited liability partnership.  
(2) In the case of any entity or partner or designated partner referred to in sub -section ( 1), the 
inspector shall not exercise his power of investigating into, and reporting on, its or his affai rs without 
obtaining the prior approval of the Central Government thereto:  
Provided that before according approval under this sub -section, the Central Government shall give the 
entity or partner or designated partner a reasonable opportunity to show cause why such approval should 
not be accorded.  
47. Producti on of documents and evidence .—(1) It shall be the duty of the designated partner and 
partners of the  limited liability partnership — 
(a) to preserve and to produce before an inspector or any person authorised by him in this behalf 
with the previous approval of the Central Government, all books and papers of, or relating to, the 
limited liability partnership or, as the case may be, the other entity, which are in their custody or 
power; and  
(b) otherwi se to give to the inspector all assistance in connection with the investigation which 
they are reasonably able to give.  
(2) The inspector may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, require any entity other 
than an entity referred to in sub -section ( 1) to furnish such information to, or produce such books and 
papers before him or any person authorised by him in this behalf, with the previous approval of that 
Government, as he may consider necessary, if the furnishing of such information or th e production of 
such books and papers is relevant or necessary for the purposes of his investigation.  
(3) The inspector may keep in his custody any books and papers produced under sub -section ( 1) or 
sub-section ( 2) for thirty days and thereafter shall retu rn the same to the limited liability partnership, other 
entity or individual by whom or on whose behalf the books and papers are produced:  
Provided that the inspector may call for the books and papers if they are needed again:  
Provided further that if cert ified copies of the books and papers produced under sub -section ( 2) are 
furnished to the inspector, he shall return those books and papers to the entity or person concerned.  
(4) An inspector may examine on oath — 
(a) any of the persons referred to in sub-section ( 1);  
(b) with the previous approval of the Central Government, any other person in relation to the 
affairs of the limited liability partnership or any other entity, as the case may be; and  18 
 (c) may administer an oath accordingly and for that p urpose may require any of those persons to 
appear before him personally.  
(5) If any person fails with out reasonable cause or refuses — 
(a) to produce before an inspector or any person authorised by him in this behalf with the 
previous approval of the Centra l Government any book or paper which it is his duty under  
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) to produce; or  
(b) to furnish any information which is his duty under sub -section ( 2) to furnish; or  
(c) to appear before the inspector personally when required t o do so under sub -section ( 4) or to 
answer any question which is put to him by the inspector in pursuance of that sub -section; or  
(d) to sign the notes of any examination,  
he shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees bu t which may extend 
to twenty -five thousand rupees and with a further fine which shall not be less than fifty rupees but which 
may extend to five hundred rupees for every day after the first day after which the default continues.  
(6) The notes of any examination under sub -section ( 4) shall be taken down in writing and signed by 
the person whose examination was made on oath and a copy of such notes shall be given to the person so 
examined on oa th and thereafter be used as an evidence by the inspector.  
48. Seizu re of documents by inspector .—(1) Where in the course of investigation, the inspector has 
reasonable ground to believe that the books and papers of, or relating to, the limited liability partnership 
or other entity or partner or designated partner  of such limited liability partnership may be destroyed, 
mutilated, altered, falsified or secreted, the inspector may make an application to the Judicial Magistrate 
of the first class, or, as the case may be, the Metropolitan Magistrate, having jurisdictio n, for an order for 
the seizure of such books and papers.  
(2) After considering the application and hearing the inspector, if necessary, the Magistrate may, by 
order, authorise the inspector — 
(a) to enter, with such assistance, as may be required, the plac e or places where such books and 
papers are kept;  
(b) to search that place or those places in the manner specified in the order; and  
(c) to seize books and papers which the inspector considers it necessary for the purposes of his 
investigation.  
(3) The inspector shall keep in his custody the books and papers seized under this section for such 
period not later than the conclusion of the investigation as he considers necessary and thereafter shall 
return the same to the concerned entity or person from whos e custody or power they were seized and 
inform the Magistrate of such return:  
 Provided that the books and papers shall not be kept seized for a continuous period of more than six 
months:  
Provided further that the inspector may, before returning such books  and papers as aforesaid, place 
identification marks on them or any part thereof.  
(4) Save as otherwise provided in this section, every search or seizure made under this section shall 
be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal  Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  
relating to searches or seizures made under that Code.  
49. Inspector's report .—(1) The Inspector may , and if so directed by the Central Government , shall 
make interim reports to that Government, and on the conclusion of the investigation, shall make a final 
report to the Central Government and any such report shall be written or printed, as the Central 
Government may direct.   19 
 (2) The Central Government — 
(a) shall forward a copy of any report (other than an interim report) mad e by the inspectors to the 
limited liability partnership at its registered office, and also to any other entity or person dealt with or 
related to the report; and  
(b) may, if it thinks fit, furnish a copy thereof, on request and on payment of the prescribed fee, to 
any person or entity related to or affected by the report.  
50. Prosecution .—If, from the report under section 49, it appears to the Central Government that any 
person in relation to the limited liability partnership or in relation to any  other entity whose affairs have 
been investigated, has been guilty of any offence for which he is liable, the Central Government may 
prosecute such person for the offence; and it shall be the duty of all partners, designated partners and 
other employees a nd agents of the limited liability partnership or other entity, as the case may be, to give 
the Central Government all assistance in connection with the prosecution which they are reasonably able 
to give.  
51. Application for winding up of l imited liability  partnership .—If any such limited liability 
partnership is liable to be wound up under this Act or any other law for the time being in force, and it 
appears to the Central Government from any such report under section 49 that it is expedient to do so by 
reason of any such circumstances as are referred to in sub -clause ( i) or sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( c) of  
sub-section ( 3) of section 43, the Central Government may, unless the limited liability partnership is 
already being wound up by the Tribunal, cause to  be presented to the Tribunal by any person authorised 
by the Central Government in this behalf, a petition for the winding up of the limited liability partnership 
on the ground that it is just and equitable that it should be wound up.  
52. Proceedings for recovery of damages  or property .—If, from any report under section 49, it 
appears to the Central Government that proceedings ought, in the public interest, to be brought by the 
limited liability partnership or any entity whose affairs have been investigate d,— 
(a) for the recovery of damages in respect of any fraud, misfeasance or other misconduct in 
connection with the promotion or formation, or the management of the affairs, of such limited 
liability partnership or such other entity; or  
(b) for the recovery of any property of such limited liability partnership or such other entity, 
which has been misapplied or wrongfully retained,  
the Central Government may itself bring proceedings for that purpose.  
53. Expenses of investigation .—(1) The e xpenses of, and incidental to, an investigation by an 
inspector appointed by the Central Government under this Act shall be defrayed in the first instance by 
the Central Government; but the following persons shall, to the extent mentioned below, be liable to 
reimburse the Central Government in re spect of such expenses, namely: — 
(a) any person who is convicted on a prosecution, or who is ordered to pay damages or restore 
any property in proceedings brought by virtue of section 52, may, in the same proceeding s, be ordered 
to pay the said expenses to such extent as may be specified by the court convicting such person, or 
ordering him to pay such damages or restore such property, as the case may be;  
(b) any entity in whose name proceedings are brought as aforesa id shall be liable, to the extent of 
the amount or value of any sums or property recovered by it as a result of the proceedings; and  
(c) unless, as a result of the investigation, a prosecution is institu ted in pursuance of section 50, — 
(i) any entity, a partner or designated partner or any other person dealt with by the report of 
the inspector shall be liable to reimburse the Central Government in respect of the whole of the 
expenses, unless and except in so far as, the Central Government otherwise direct s; and  
(ii) the applicants for the investigation, where the inspector was appointed in pursuance of the 
provisions of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 43, shall be liable to such extent, if any, as 
the Central Government may direct.  20 
 (2) Any amount for which a limited liability partnership or other entity is liable by virtue of clause ( b) 
of sub -section ( 1) shall be a first charge on the sums or property mentioned in that clause.  
(3) The amount of expenses in respect of which any limited liability pa rtnership, other entity, a 
partner or designated partner or any other person is liable under sub -clause ( i) of clause ( c) of  
sub-section ( 1) to reimburse the Central Government shall be recoverable as arrears of land revenue.  
(4) For the purposes of this section, any costs or expenses incurred by the Central Government or in 
connection with the proceedings brought by virtue of section 52 shall be treated as expenses of the 
investigation giving rise to the proceedings.  
54. Inspe ctor's report to be evidence .—A copy of any report of any inspector or inspectors 
appointed under the provisions of this Act, authenticated in such manner, if any, as may be prescribed, 
shall be admissible in any legal proceeding as evidence in relation to any matter contained in the report.  
CHAPTER X  
CONVERSION INTO LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP  
55. Conversion from firm into l imited liability partnership .—A firm may convert into a limited 
liability partnership in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the Second Schedule.  
56. Conversion from private company into lim ited liability partnership .—A private company 
may convert into a limited liability partnership in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the 
Third Schedule.  
57. Conversion from unlisted public company  into l imited liability partnership .—An unlisted 
public company may convert into a limited liability partnership in accordance with the provisions of this 
Chapter and the Fourth Schedule.  
58. Registrat ion and effect of conversion .—(1) The Registrar, on satisfying that a firm, private 
company or an unlisted public company, as the case may be, has complied with the provisions of the 
Second Schedule, the Third Schedule or the Fourth Schedule, as the case may be, shall, subject to the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, register the documents submitted under such 
Schedule and issue a certificate of registration in such form as the Registrar may determine stating that 
the limited liability partnership is, on and from the d ate specified in the certificate, registered under this 
Act:  
Provided that the limited liability partnership shall, within fifteen days of the date of registration, 
inform the concerned Registrar of Firms or Registrar of Companies, as the case may be, wit h which it was 
registered under the provisions of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932  (9 of 1932) or the Companies Act, 
1956 (1 of 1956)  as the case may be, about the conversion and of the particulars of the limited liability 
partnership in such form and mann er as may be prescribed.  
(2) Upon such conversion, the partners of the firm, the shareholders of private company or unlisted 
public company, as the case may be, the limited liability partnership to which such firm or such company 
has converted, and the par tners of the limited liability partnership shall be bound by the provisions of the 
Second Schedule, the Third Schedule or the Fourth Schedule, as the c ase may be, applicable to them.  
(3) Upon such conversion, on and from the date of certificate of registra tion, the effects of the 
conversion shall be such as specified in the Second Schedule, the Third Schedule or the Fourth Schedule, 
as the case may be.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, on and from the 
date of registration specified in the certificate of registration issued under the Second Schedule, the Third 
Schedule or the Fourth  Schedule, as the case may be, — 
(a) there shall be a limited liability partnership by the name specified in the certificate of 
registration registered under this Act;  
(b) all tangible (movable or immovable) and intangible property vested in the firm or the 
company, as the case may be, all  assets, interests, rights, privileges, liabilities, obligations relating to 
the firm or the company, as the case may be, and the whole of the undertaking of the firm or the 21 
 company, as the case may be, shall be transferred to and shall vest in the limited  liability partnership 
without further assurance, act or deed; and  
 (c) the firm or the company, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be dissolved and removed 
from the records of the Registrar of Firms or Registrar of Companies, as the case may be.  
CHAPT ER XI  
FOREIGN LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIPS  
59. Foreign li mited liability partnerships .—The Central Government may make rules for 
provisions in relation to establishment of place of business by foreign limited liability partnerships within 
India and carrying on their business therein by applying or incorporating, with such modifications, as 
appear appropriate, the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956)  or such regulatory mechanism 
with such composition as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER XII  
COMP ROMISE, ARRANGEMENT OR RECONSTRUCTION OF LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIPS  
60. Compromise, or arrangement of li mited liability partnerships .—(1) Where a compro mise or 
arrangement is proposed — 
(a) between a limited liability partnership and its creditors; or  
(b) between a limited liability partnership and its partners,  
the Tribunal may, on the application of the limited liability partnership or of any creditor or partner of the 
limited liability partnership, or, in the case of a limited liability partnershipwhi ch is being wound up, of 
the liquidator, order a meeting of the creditors or of the partners, as the case may be, to be called, held and 
conducted in such manner as may be prescribed or as the Tribunal directs.  
(2) If a majority representing three -fourths in value of the creditors, or partners, as the case may be, at 
the meeting, agree to any compromise or arrangement, the compromise or arrangement shall, if 
sanctioned by the Tribunal, by order be binding on all th e creditors or all the partners, as the case may be, 
and also on the limited liability partnership, or in the case of a limited liability partnership which is being 
wound up, on the liquidator and contributories of the limited liability partnership:  
Provi ded that no order sanctioning any compromise or arrangement shall be made by the Tribunal 
unless the Tribunal is satisfied that the limited liability partnership or any other person by whom an 
application has been made under sub -section ( 1) has disclosed t o the Tribunal, by affidavit or otherwise, 
all material facts relating to the limited liability partnership, including the latest financial position of the 
limited liability partnership and the pendency of any investigation proceedings in relation to the l imited 
liability partnership.  
(3) An order made by the Tribunal under sub -section ( 2) shall be filed by the limited liability 
partnership with the Registrar within thirty days after making such an order and shall have effect only 
after it is so filed.  
(4) If default is made in complying with sub -section ( 3), the limited liability partnership, and every 
designated partner of the limited liability partnership shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 
one lakh rupees.  
(5) The Tribunal may, at any tim e after an application has been made to it under this section, stay the 
commencement or continuation of any suit or proceeding against the limited liability partnership on such 
terms as the Tribunal thinks fit, until the application is finally disposed of.  
61. Power of Tribunal to enfor cecompromise or arrangement .—(1) Where the Tribunal makes an 
order under section 60 sanctioning a compromise or an arrangement in respect of a li mited liability 
partnership, it — 
(a) shall have power to supervise the carrying out of the compromise or an arrangement; and  22 
 (b) may, at the time of making such order or at any time thereafter, give such directions in regard 
to any matter or make such modifications in the compromise or arrangement as it may consider 
necessary for the proper working of the compromise or arrangement.  
(2) If the Tribunal aforesaid is satisfied that a compromise or an arrangement sanctioned under 
section 60 cannot be worked satisfactorily with or without modifications, it may, either on its own motion 
or on the application of any person interested in the affairs of the limited liability partnership, make an 
order for winding up the limited liability partnership, and such an order shall be deemed to be an order 
made under section 64 of this Act.  
62. Provisio ns for facilitating reconstruction or amalgamation of li mited liability 
partnerships .—(1) Where an application is made to the Tribunal under section 60 for sanctioning of a 
compromise or arrangement proposed between a limited liability partnership and any such persons as are 
mentioned in that section, and i t is shown to the Tribunal that — 
(a) compromise or arrangement has been proposed for the purposes of, or in connection with, a 
scheme for the reconstruction of any limited liability partnership or limited  liability partnerships, or 
the amalgamation of any two or more limi ted liability partnerships; and  
(b) under the scheme the whole or any part of the undertaking, property or liabilities of any 
limited liability partnership concerned in the scheme (in this  section referred to as a "transferor 
limited liability partnership") is to be transferred to another limited liability partnership (in this 
section referred to as the "transferee limited liability partnership"), the Tribunal may, either by the 
order sanct ioning the compromise or arrangement or by a subsequent order, make provisions for all or 
any of  the following matters, namely :— 
(i) the transfer to the transferee limited liability partnership of the whole or any part of the 
undertaking, property or liabi lities of any transferor limited liability partnership;  
(ii) the continuation by or against the transferee limited liability partnership of any legal 
proceedings pending by or against any transferor limited liability partnership;  
(iii) the dissolution, wit hout winding up, of any transferor limited liability partnership;  
(iv) the provision to be made for any person who, within such time and in such manner as the 
Tribunal directs, dissent from the compromise or arrangement; and  
(v) such incidental, consequential and supplemental matters as are necessary to secure that the 
reconstruction or amalgamation shall be fully and effectively carried out:  
Provided that no compromise or arrangement proposed for the purposes of, or in connection 
with, a scheme f or the amalgamation of a limited liability partnership, which is being wound up, 
with any other limited liability partnership or limited liability partnerships, shall be sanctioned by 
the Tribunal unless the Tribunal has received a report from the Registra r that the affairs of the 
limited liability partnership have not been conducted in a manner prejudicial to the interests of its 
partners or to public interest:  
Provided further that no order for the dissolution of any transferor limited liability partnersh ip 
under clause ( iii) shall be made by the Tribunal unless the Official Liquidator has, on scrutiny of 
the books and papers of the limited liability partnership, made a report to the Tribunal that the 
affairs of the limited liability partnership have not b een conducted in a manner prejudicial to the 
interests of its partners or to public interest.  
(2) Where an order under this section provides for the transfer of any property or liabilities, then, by 
virtue of the order, that property shall be transferred t o and vest in, and those liabilities shall be 
transferred to and become the liabilities of, the transferee limited liability partnership; and in the case of 
any property, if the order so directs, freed from any charge which is, by virtue of the compromise or 
arrangement, to cease to have effect.  
(3) Within thirty days after the making of an order under this section, every limited liability 
partnership in relation to which the order is made shall cause a certified copy thereof to be filed with the 
Registrar for registration.  23 
 (4) If default is made in complying with the provisions of sub -section ( 3), the limited liability 
partnership, every designated partner of the limited liability partnership shall be punishable with fine 
which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.  
Explanation .—In this section "property" includes property, rights and powers of every description; 
and "liabilities" includes duties of every description.  
CHAPTER XIII  
WINDING UP AND DISSOLUTION  
63. Winding up and dissolution .—The winding up of a limited liability partnership may be either 
voluntary or by the Tribunal and limited liability partnership, so wound up may be dissolved.  
64. Circumstances in which limited liability partnership may be wound  up by Tribunal. —A 
limited liability partnership may be wound up by the Tribunal, — 
(a) if the limited liability partnership decides that limited liability partnership be wound up by the 
Tribunal ; 
(b) if, for a period of more than six months, the number of partners of the limited liability 
partnership is reduced below two;  
1*****  
(d) if the limited liability partnership has acted against the interests of the sovereignty and 
integrity of India, the security of the State or public order;  
(e) if the limited liability partnership has made a default in filing w ith the Registrar the Statement 
of Account and Solvency or annual return for any five consecutive financial years; or  
(f) if the Tribunal is of the opinion that it is just and equitable that the limited liability partnership 
be wound up.  
65. Rules for wind ing up and dissolution .—The Central Government may make rules for the 
provisions in relation to winding up and dissolution of limited liability partnerships.  
CHAPTER XIV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
66. Business transactions of partner with limited liability partnership .—A partner may lend 
money to and transact other business with the limited liability partnership and has the same rights and 
obligations with respect to the loan or other transactions as a person who is not a partner.  
67. Application of the provisions of th e Companies Act .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, direct that any of the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 
1956)  specified in the notification — 
(a) shall apply to any limited liability partnership; or  
(b) shall apply to any limited liability partnership with such exception, modification and 
adaptation, as may be specified, in the notification.  
 (2) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid in draft 
before each Ho use of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
disapproving the issue of the notification or both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
notification, the notification shall not be issued or, as the case may be, shall be issued only in such 
modified form as may b e agreed upon by both the Houses.  
68. Electronic filing of documents .—(1) Any document required to be filed, recorded or registered 
under this Act may be filed, recorded or registered in such manner and subject to such conditions as may 
be prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Clause ( c) omitted by Act 31 of 2016, s. 254 and The Tenth Schedule  (w.e.f. 28 -5-2016) . 24 
  (2) A copy of or an extract from any document electronically filed with or submitted to the Registrar 
which is supplied or issued by the Registrar and certified through affixing digital signature as per the 
Information Technology Act, 2000  (21 of 2000)  to be a true copy of or extract from such document shall, 
in any proceedings, be admissible in evidence as of equal validity with the original document.  
 (3) Any information supplied by the Registrar that is certified by the Registrar through affixing 
digital si gnature to be a true extract from any document filed with or submitted to the Registrar shall, in 
any proceedings, be admissible in evidence and be presumed, unless evidence to the contrary is adduced, 
to be a true extract from such document.  
69. Payment o f additional fee .—Any document or return required to be filed or registered under this 
Act with the Registrar, if, is not filed or registered in time provided therein, may be filed or registered 
after that time upto a period of three hundred days from the date within which it should have been filed, 
on payment of additional fee of one hundred rupees for every day of such delay in addition to any fee as 
is payable for filing of such document or return:  
Provided that such document or return may, without preju dice to any other action or liability under 
this Act, also be filed after such period of three hundred days on payment of fee and additional fee 
specified in this section.  
70. Enhanced punishment .—In case a limited liability partnership or any partner or d esignated 
partner of such limited liability partnership commits any offence, the limited liability partnership or any 
partner or designated partner shall, for the second or subsequent offence, be punishable with 
imprisonment as provided, but in case of off ences for which fine is prescribed either along with or 
exclusive of imprisonment, with fine which shall be twice the amount of fine for such offence.  
71. Application of other laws not barred .—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.  
72. Jurisdiction of Tribunal and Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Tribunal shall exercise such powers 
and perform such functions as are, or may be, conferred on it by or under this Act or any other law for the 
time being in force.  
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order or decision of Tribunal may prefer an appeal to the Appellate 
Tribunal and the provisions of sections 10FQ, 10FZA, 10G, 10GD, 10GE and 10GF of the Companies 
Act, 1956  (1 of  1956)  shall be applicable in respect of such appeal.  
73. Penalty on non -compliance of any order passed by Tribunal .—Whoever fails to comply with 
any order made by the Tribunal under any provision of this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment 
which may  extend to six months and shall also be liable to a fine which shall not be less than fifty 
thousand rupees.  
74. General penalties .—Any person guilty of an offence under this Act for which no punishment is 
expressly provided shall be liable to a fine which  may extend to five lakh rupees but which shall not be 
less than five thousand rupees and with a further fine which may extend to fifty rupees for every day after 
the first day after which the default continues.  
75. Power of Registrar to strike defunct lim ited liability partnership off register .—Where the 
Registrar has reasonable cause to believe that a limited liability partnership is not carrying on business or 
its operation, in accordance with the provisions of this Act, the name of limited liability par tnership may 
be struck off the register of limited liability partnerships in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Registrar shall, before striking off the name of any limited liability partnership 
under this section, give such limited liabil ity partnership a reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
76. Offences to li mited liability partnerships .—Where an offence under this Act committed by a 
limited liability partnership is proved — 
(a) to have been committed with the consent or connivance of a partner or partners or designated 
partner or designated partners of the limited liability partnership; or  25 
 (b) to be attributable to any neglect on the part of the partner or partners or designat ed partner or 
designated partners of that limited liability partnership,  
the partner or partners or designated partner or designated partners of the limited liability partnership, as 
the case may be, as well as that limited liability partnership shall be guilty of the offence and shall be 
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
77. Jurisdiction of Court .—Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in any Act for the time 
being in force, the Judicial Magistrate of the first class or, as t he case may be, the Metropolitan Magistrate 
shall have jurisdiction to try any offence under this Act and shall have power to impose punishment in 
respect of said offence.  
78. Power to alter Schedules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the  Official 
Gazette, alter any of the provisions contained in any of the Schedules to this Act.  
(2) Any alteration notified under sub -section ( 1) shall have effect as if enacted in the Act and shall 
come into force on the date of the notification, unless th e notification otherwise directs.  
(3) Every alteration made by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the alteration, or both Houses agree that the alteration should not be 
made, the alteration shall, thereafter, have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the val idity of 
anything previously done in pursuance of that alteration.  
79. Power to make  rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prej udice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) form and manner of prior consent to be given by designated partner under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 7;  
(b) the form and manner of p articulars of every individual agreeing to act as designated partner of 
limited liability partnership under sub -section ( 4) of section 7;  
(c) the conditions and requirements relating to the eligibility of an individual to become a 
designated partner under sub-section ( 5) of section 7;  
(d) the manner of filing the incorporation document and payment of fees payable thereof under 
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 11;  
(e) the form of statement to be filed under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 11 ; 
(f) the form of incorporation document under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 11;  
(g) the information to be contained in the incorporation document concerning the proposed 
limited liability partnership under clause ( g) of sub -section ( 2) of section 11;  
(h) the manner of serving the documents on a limited liability partnership or a partner or a 
designated partner and the form and manner in which any other address may be declared by the 
limited liability partnership under sub -section ( 2) of sec tion 13;  
(i) the form and manner of notice to the Registrar and the conditions in respect of change of 
registered office under sub -section ( 3) of section 13;  
(j) the form and manner of application and amount of fee payable to the Registrar under  
sub-section (1) of section 16;  
(k) the manner in which names will be reserved by the Registrar under sub -section ( 2) of  
section 16;  26 
 (l) the manner in which an application may be made by an entity under sub -section ( 1) of  
section 18;  
(m) the form and manner of notice of change of name of limited liability partnership and the 
amount of fee payable under section 19;  
(n) the form and manner of the limited liability partnership agreement and the changes made 
therein and the amount of fee payable under sub -section ( 2) of section 23;  
(o) the form of notice, the amount of fee payable and the manner of authentication of the 
statement under clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) of sub -section ( 3) of section 25;  
(p) the manner of accounting and disclosure of monetary value of contribut ion of a partner under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 32;  
(q) the books of account and the period of their maintenance under sub -section ( 1) of section 34;  
(r) the form of Statement of Account and Solvency under sub -section ( 2) of section 34;  
(s) the form, manner, fee and time of filing of Statement of Account and Solvency under  
sub-section ( 3) of section 34;  
(t) the audit of accounts of a limited liability partnership under sub -section ( 4) of section 34;  
(u) the form and manner of annual return  and fee payable under sub -section ( 1) of section 35;  
(v) the manner and amount of fee payable for inspection of incorporation document, names of 
partners and changes made therein, Statement of Account and Solvency and annual return under 
section 36;  
(w) the destruction of documents by Registrar in any form under section 40;  
(x) the amount required as security under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3) of section 43;  
(y) the amount of security to be given under section 44;  
(z) the fee payable for furnishing a copy  under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 49;  
(za) the manner of authentication of report of inspector under section 54;  
(zb) the form and manner of particulars about conversion under the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of 
section 58;  
(zc) in relation to establishment of place of business and carrying on business in India by foreign 
limited liability partnerships and regulatory mechanism and composition under section 59;  
(zd) the manner of calling, holding and conducting meeting under sub -section ( 1) of se ction 60;  
(ze) in relation to winding up and dissolution of limited liability partnerships under section 65;  
(zf) the manner and conditions for filing document electronically under sub -section ( 1) of  
section 68;  
(zg) the manner for striking off the names of limited liability partnerships from the register under 
section 75;  
(zh) the form and manner of statement containing particulars and amount of fee payable under 
sub-paragraph ( a) of para graph 4 of the Second Schedule;  
(zi) the form and manner of particul ars about conversion under the proviso to para graph 5 of the 
Second Schedule;  
(zj) the form and manner of the statement and the amount of fee payable under sub -paragraph ( a) 
of paragraph 3 of the Third Schedule;  
(zk) the form and manner of particulars abou t conversion under the proviso to paragraph 4 of the 
Third Schedule;  27 
 (zl) the form and manner of the statement and amount of fee payable under sub -paragraph ( a) of 
paragraph 4 of the Fourth Schedule; and  
(zm) the form and manner of particulars about conversion under the proviso to paragraph 5 of the 
Fourth Schedule.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament,  while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Ho uses agree in 
making any modification in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall, 
thereafter, have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
80. Power to remove diff iculties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of tw o years 
from the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
81. Transitional provisions .—Until the Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal are constitut ed under 
the provis ions of the Companies Act, 1956(1 of 1956)  the provisions of this Act shall have effect subject 
to the followi ng modifications, namely: — 
(a) for the word "Tribunal" occurring in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 41, clause ( a) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 43 and section 44, the words "Company Law Board" had been substituted;  
(b) for the word "Tribunal" occurring in section 51 and in sections 60 to 64, the words "High 
Court" had been substituted;  
(c) for the words "Appellate Tribunal" occurring in sub -section ( 2) of section 72, the words "Hi gh 
Court" had been substituted.   28 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 23( 4)] 
PROVISIONS REGARDING MATTERS RELATING TO MUTUAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF PARTNERS AND 
LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP AND I TS PARTNERS APPLICABLE IN THE ABSENCE OF ANY AGREEMENT 
ON SUCH MATTERS  
1. The mutual rights and duties of the partners and the mutual rights and duties of the limited liability 
partnership and its partners shall be determined, subject to the terms of any l imited liability partnership 
agreement or in the absence of any such agreement on any matter, by t he provisions in this Schedule.  
2. All the partners of a limited liability partnership are entitled to share equally in the capital, profits 
and losses of the  limited liability partnership.  
3. The limited liability partnership shall indemnify each partner in respect of payments made and 
personal lia bilities incurred by him — 
(a) in the ordinary and proper conduct of the business of the li mited liability partners hip; or  
(b) in or about anything necessarily done for the preservation of the business or property of the 
limited liability partnership.  
4. Every partner shall indemnify the limited liability partnership for any loss caused to it by his fraud 
in the conduc t of the business of the limited liability partnership.  
5. Every partner may take part in the management of the  limited liability partnership.  
6. No partner shall be entitled to remuneration for acting in the business or management of the  limited 
liability  partnership.  
7. No person may be introduced as a partner without the consen t of all the existing partners.  
8. Any matter or issue relating to the limited liability partnership shall be decided by a resolution 
passed by a majority in number of the partners, and for this purpose, each partner shall have one vote. 
However, no change may be made in the nature of business of the limited liability partnership without the 
consent of all the partners.  
9. Every limited liability partnership shall ensure tha t decisions taken by it are recorded in the minutes 
within thirty days of taking such decisions and are kept and maintained at the registered office of the 
limited liability partnership.  
10. Each partner shall render true accounts and full information of a ll things affecting the limited 
liability partnership to any partne r or his legal representatives.  
11. If a partner, without the consent of the limited liability partnership, carries on any business of the 
same nature as and competing with the limited liab ility partnership, he must account for and pay over to 
the limited liability partnership all profit s made by him in that business.  
12. Every partner shall account to the limited liability partnership for any benefit derived by him 
without the consent of th e limited liability partnership from any transaction concerning the limited 
liability partnership, or from any use by him of the property, name or any business connection of the  
limited liability partnership.  
13. No majority of the partners can expel any p artner unless a power to do so has been conferred by 
express agreement between the partners.  
14. All disputes between the partners arising out of the limited liability partnership agreement which 
cannot be resolved in terms of such agreement shall be refer red for arbitration as per the provisions of the 
Arbitra tion and Conciliation Act, 1996(26 of 1996).   29 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 55)  
CONVERSION FROM FIRM INTO LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP  
1. Interpretation .—In this Schedule, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) "firm" means a firm as defined in section 4 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932  (9 of 1932) ; 
(b) "convert", in relation to a firm converting into a limited liability partnership, means a transfer 
of the property, assets, interests,  rights, privileges, liabilities, obligations and the undertaking of the 
firm to the limited liability partnership in accordance with this Schedule.  
2. Conversion from firm into limited liability partnership .—(1) A firm may convert into a limited 
liability  partnership by complying with the requirements as to the conve rsion set out in this Schedule.  
(2) Upon such conversion, the partners of the firm shall be bound by the provisions of this Schedu le 
that are applicable to them.  
3. Eligibility for conversion .—A firm may apply to convert into a limited liability partnership in 
accordance with this Schedule if and only if the partners of the limited liability partnership into which the 
firm is to be converted, comprise, all the partners of the firm and no one els e. 
4. Statements to be filed .—A firm may apply to convert into a limited liability partnersh ip by filing 
with the Registrar — 
(a) a statement by all of its partners in such form and manner and accompanied by such fee as the 
Central Government may prescribe,  containing the  following particulars, namely: — 
(i) the name and registration number, if applicable, of the firm; and  
(ii) the date on which the firm was registered under the Indian Partnership Act, 1932  (9 of 
1932)  or under an y other law, if applicable, and 
(b) incorporation document and statement referred to in section 11.  
5. Registration of conversion .—On receiving the documents referred to in paragraph 4, the Registrar 
shall subject to the provisions of this Act, register the documents and issue a cert ificate of registration in 
such form as the Registrar may determine stating that the limited liability partnership is, on and from the 
date specified in the certificate, registered under this Act:  
Provided that the limited liability partnership shall, with in fifteen days of the date of registration, 
inform, the concerned Registrar of Firms with which it was registered under the provisions of the Indian 
Partnership Act, 1932  (9 of 1932)  about the conversion and of the particulars of the limited liability 
partnership in such form and manner as the Central Government may prescribe.  
6. Regi strar may refuse to register .—(1) Nothing in this Schedule shall be construed as to require 
the Registrar to register any limited liability partnership if he is not satisfied  with the particulars or other 
information furnished under the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that an appeal may be made before the Tribunal in case of refusal of registration by the 
Registrar.  
(2) The Registrar may, in any particular case, require the d ocuments referred to in paragraph 4 to be 
verified in such manner, as he considers fit.  
7.Effect of registration .—On and from the date of registration specified in the certificate of 
registr ation issued under paragraph 5, — 
(a) there shall be a limited liab ility partnership by the name specified in the certificate of 
registration registered under this Act;  
(b) all tangible (movable and immovable) property as well as intangible property vested in the 
firm, all assets, interests, rights, privileges, liabilitie s, obligations relating to the firm and the whole of 30 
 the undertaking of the firm shall be transferred to and shall vest in the limited liability partnership 
without furt her assurance, act or deed; and  
(c) the firm shall be deemed to be dissolved and if earlier registered under the Indian Partnership 
Act, 1932  (9 of 1932) removed from the records maintained under that Act.  
8. Registra tion in relation to property .—If any property to which sub -paragraph ( b) of paragraph 7 
applies is registered with any auth ority, the limited liability partnership shall, as soon as practicable after 
the date of registration, take all necessary steps as required by the relevant authority to notify the authority 
of the conversion and of the particulars of the limited liability partnership in such medium and form as the 
authority may specify.  
9. Pending proceedings .—All proceedings by or against the firm which are pending in any Court or 
Tribunal or before any authority on the date of registration may be continued, completed and enforced by 
or against the  limited liability partnership.  
10.Continuance of convictio n, ruling, order or judgment .—Any conviction, ruling, order or 
judgment of any Court, Tribunal or other authority in favour of or against the firm may be enforced by or 
against the  limited liability partnership.  
11. Existing agreements .—Every agreement to which the firm was a party immediately before the 
date of registration, whether or not of such nature that the rights and liabilities thereunder could be 
assigned, shall  have effect as from that date as if — 
(a) the limited liability partnership were a party to such an agr eement instead of the firm; and  
(b) for any reference to the firm, there were substituted in respect of anything to be done on or 
after the date of regis tration a reference to the  limited liability partnership.  
12. Existing contracts, etc .—All deeds, contracts, schemes, bonds, agreements, applications, 
instruments and arrangements subsisting immediately before the date of registration relating to the firm or 
to which the firm is a party, shall continue in force on and after that date as if they relate to the limited 
liability partnership and shall be enforceable by or against the limited liability partnership as if the limited 
liability partnership were nam ed therein or were a par ty thereto instead of the firm.  
13. Continuance of employment .—Every contract of employment to which paragraph 11 or 
paragraph 12 applies shall continue to be in force on or after the date of registration as if the limited 
liability partnership were the employer thereunder instead of the firm.  
14. Existing app ointment , authority or power .—(1) Every appointment of the firm in any role or 
capacity which is in force immediately before the date of registration shall take effect and operate from 
that date as if the limited liabil ity partnership were appointed.  
(2) Any autho rity or power conferred on the firm which is in force immediately before the date of 
registration shall take effect and operate from that date as if it were conferred on the  limited liability 
partnership.  
15. Appli cation of paragraphs 7 to 14 .—The provisions of paragraphs 7 to 14 (both inclusive) shall 
apply to any approval, permit or licence issued to the firm under any other Act which is in force 
immediately before the date of registration of the limited liability partnership, subject to the provi sions of 
such other Act under which such approval, per mit or licence has been issued.  
16. Partner liable for liabilities and obligatio ns of firm before conversion .—(1) Notwithstanding 
anything in paragraphs 7 to 14 (both inclusive), every partner of a firm  that has converted into a limited 
liability partnership shall continue to be personally liable (jointly and severally with the limited liability 
partnership) for theliabilities and obligations of the firm which were incurred prior to the conversion or 
which arose from any contract entere d into prior to the conversion.  
(2) If any such partner discharges any liability or obligation referred to in sub -paragraph ( 1), he shall 
be entitled (subject to any agreement with the limited liability partnership to the c ontrary) to be fully 
indemnified by the limited liability partnership in respect of such l iability or obligation.  31 
 17. Notice of conversion in correspondence .—(1) The limited liability partnership shall ensure that 
for a period of twelve months commencing n ot later than fourteen days after the date of registration, every 
official correspondence of the limited liability p artnership bears the following:  
(a) a statement that it was, as from the date of registration, converted from a firm into a limited 
liability partnership; and  
(b) the name and registration number, if applicable, of the firm from  which it was converted.  
(2) Any limited liability partnership which contravenes the provisions of sub -paragraph ( 1) shall be 
punishable with fine which shall n ot be less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh 
rupees and with a further fine which shall not be less than fifty rupees but which may extend to five 
hundred rupees for every day after the first day after which the default continues.   32 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 56)  
CONVERSION FROM PRIVATE COMPANY INTO LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP  
1.Interpretation .—In this Schedule, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) "company" means a private company as defined in clause ( iii) of sub -section (1) of section 3 
of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) ; 
(b) "convert", in relation to a private company converting into a limited liability partnership, 
means a transfer of the property, assets, interests, rights, privileges, liabilities, obligations and the 
undertaking of the private company to the limited liability partnership in accordance with this 
Schedule.  
2. Eligibility for conversion of private companies into l imited liability partnership .—(1) A 
company may convert into a limited liability part nership by complying with the requirements as to the 
conversion set out in this Schedule.  
(2) A company may apply to convert into a limited liability partnership in accordance with this 
Schedule if and only if — 
(a) there is no security interest in its assets subsisting or in force at the time of application; and  
(b) the partners of the limited liability partnership to which it converts comprise all the 
shareholders of the company and no one else.  
(3) Upon such conversion, the company, its shareholders, the limited liability partnership into which 
the company has converted and the partners of that limited liability partnership shall be bound by the 
provisions of this Schedule that are applicable to them.  
3. Statements to be filed .—A company may apply to convert into a limited liability partnership by 
filing with the Registrar — 
(a) a statement by all its shareholders in such form and manner to be accompanied by such fees as 
the Central Government may prescribe, containing the  following particulars, namely: — 
(i) the name and regi stration number of the company;  
(ii) the date on which the company was incorporated; and  
(b) incorporation document and statement referred to in section 11.  
4. Registration of conversion .—On receiving the documents referred to in par agraph 3, the Registrar 
shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, register the documents and issue 
a certificate of registration in such form as the Registrar may determine stating that the limited liability 
partnership is , on and from the date specified in the certificate, registered under this Act:  
Provided that the limited liability partnership shall, within fifteen days of the date of registration, 
inform the concerned Registrar of Companies with which it was registered  under the provisions of the 
Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956)  about the conversion and of the particulars of the limited liability 
partnership in such form and manner as the Central Government may prescribe.  
5. Regi strar may refuse to register .—(1) Nothing in this Schedule shall be construed as to require 
the Registrar to register any limited liability partnership if he is not satisfied with the particulars or other 
information furnished under the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that an appeal may be made b efore the Tribunal in case of refusal of registration by the 
Registrar.  
(2) The Registrar may, in any particular case, require the documents referred to in paragraph 3 to be 
verified in such manner, as he considers fit.   33 
 6. Effect of registration .—On and f rom the date of registration specified in the certificate of 
regist ration issued under paragraph 4 — 
(a) there shall be a limited liability partnership by the name specified in the certificate of 
registration registered under this Act;  
(b) all tangible (mov able or immovable) and intangible property vested in the company, all assets, 
interests, rights, privileges, liabilities, obligations relating to the company and the whole of the 
undertaking of the company shall be transferred to and shall vest in the limi ted liability partnership 
without further assurance, act or deed; and  
(c) the company shall be deemed to be dissolved and removed from the records of the Registrar 
of Companies.  
7. Registra tion in relation to property .—If any property to which clause ( b) of paragraph 6 applies 
is registered with any authority, the limited liability partnership shall, as soon as practicable, after the date 
of registration, take all necessary steps as required by the relevant authority to notify the authority of the 
conversi on and of the particulars of the limited liability partnership in such form and manner as the 
authority may determine.  
8. Pending proceedings .—All proceedings by or against the company which are pending before any 
Court, Tribunal or other authority on the date of registration may be continued, completed and enforced 
by or against the limited liability partnership.  
9. Continuance of convict ion, ruling, order or judgment .—Any conviction, ruling, order or 
judgment of any Court, Tribunal or other authority in f avour of or against the company may be enforced 
by or against the limited liability partnership.  
10.Existing agreements .—Every agreement to which the company was a party immediately before 
the date of registration, wh ether or not of such nature that the rights and liabilities thereunder could be 
assigned, shall have effect as from that date as if— 
(a) the limited liability partnership were a party to such an agreement instead of the company; and  
(b) for any reference to the company, there were substitut ed in respect of anything to be done on 
or after the date of registration a reference to the limited liability partnership.  
11. Existing contracts, etc .—All deeds, contracts, schemes, bonds, agreements, applications, 
instruments and arrangements subsisting  immediately before the date of registration relating to the 
company or to which the company is a party shall continue in force on and after that date as if they relate 
to the limited liability partnership and shall be enforceable by or against the limited  liability partnership as 
if the limited liability partnership were named therein or were a party thereto instead of the company.  
12. Continuance of employment .—Every contract of employment to which paragraph 10 or 
paragraph 11 applies shall continue in fo rce on or after the date of registration as if the limited liability 
partnership were the employer thereunder instead of the company.  
13. Existing app ointment, authority or power .—(1) Every appointment of the company in any role 
or capacity which is in force immediately before the date of registration shall take effect and operate from 
that date as if the limited liability partnership were appointed.  
(2) Any authority or power conferred on the company which is in force immediately before the date 
of regi stration shall take effect and operate from that date as if it were conferred on the limited liability 
partnership.  
14. Appli cation of paragraphs 6 to 13 .—The provisions of paragraphs 6 to 13 (both inclusive) shall 
apply to any approval, permit or licence issued to the company under any other Act which is in force 
immediately before the date of registration of the limited liability partnership, subject to the provisions of 
such other Act under which such approval, permit or licence has been issued.  34 
 15. Notice of  conversion in correspondence .—(1) The limited liability partnership shall ensure that 
for a period of twelve months commencing not later than fourteen days after the date of registration, every 
official correspondence of the limited liability partnersh ip bears the following, namely: — 
(a) a statement that it was, as from the date of registration, converted from a company into a 
limited liability partnership; and  
(b) the name and registration number of the company from which it was converted.  
(2) Any limited liability partnership which contravenes the provisions of sub -paragraph ( 1) shall be 
punishable with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh 
rupees and with a further fine which shall not be less than fifty rupees but which may extend to five 
hundred rupees for every day after the first day after which the default continues.   35 
 THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 57)  
CONVERSION FROM UNLISTED PUBLIC COMPANY INTO LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP  
1. Interpret ation .—(1) In this Schedule, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) "company" me ans an unlisted public company;  
(b) "convert", in relation to a company converting into a limited liability partnership, means a 
transfer of the property, assets, interests, rights, privileges, liabilities, obligations and the undertaking 
of the company to the limited liability partnership in accordance with the provisions of this Schedule;  
(c) "listed company" means a listed company as defined in the Securities Exc hange Board of 
India (Disclosure and Investor Protection) Guidelines, 2000 issued by the Securities and Exchange 
Board of India under section 11 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992  (15 of 
1992) ; 
(d) "unlisted public company" means a com pany which is not a listed company.  
2. Conversion of company into a l imited liability partnership .—(1) A company may convert into a 
limited liability partnership by complying with the requirements as to the conve rsion set out in this 
Schedule.  
(2) Upon such conversion, the company, its shareholders, the limited liability partnership into which 
the company has converted and the partners of that limited liability partnership shall be bound by the 
provisions of this Schedu le that are applicable to them.  
3. Eligibility for conversion .—A company may apply to convert into a limited liability partnership 
in accordance with the provisions of this Schedule if and only if — 
(a) there is no security interest in its assets subsisting or in force at the time of application; and  
(b) the partners of the limited liability partnership to which it converts comprise all the 
shareholders of the company and no one else.  
4. Statements to be filed .—A company may apply to convert into a limited liability partnersh ip by 
filing with the Registrar — 
(a) a statement by all its shareholders in such form and manner to be accompanied by such fee as the 
Central Government may prescribe containing the  following particulars, namely: — 
(i) the name and regi stration number of the company;  
(ii) the date on which the company was incorporated; and  
(b) incorporation document and state ment referred to in section 11.  
5. Registration of conversion .—On receiving the documents referred to in paragraph 4, the Registrar 
shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, and the rules made thereunder, register the documents and 
issue a certificate of registration in such form as the Registrar may determine stating that the  limited 
liability partnership is, on and from the date specified in the certificate, registered under this Act:  
 Provided that the limited liability partnership shall, within fifteen days of the date of registration, 
inform the concerned Registrar of Comp anies with which it was registered under the provisions of the 
Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) about the conversion and of the particulars of the limited liability 
partnership in such form and manner as the Ce ntral Government may prescribe.  
6. Regi strar ma y refuse to register .—(1) Nothing in this Schedule shall be construed as to require 
the Registrar to register any limited liability partnership if he is not satisfied with the particulars or other 
information furnished under the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that an appeal may be made before the Tribunal in case of refusal of registration by the 
Registrar.  36 
 (2) The Registrar may, in any particular case, require the documents referred to in paragraph 4 to be 
verified in su ch manner, as he considers fit.  
7. Effect of registration .—On and from the date of registration specified in the certificate of 
regist ration issued under paragraph 5 — 
(a) there shall be a limited liability partnership by the name specified in the certificate of 
registra tion registered under this Act;  
(b) all tangible (movable or immovable) and intangible property vested in the company, all assets, 
interests, rights, privileges, liabilities, obligations relating to the company and the whole of the 
undertaking of the company shall be transferred to and shall vest in the limited liability partnership 
without furt her assurance, act or deed; and  
(c) the company shall be deemed to be dissolved and removed from the records  of the Registrar 
of Companies.  
8. Registra tion in relation to proper ty.—If any property to which clause ( b) of paragraph 7 applies 
is registered with any authority, the limited liability partnership shall, as soon as practicable, after the date 
of registration, take all necessary steps as required by the relevant authority  to notify the authority of the 
conversion and of the particulars of the limited liability partnership in such form and manner as the 
authority may determine.  
9. Pending proceedings .—All proceedings by or against the company which are pending in any 
Court or Tribunal or before an authority on the date of registration may be continued, completed and 
enforced by or against the  limited liability partnership.  
10. Continuance of conviction , ruling, order or judgment .—Any conviction, ruling, order or 
judgment of any Court, Tribunal or other authority in favour of or against the company may be enforced 
by or against the limited liability partnership.  
11. Existing agreem ents.—Every agreement to which the company was a party immediately before 
the date of registratio n, whether or not of such nature that the rights and liabilities thereunder could be 
assigned, shall have effect as from that date as if — 
(a) the limited liability partnership were a party to such an agreement instead of the company; and  
(b) for any refere nce to the company, there were substituted in respect of anything to be done on 
or after the date of registration a reference to the limited liability partners hip. 
12. Existing contracts, etc .—All deeds, contracts, schemes, bonds, agreements, applications, 
instruments and arrangements subsisting immediately before the date of registration relating to the 
company or to which the company is a party shall continue in force on and after that date as  if they relate 
to the limited liability partnership and shall be enforceable by or against the limited liability partnership as 
if the limited liability partnership were named therein or were a party thereto instead of the company.  
13. Continuance of empl oyment .—Every contract of employment to which paragraph 11 or 
paragraph 12 applies shall continue in force on or after the date of registration as if the limited liability 
partnership were the employer thereunder inste ad of the company.  
14. Existing ap poin tment, authority or power .—(1) Every appointment of the company in any role 
or capacity which is in force immediately before the date of registration shall take effect and operate from 
that date as if the limited liabil ity partnership were appointed.  
(2) Any authority or power conferred on the company which is in force immediately before the date 
of registration shall take effect and operate from that date as if it were conferred on the  limited liability 
partnership.  
15. Appli cation of paragraphs 7 to 14 .—The provisions of paragraphs 7 to 14 (both inclusive) shall 
apply to any approval, permit or licence issued to the company under any other Act which is in force 
immediately before the date of registration of the limited liability partnership, subject to th e provisions of 
such other Act under which such approval, per mit or licence has been issued.  37 
 16. Notice of conversion in correspondence .—(1) The limited liability partnership shall ensure that 
for a period of twelve months commencing not later than fourtee n days after the date of registration, every 
official correspondence of the limited liability partnersh ip bears the following, namely: — 
(a) a statement that it was, as from the date of registration, converted from a company into a 
limited liability partnership; and  
(b) the name and registration number of the compa ny from which it was converted.  
(2) Any limited liability partnership which contravenes the provisions of sub -paragraph ( 1) shall be 
punishable with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh 
rupees and with a further fine which shall not be less than fifty rupees but which may extend to five 
hundred rupees for every day after the first day after which the default continues . 
___________ _______  
 
--------------------------The National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act, 2009--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI LAWS (SPECIAL PROVISIONS)  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and duration . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Enforcement to be kept in abeyance . 
4. Provisions of this Act not to apply in certain cases . 
5. Power of Central Government to give directions.  
6. Validation of acts done or omitted to be done, etc., during 1st January, 2009 up to the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
  2 
 THE NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI LAWS (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) 
ACT , 2009  
ACT NO. 24 OF 2009  
 [16th March,  2009.]  
An Act to make special provisions for the National Capital Territory of Delhi for a further period 
up to the 31st day of December, 2009 and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto.  
WHEREAS  there had been phenomenal increase in the population of the National Capital Territory of 
Delhi owing to migration and other factors resulting in tremendous pressure on land and infrastructure 
leading to encroachment or unauthorised developments which are  not in consonance with the concept of 
planned development as provided in the Master Plan of Delhi, 2001 and the relevant Acts and building 
bye-laws made thereunder;  
AND WHEREAS  the Master Plan of Delhi, 2001 was extensively modified and notified by the Central 
Government on the 7th day of February, 2007 with the perspective for the year 2021 keeping in view the 
emerging new dimensions in urban development vis-a-vis the social, f inancial and other ground realities;  
AND WHEREAS  the Master Plan of Delhi with the perspective for the year 2021 specifically provides 
for strategies for housing for urban poor as well as to deal with the informal sector;  
AND WHEREAS  a strategy and a schem e has been prepared by the local authorities in the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi for regulation of urban street vendors in accordance with the National Policy 
for Urban Street Vendors and the Master Plan for Delhi, 2021;  
AND WHEREAS  based on the pol icy finalised by the Central Government regarding regularisation of 
unauthorised colonies, village abadi  area and its extension, the guidelines and regulations for this purpose 
have been issued;  
AND WHEREAS  more time is required for orderly implementation of scheme regarding hawkers and 
urban street vendors and for regularisation of unauthorised colonies, village abadi  area and its extension;  
AND WHEREAS  the revised policy and orderly arrangements for relocation and rehabilitation of slum 
dwellers and Jhuggi -Jhompri  clusters in the National Capital Territory of Delhi is under consideration of 
the Government;  
AND WHEREAS  policy regarding existing farm houses involving construction beyond permissible 
building limits, schools, dispensaries, religious insti tutions and cultural institutions and storages, 
warehouses and godowns used for agricultural inputs or produce (including dairy and poultry) in rural 
areas built on agricultural land is under consideration of the Central Government;  
AND WHEREAS  the Nationa l Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act, 2007  
(43 of 2007) was enacted on the 5th day of December, 2007 to make special provisions for the areas of 
National Capital Territory of Delhi for a period up to the 31st day of December,  2008 and h as ceased to 
operate after the 31st day of December, 2008;  
AND WHEREAS  it is expedient to have a law in terms of the Master Plan of Delhi,2021, in 
continuation of the said Act for a period up to the 31st day of December, 2009 to provide temporary relief 
and to minimise avoidable hardships and irreparable loss to the people of the National Capital Territory of 
Delhi against any action by the concerned agency in respect of persons covered by the policies referred to 
above.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the S ixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:– 
1. Short title, exten t, commencement and duration. –(1) This Act may be called the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act, 2009.  
  3 
 (2) It extends to the National Capital Territory  of Delhi.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of January, 2009.  
(4) It shall cease to have effect on the 31st day of December, 2009, except as respects things done or 
omitted to be done before such cesser, and upon such cesser  section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, 
(10 of 1897) shall apply as if this Act had then been repealed by a Central Act.  
2. Definitions. –(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, – 
(a) “building bye -laws” means bye -laws made under section  481 of the Delhi Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1957 (66 of 1957) or the bye -laws made under section 188, sub -section ( 3) of 
section 189 and sub -section ( 1) of section 190 of  the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911( Punjab Act 3 of 
1911)  as in force in New Delhi or the regulations made under sub -section ( 1) of section 57 of the 
Delhi Development Act, 1957 (61 of 1957) , relating to buildings;  
(b) “Delhi” means the entire area of the National Capital Territory of Delhi except the Delhi 
Cantonment as defined in clause ( 11) of section 2 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 (66 of 
1957) ; 
(c) “encroachment ” means unauthorised occupation of Government la nd or public land by way of 
putting temporary, semi -permanent or permanent structure for residential use or commercial use or 
any other use;  
(d) “local authority ” means the Delhi Municipal Corporation established under the Delhi 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1957(66 of 1957) , or the New Delhi Municipal Council established under 
the New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994 (44 of 1994 ) or the Delhi Development Authority 
established under the Delhi Development Act , 1957  (61 of 1957), legally entitled to exercise control 
in respect of the areas under their respective jurisdiction;  
(e) “Master Plan ” means the Master Plan for Delhi with the perspective for the year 2021, 
notified vide notification number S.O.141(E), dated the 7th February, 2007, under the Delhi 
Devel opment Act, 1957  (61 of 1957) ; 
(f) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(g) “punitive action ” means action taken by a local authority under the relevant law against 
unauthorised  development and shall include demolition, sealing of  premises and displacement of 
persons or their business establishment from their existing location, whether in pursuance of court 
orders or otherwise;  
(h) “relevant law ” means in case of – 
(i) the Delhi D evelopment Authority, the Delhi Development Act, 1957  (61 of 1957) ; 
(ii) the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957                   
(66 of 1957) ; and  
(iii) the  New Delhi Municipal Council, the New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994               
(44 of 1994) ; 
(i) “unauthorised development ” means use of land or use of building or construction of building 
or development of colonies carried out in contravention of the sanctioned plans or without obtaining 
the sanction of plans, or in contravention of the land use as permitted under the Master Plan or Zonal 
Plan or layout plan, as the case may be, and includes any encroachment.  
(2) Words and expressions used but not defined herein shall have the meanings respectively assigned 
to them in the Delhi Development Act, 1957  (61 of 1957) , the Delhi Mun icipal Corporation Act, 1957   
(66 of 1957) and the New Delhi Municipal Council Act,  1994  (44 of 1994) . 
3. Enforcement to be kept in abeyance. –(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any relevant law 
or any rules, regulations or bye -laws made thereunder, the Central Government shall before the expiry of 
this Act, take all possible measures to finalise norms, policy guidelines, feasible strategies a nd make 
orderly arrangements to deal with the problem of encroachment or unauthorised development in the form 
of encroachment by slum dwellers and Jhuggi -Jhompri  clusters, hawkers and urban street vendors, 4 
 unauthorised colonies, village abadi  area (includi ng urban villages) and its extension, existing farm 
houses involving construction beyond permissible building limits and schools, dispensaries, religious 
institutions, cultural institutions, storages, warehouses and godowns used for agricultural inputs or 
produce (including dairy and poultry) in rural areas built on agricultural land, as mentioned below:  
(a) policy for relocation and rehabilitation of slum dwellers and Jhuggi -Jhompri  clusters in 
accordance with the provisions of the Master Plan of Delhi, 20 21 to ensure development of Delhi in a 
sustainable, planned and humane manner;  
(b) scheme and orderly arrangements for regulation of urban street vendors in consonance with 
the national policy for urban street vendors and hawkers as provided in the Master Plan of Delhi, 
2021;  
(c) orderly arrangements pursuant to guidelines and regulations for regularisation of unauthorised 
colonies, village abadi area (including urban villages) and its extension, as existed on the 31st day of 
March, 2002, and where construction took place even beyond that date and up to the 8th day of 
February, 2007;  
(d) policy regarding existing farm houses involving construction beyo nd permissible building 
limits; and  
(e) policy regarding schools, dispensaries, religious institutions, cultural institutions, storages, 
warehouses and godowns used for agricultural inputs or produce (including dairy and poultry) in rural 
areas built on ag ricultural land.  
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1) and notwithstanding any judgment, decree 
or order of any court, status quo – 
(i) as on the 1st day of January, 2006, in respect of encroachment o r unauthorised development; 
and 
(ii) in respect of unauthorised colonies, village abadi  area (including urban villages) and its 
extension, which existed on the 31st day of March, 2002 and where construction took place even 
beyond that date and up to the 8th day of February, 2007, mentioned in sub -section ( 1), 
shall be maintained.  
(3)All notices issued by any local authority for initiating action against encroachment or unauthorised 
development referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall be deemed to have been suspended and no punitive 
action shall  be taken till the 31st day of December, 2009.  
(4) Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this Act, the Central Government may, at any 
time before the 31st day of December, 2009, withdraw the exemption by notification in respect of 
encroachment or unauthorised development mentioned in sub -sectio n (2) or sub -section ( 3), as the case 
may be.  
4. Provisions of this Act not to apply in certain cases. –During the period of operation of this Act, 
no relief shall be available under the provisions of section 3 in respect of the following encroachment or 
unauthorised development, namely: – 
(a) encroachment on public land except in those cases which are covered under clauses ( a),(b) 
and ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3; 
(b) removal of slums and Jhuggi -Jhompri  dwellers, hawkers and urban street vendors, 
unauthorised colonies or part thereof, village abadi area (including urban villages) and its extension in 
accordance with the relevant policies approved by the Central Government for clearance of land 
required for specific public projects.  
5. Power of Centr al Government to give directions. –The Central Government may, from time to 
time, issue such directions to the local authorities as it may deem fit, for giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act and it shall be the duty of the local authorities, to comply  with such directions.  
  5 
 6.Validation of acts done or omitted to be done, etc., during 1st January, 2009 up to the date of 
commencement of this Act. –Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, all things 
done, or, omitted to be done, and al l action taken, or, not taken, during the period beginning on or after 
the 1st day of January, 2009 and ending immediately before the date of commencement of this Act, shall, 
in so far as they are in conformity with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to  have been done, or, 
omitted to be done, or, taken, or, not taken, under these provisions as if such provisions were in force at 
the time such things were done or omitted to be done and action taken or not taken during the aforesaid 
period.  
________  
--------------------------The National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Second Act, 2009--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI LAWS  
(SPECIAL PROVISIONS) SECOND ACT, 2009  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and duration . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Enforcement to be kept in abeyance . 
4. Provisions of this Act not to apply in certain cases . 
5. Power of Central Government to give directions .  
 
  2 
 THE NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI LAWS  
(SPECIAL PROVISIONS) SECOND ACT, 2009  
ACT NO. 40 OF 2009  
[22nd December , 2009 .] 
An Act to make special provisions for the National Capital Territory of Delhi for a further period  
up to the 31st day of December, 2010 and for matters connected therewith or incidental  
thereto.  
WHEREAS  there had been phenomenal increase in the population of the National Capital  Territory of 
Delhi owing to migration and other factors resulting in tremendous pressure on land  and infrastructure 
leading to encroachment or unauthorised developments which are  not in consonance with the concept of 
planned development as provided in the  Master Plan  for Delhi, 2001 and the relevant Acts and building 
bye-laws made thereunder;  
AND WHEREAS the Master Plan of Delhi, 2001 was extensively modified and notified by  the Central 
Government on the 7th day of February, 2007 with the perspective for the year2021 keeping in view the 
emerging new dimensions in urban  development vis-a-vis the social, financial and other ground realities;  
AND WHEREAS  the Master Plan of Delhi with the perspective for the year 2021specifically provides 
for strategies for ho using for urban poor as well as to deal with thein  formal sector;  
AND WHEREAS  a strategy and a scheme has been prepared by the local authorities in the  National 
Capital Territory of Delhi for regulation of urban street vendors in accordance with  the National Policy 
for Urban Street Vendors and the Master Plan for Delhi, 2021, and is  being implemented;  
AND WHEREAS  based on the policy finalised by the Central Government regarding  regularisation of 
unauthorised colonies, village a badi area and its exten sion, the guidelines  and regulations for this 
purpose have been issued;  
AND WHEREAS  in pursuance of the guidelines and regulations  for regularisation of unauthorised 
colonies , necessary steps are  being taken which, inter alia , involve scrutiny of  layout pl ans, assessment of 
built up percentage existed as on the 31st day of March, 2002,  identification of mixed use of streets,  
approval of layout plans, fixation of boundaries, change  of land use and identification of colonies not 
eligible for regularisation;  
AND WHEREAS  more time is required for orderly implementation of scheme regarding  hawkers and 
urban street ve ndors and for regularisation of unauthorised colonies, village  abadi area and its  extension;  
AND WHEREAS  the revised policy and orderly arrangements for relocation and  rehabilitation of slum 
dwellers and Jhuggi -Jhompri clusters in the National Capital Territory  of Delhi has been  considered and a 
Bill, namely, the Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board  Bill, 2009 has been prepared by the 
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi  to provide for implementation of schemes for  
improvement of Jhuggi -Jhompri clusters and its redevelopment with a view to bring improvement in 
environment and living cond itions, and preparing housing scheme for resettlement of persons;  
AND WHEREAS  the draft policy regarding farm houses has been formulated by the Delhi Development 
Authority and has been forwarded to major stakeholders for their views and comments;  
AND WHEREAS  in pursuance of the M aster Plan for Delhi, 2021, the policy or plan regarding schools, 
dispensaries, religious institu tions , cultural institutions, storages, warehouses and go  downs used for 
agricultural inputs or produce (including dairy and poult ry) in rural areas built on agricultural land is 
under consideration of the Central Government;  
  3 
 AND WHEREAS  the National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act,  2007  
(43 of 2007)  was enacted on the 5th day of December, 2007 to make spe cial provisions for the areas  of 
National Capital Territory of Delhi for a period up to the 31st day of December, 2008which ceased to 
operate after the 31st December, 2008;  
AND WHEREAS  the National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act,  2009  
(24 of 2009) was enacted in continuation of the aforesaid Act  referred to in the preceding paragraph for a 
period up to the 31st day of  December, 2009 to make special provisions for the areas of the National 
Capital Territory of  Delhi and that Act ce ased to operate after the 31st day of December, 2009;  
AND WHEREAS  it is expedient to have a law in terms of the Master Plan for Delhi, 2021,  in 
continuation of the said Act for a period up t o the 31st day of December, 2010  to provide  for temporary 
relief a nd to minimise avoidable hardships and irreparable loss to the people of  the National Capital 
Territory of Delhi against any action by the concerned agency in respect  of persons covered by the 
policies referred to above.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent, commencement  and duration .—(1) This Act may be called the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special  Provisions)  Second Act, 2009 . 
(2) It extends to the National Capital Territory of Delhi.  
(3) It shall come into force on the 1st day of January, 2010 . 
(4) It shall cease to have effect o n the 31st day of December, 2010 , except as respects  things done or 
omitted to be done before such cesser, and upon such cesser  section 6 of the  General Clauses Act, 1897  
(10 of 1897) , shall apply as if this Act had then been repealed by a Central Act.  
2. Definitions. —(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “building bye -laws” means bye -laws made under section  481 of the Delhi  Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1957  (66 of 1957 ) or the bye -laws made under section 188, sub -section  (3) of 
section 189 and sub -section ( 1) of section 190 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911  (Punjab Act 3of 
1911 ), as in force in New Delhi or th e regulations made under sub -section ( 1) of section 57 of  the 
Delhi Development Act, 1957  (61 of 1957 ) relating to buildings;  
(b) “Delhi” means the entire area of the National Capital Territory of Delhi except  the Delhi 
Cantonment as defined in clause ( 11) of section 2 of the Delhi Municipal  Corporation Act, 1957               
(66 of 1957) ; 
(c) “encroachment” means unauthorised occupation of Government land or  public land by way of 
putting  temporary, semi -permanent or permanent structure for  residential use or commercial use or 
any other use;  
(d) “local authority” means the Delhi Municipal Corporation established under  the Delhi 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 ( 66 of 1957) , or the New Delhi Municipal Council  established 
under the New Delhi Municipal Council A ct, 1994  (44 of 1994)  or the Delhi Development  Authority 
established under the Delhi Development Act, 1957 (61 of 1957) , legally entitled to  exercise control 
in respect of the areas under their respective jurisdiction;  
(e) “Master Plan” means the Master Plan for Delhi with the perspective for the  year 2021, 
notified vide notification number S.O.141(E), dated the 7th day of February,  2007 , under  the Delhi 
Development Act, 1957 (61 of 1957) ; 
(f) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(g) “punitive action” means action taken by a local authority under the relevant  law against 
unauthorised development and shall include demolition, sealing of premises  and displacement of 
persons or their business establishment from their existing  location,  whether in pursuance of court 
orders or  otherwise;   4 
 (h) “relevant law” means in case of — 
(i) the Delhi Development Authority, the Delhi Development Act, 1957  (61 of 1957) ; 
(ii) the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, the Delhi Municipal Corporation  Act, 1957  
(66 of 1957) ; and  
(iii) the New Delhi Municipal Council, the New Delhi Municipal Council  Act, 1994  
(44 of 1994) ; 
(i) “unauthorised development” means use of land or use of building or  construction of building 
or development of colonies carried ou t in contravention of  the sanctioned plans or without obtaining 
the sanction of plans, or in contravention of  the land use as permitted under the Master Plan or Zonal 
Plan or layout plan, as the  case may be, and includes any encroachment.  
(2) Words and exp ressions used but not defined herein shall have the meanings  respectively assigned 
to them in the Delhi Development Act, 1957 (61 of 1957) the Delhi Municipal  Corporation Act, 1957  
(66 of 1957) and the New De lhi Municipal Council Act, 1994  (44 of 1994).  
3.Enforcement to be kept in abeyance .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any relevant 
law or any rules, regulations  or bye -laws made thereunder, the Central Government shall before the 
expiry of this Act, take  all possible measures to finalise norms, policy guidelines, feasible strategies and 
make orderly  arrangements to deal with the problem of encroachment or unauthorised development in the  
form of encroachment by slum dwellers and Jhuggi -Jhompri clusters, hawkers and urban  street vendors, 
unauthoris ed colonies, village abadi area (including urban villages) and its  extension, existing farm 
houses involving construction beyond permissible building limits  and schools, dispensaries, religious 
institutions, cultural institutions, storages, warehouses  and go downs used for agricultural inputs or 
produce (including dairy and poultry) in rural  areas built on agricultural land, as mentioned below:  
(a) policy for relocation and rehabilitation of slum dwellers and  Jhuggi -Jhompri clusters in 
accordance with the  provisions of the Master Plan  of Delhi, 2021 to ensure development  of Delhi in a 
sustainable, planned and humane manner;  
(b) scheme and orderly arrangements for regulation of urban street vendors inconsonance with the 
national policy for urban street vendor s and hawkers as provided  in the Master Plan of Delhi, 2021;  
(c) orderly arrangements pursuant to guidelines and regulations for regularization of unauthorised 
colonies, village abadi area (including urban villages) and its extension,  as existed on the 31st day of 
March, 2002, and where construction took place even  beyond that date and up to the 8th day of 
February, 2007;  
(d) policy regarding existing farm houses involving construction beyond  permissible building 
limits; and  
(e) policy or plan regarding schools, dispensaries,  religious institutions, cultural institutions, 
storages, warehouses and go  downs used  for agricultural inputs or produce (including dairy and 
poultry) in rural areas built on  agricultural land.  
(2) Subject to the provisions contained  in sub -section ( 1) and notwithstanding any  judgment, decree 
or order of any court, status quo — 
(i) as on the 1st day of January, 2006 in respect of encroachment or unauthorised  development; 
and 
(ii) in respect of unauthorised colonies, village a badi area (including urban  villages) and its 
extension, which existed on the 31st day of March, 2002 and where  construction took place even 
beyond that date and up to the 8th day of February, 2007,  mentioned in sub -section ( 1), 
shall be maintained.  
(3) All notices issued by any local authority for initiating action against encroachment  or 
unauthorised development referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall be deemed to have been  suspended and no 
punitive action shall be taken til l the 31st day of December, 2010 . 5 
 (4) Notwi thstanding any other provision contained in this Act, the Central Government  may, at any 
time befor e the 31st day of December, 2010 , withdraw the exemption by notification  in respect of 
encroachment or unauthorised development mentioned in sub -section ( 2) or sub-section ( 3), as the case 
may be.  
4. Provisions of this Act not to apply in certain cases .—During the period of operation of this Act, 
no relief shall be available under the  provisions of section 3 in respect of the following encroachment or 
unauthorised development,  namely: — 
(a) encroachment on public land except in those cases which are covered under  clauses ( a), (b) 
and ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3;  
(b) removal of slums and Jhuggi -Jhompri dwellers, hawkers and urban street  vendors, 
unauthorised colonies or part thereof, village  a badi area (including urban  villages) and its extension 
in accordance with the relevant policies approved by the  Central Government for clearance of land 
required for specific public projects.  
5. Power of Cen tral Government to give directions. —The Central Government may, from time to 
time, issue such directions to the local  authorities as it may deem fit, for giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act and it shall be the  duty of the local authorities, to comp ly with such directions.  
--------------------------The National Jute Board Act, 2008--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL JUTE BOARD ACT, 2008  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
 
CHAPTER II  
THE NATIONAL JUTE BOARD  
 
3. Constitution and incorporation of Board.  
4. Secretary and other officers . 
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS OF THE BOARD  
 
5. Functions of Board.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROPERTY AND CONTRACT  
 
6. The Council and Society to v est in Board . 
7. General effect of vesting  of Council and Society in Board . 
8. Licences, etc. , to be deemed to have been granted to Board.  
9. Tax exemption or benefits to continue have  effect.  
10. Guarantee to be operative.  
11. Provisions in respect of officers and other employees of Council and Society . 
CHAPTER V  
POWERS OF THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  
 
12. Directions by Central Government.  
13. Supersession of Board . 
CHAPTER VI  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
14. Grants and loans by Central Government.  
15. Budget.  
16. Annual report.  
  2 
 SECTIONS  
 
17. Accounts and audit.  
18. Laying of annual and auditor’s report before Parliament.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
19. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
20. Officers and employees of Board to be public servant s. 
21. Power to make rules.  
22. Power to make regulations.  
23. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
24. Power to remove difficulties.  
25. Amendment of Act 28 of 1983.  
26. Repeal and savings.  
  3 
 THE NATIONAL JUTE BOARD ACT, 2008  
ACT NO. 12 OF 2009  
[12th February  2009 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of a National Jute Board for the development of the 
cultivation, manufacture and marketing of jute and jute  products and for matters connected 
therewith and incidental thereto . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -ninth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the National Jute Board Act, 
2008.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requir es,— 
(a) “appointed day ” means such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint for the purpose of section 3;  
(b) “Board ” means the National Jute Board constituted under section 3;  
(c) “Chairperson ” means the Chairperson of the Board;  
(d) “Council ” means the Jute Manufactures Development Council established under section 3 of 
the Jute Manufactures Development Council Act, 1983  (27 of 1983);  
(e) “Jute” means the plants of jute, kenaf and mesta;  
(f) “jute manufacture ” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the Jute Manufactures 
Cess Act, 1983(28 of 1983);  
(g) “member ” means a member of the Board and includes the Chairperson;  
(h) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(i) “regulations ” means regulations made by the Board under this Act;  
(j) “Society ” means the National Centre for Jute Diversification, a society set up by the Central 
Government in the Ministry of Textiles and registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860                        
(21 of 1860);  
(k) “year” means the year commencing on the 1st day of April and ending on the 31st day of 
March next following.  
CHAPTER II  
THE NATIONAL JUTE BOARD  
3. Constitution and incorporation of Board .—(1) With effect from the appointed day, the Central 
Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute, for the purposes of this Act, a Board 
to be called the National Jute Board.  
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetua l succession and a 
common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to 
contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) The head office of the Board shall be at Kolkata in the State of West Bengal o r such other place as 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify and the Board may, with the 4 
 previous approval of the Central Government, establish offices or agencies at other places in or outside 
India.  
(4) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Secretary in charge of the ministry of the Central Government dealing with textiles, who 
shall be the ex officio  Chairperson of the Board;  
(b) three Members of Parliament of whom two shall be elected from among themselves by the 
members of the House of the People and one from among themselves by the members of the Council 
of States;  
(c) the Additional Secretary and Financial Adviser, Ministry of Textiles, Government of India,           
ex officio;  
(d) the Joint Secretary (Jute) in the Ministry of Textiles, Government of India, ex officio ; 
(e) two members of the rank of Joint Secretary to be nominated by the Central Government to 
represent respectively the ministries of the Ce ntral Government dealing with — 
(i) agriculture, and  
(ii) food and public distribution;  
(f) three members to be nominated by the Central Government by rotation in the alphabetical 
order to represent respectively the Governments of the States of Andhra Pradesh, As sam, Bihar, 
Meghalaya, Orissa, Tripura and West Bengal; the nomination shall be from officials of the State 
Government holding the rank of Secretary to the State Government and dealing with Jute or Textile 
matters;  
(g) three members of jute farmers of whic h one from State of West Bengal and two from other 
States on rotational basis to be nominated by the Central Government;  
(h) three members of jute workers of which one from State of West Bengal and two from other 
States nominated by the Central Government on rotational basis;  
(i) two experts from the field of jute technology and related field to be nominated by the Central 
Government;  
(j) two members from the “micro enterprises ”, “small enterprises ” and “medium enterprises ” 
dealing in jute industry to be no minated by the Central Government.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of this clause, the expressions “medium enterprise ”, “micro 
enterprise ” and “small enterprise ” shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in clause ( g), 
clause ( h) and clause ( m) of section 2 of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 
2006  (27 of 2006);  
(k) two members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the jute industry in the 
organised sector;  
(l) two members to be appointed by the Central Gover nment to represent the jute industry in the 
decentralised sector;  
(m) two members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the exporters of jute 
products;  
(n) the Director, Indian Jute Industries Research Association, ex officio ; 
(o) the Principal, Institute of Jute Technology, ex officio ; 
(p) the Director, National Institute of Research on Jute and Allied Fibre Technology, Kolkata,               
ex officio;  
(q) the Director, Central Research Institute for Jute and Allied Fibres, ex officio ; 
(r) the Chairman and Managing Director, Jute Corporation of India, ex officio ; 5 
 (s) the Jute Commissioner, ex officio ; 
(t) the Secretary, National Jute Board, who shall be the ex officio  Member -Secretary of the Board.  
(5) The term of office of the members, other than the ex officio  members, and the manner of filling 
vacancies among, and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions by, such members 
shall be as may be prescribed.  
(6) The office of members of the Board shall not disqualify its holder for being chosen as, or for 
being a member of either House of Parliament.  
(7) The Chairperson shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of the Board, exercise and 
discharge such powers and duties  of the Board as may be assigned to him by the Board and such other 
powers and duties as may be prescribed.  
(8) The Board shall elect from among its members a Vice -Chairperson who shall exercise such of the 
powers and perform such of the functions of the C hairperson as may be prescribed or as may be delegated 
to him by the Chairperson.  
(9) The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such procedure in regard to the 
transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at meetings)  as may be determined by 
regulations.  
4. Secretary and other officers .—(1) The Central Government may appoint the Secretary and such 
other officers and employees as it considers necessary, for the efficient discharge of the functions of the 
Board under this Act.  
(2) The terms and conditions of service of the Secretary and other officers and employees of the 
Board shall be such as may be determined by regulations.  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS OF THE BOARD  
5. Functions of Board .—(1) It shall be the duty of the Board to promote the development of jute and 
jute products by such measures as it thinks fit.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the B oard may undertake measures 
to— 
(i) evolve an integrated approach to jute cultivation in the matters of formulation of schemes, 
extension work, implementation and evaluation of schemes aimed at increasing the yield of jute and 
improving the quality thereon;  
(ii) promote production of better quality raw jute;  
(iii) enhance productivity of raw jute; 
(iv) promote or undertake arrangements for better marketing and stabilisation of the prices of raw 
jute; 
(v) promote standardisation of raw jute and jute products;  
(vi) suggest norms of efficiency for jute industry with a view to eliminating waste, o btaining 
optimum production, improving quality and reducing costs;  
(vii) propagate information useful to the growers of raw jute and manufacturers of jute products;  
(viii) promote and undertake measures for quality control of raw jute and jute products;  
(ix) assist and encourage studies and research for improvement of processing, quality, techniques 
of grading and packaging of raw jute;  
(x) promote or undertake surveys or studies aimed at collection and formulation of statistics 
regarding raw jute and jute  products;  
  6 
 (xi) promote standardisation of jute manufactures;  
(xii) promote the development of production of jute manufactures by increasing the efficiency 
and productivity of the jute industry;  
(xiii) sponsor, assist, coordinate, encourage or undertake scientific, technological, economic and 
marketing research pertaining to the jute sector;  
(xiv) maintain and improve existing markets and to develop new markets within the country and 
outside for jute manufactures and to devise marketing strategies in cons onance with the demand for 
such manufactures in the domestic and international markets;  
(xv) sponsor, assist, coordinate or encourage scientific, technological and economic research in 
the matters related to materials, equipment, methods of production, pro duct development including 
discovery and development of new materials, equipment and methods and improvements in those 
already in use in the jute industry;  
(xvi) provide and create necessary infrastructural facilities and conditions conducive to the 
development of diversified jute products by way of assisting the entrepreneurs, artisans, craftsman, 
designers, manufacturers, exporters, non -Governmental agencies in  the following manner, namely: — 
(a) transfer of technology from research and development i nstitutions and other 
organisations in India and abroad;  
(b) providing support services to the entrepreneurs for the implementation of their 
projects including technical guidance and training;  
(c) organising  entrepreneurial development programmes;  
(d) plan ning and executing market promotion strategies including exhibitions, 
demonstrations, media campaigns in India and abroad;  
(e) providing financial assistance by way of subsidy or seed capital;  
(f) providing a forum to the people engaged or interested in di versified jute products for 
interacting with various national and international agencies, engaged in the jute and jute 
textile sector;  
(xvii) organise  workshops, conferences, lectures, seminars, refresher courses and set up study 
groups and conduct training programmes for the purpose of promotion and development of jute and 
jute products;  
(xviii) undertake research on jute seed to improve quality and to  shorten the gestation period of 
jute crop;  
(xix) incorporate measures for sustainable Human Resource Development of the jute sector and to 
provide necessary funds for the same;  
(xx) modernisation of jute sector and technology development;  
(xxi) take steps  to protect the interests of jute growers and workers and to promote their welfare 
by improving their livelihood avenues;  
(xxii) secure better working conditions and provisions and improvement of amenities and 
incentives for workers engaged in the jute ind ustry;  
(xxiii) register jute growers and manufacturers on optional basis;  
(xxiv) collect statistics with regard to jute and jute products for compilation and publication;  
(xxv) subscribe to the share capital of or enter into any arrangement (whether by way  of 
partnership, joint venture or any other manner) with any other body corporate for the purpose of 
promoting the jute sector or for promotion and marketing of jute and jute products in India and 
abroad.  
  7 
 (3) It shall be the duty of the Board — 
(a) to advise the Central Government on all matters relating to the development of raw jute and 
the jute industry, including import and export of jute and jute products;  
(b) to prepare and furnish reports relating to the jute sector as may be required by the Cent ral 
Government from time to time.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROPERTY AND CONTRACT  
  6. The Council and Society to v est in Board .—(1) On and from the appointed day, there shall be 
transferred to, and vest in, the Board constituted under section 3, the Council and the Society.  
(2) The Council and the Society which is transferred to, and which vests in, the Board under sub -
section ( 1) shall be deemed to include all assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and all property 
movable and immovable, real or personal, corporeal or incorporeal, present or contingent, of whatever 
nature and wheresoever situate, including lands, buildings, machinery, equipments, cash balances, capital, 
reserves, reserve funds, investments, tenancies, leases and book debts and all  other rights and interests 
arising out of such property as were immediately before the appointed day in the ownership or possession 
or power of the Council, or as the case may be, the Society, whether within or outside India, all books of 
account and docu ments relating thereto and shall also be deemed to include all borrowings, liabilities and 
obligations of whatever kind then subsisting of the Society, or as the case may be, the Council.  
 7. General effect of v esting of Council and Society in Board .—(1) All contracts, agreements and 
working arrangements subsisting immediately before the appointed day and affecting the Council, or, as 
the case may be, the Society shall, in so far as they relate to the Council, or, as the case may be, the 
Society, cease to h ave effect or be enforceable against the Council, or, as the case may be, the Society and 
shall be of as full force and effect against or in favour of the Board in which the Council and the Society 
have vested by virtue of this Act and enforceable as fully  and effectively as if, instead of the Council, or, 
as the case may be, the Society, the Board had been named therein or had been a party thereto.  
(2) Any proceeding, suit or cause of action pending or existing immediately before the appointed day 
by or ag ainst the Council or the Society may, as from that day, be continued and enforced by or against 
the Board in which it has vested by virtue of this Act, as it might have been enforced by or against the 
Council or the Society if this Act had not been passed,  and shall cease to be enforceable by or against the 
Council or, as the case may be, the Society.  
8. Licences, etc. , to be deemed to have been granted to Board .—With effect from the appointed 
day, all licences, permits, quotas and exemptions, granted to the Council or the Society in connection with 
the affairs and business of the Council, or, as the case may be, the Society, under any law for the time 
being in force, shall be deemed to have been granted to the Board in which the Council and the Society 
have vested by virtue of this Act.  
9. Tax exemption or benefit to continue have effect .—(1) Where any exemption from, or any 
assessment with respect to, any tax has been granted or made or any benefit by way of set off or carry 
forward, as the case may be, o f any unabsorbed depreciation or investment allowance or other allowance 
or loss has been extended or is available to the Council or the Society, under the Income -tax Act, 1961   
(43 of 1961), such exemption, assessment or benefit shall continue to have eff ect in relation to the Board 
in which the Council and the Society have vested by virtue of this Act.  
(2) Where any payment made by the Council or the Society is exempted from deduction of tax at 
source under any provision of the Income -tax Act, 1961(43 of 1961) the exemption from tax will continue 
to be available as if the provisions of the said Act made applicable to the Council or the Society were 
operative in relation to the Board in which the Council and the Society have vested by virtue of this Act.  
(3) The transfer and vesting of the Council or the Society in terms of section 6 shall not be construed 
as a transfer within the meaning of the Income -tax Act, 1961(43 of 1961) for the purposes of capital 
gains.  8 
 10. Guarantee to be operative .—Any guarantee g iven for or in favour of the Council or the Society 
with respect to any loan or lease finance shall continue to be operative in relation to the Board in which 
the Council and the Society have vested by virtue of this Act.  
11. Provisions in respect of offic ers and other employees of Council and Society .—(1) (a) Every 
officer or other employee of the Council serving in its employment immediately before the appointed day 
shall, in so far as such officer or other employee is employed in connection with the Council which has 
vested in the Board by virtue of this Act, becomes, as from the appointed day, an officer, or, as the case 
may be, other employee of the Board.  
(b) Every officer or other employee of the Society serving in its employment immediately befor e the 
appointed day shall, in so far as such officer or other employee is employed in connection with the 
Society which has vested in the Board by virtue of this Act, becomes, as from the appointed day, an 
officer, or, as the case may be, other employee of  the Board.  
(2) Every officer or other employee of the Council or the Society who becomes an officer, or as the 
case may be, other employee of the Board, as referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall hold his office or service 
therein by the same tenure, at the  same remuneration, upon the same terms and conditions, with the same 
obligations and rights and privileges as to leave, insurance, superannuation scheme, provident fund, other 
funds, retirement, pension, gratuity and other benefits as he would have held u nder the Council, or, as the 
case may be, the Society, if it had not vested in the Board and shall continue to do so as an officer or other 
employee, as the case may be, of the Board, or until the expiry of a period of one year from the appointed 
day if su ch officer or other employee opts not to be the officer or other employee of the Board within such 
period:  
Provided that if the Board thinks it expedient to extend the period so fixed, it may extend the same up 
to a maximum period of one year.  
(3) Where an  officer or other employee of the Council or the Society opts under sub -section ( 2) not to 
be in the employment or service of the Board in which the Council and the Society have vested, such 
officer or other employee shall be deemed to have resigned from t he respective cadre.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947(14 of 1947) or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other employee of the 
Council or the Society to the  Board shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any compensation 
under this Act or any other law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any 
court, tribunal or other authority.  
(5) The officers and other employees w ho have retired before the appointed day from the service of 
the Council or the Society and are entitled to any benefits, rights or privileges shall be entitled to receive 
the same benefits, rights or privileges from the Board in which the Council and the Society have vested.  
(6) The trusts of the Provident Fund and Group Insurance and Superannuation Scheme of the Council 
or the Society for the welfare of officers or employees would continue to discharge their functions in the 
Board as was being done hither to in the Council or the Society and tax exemption granted to Provident 
Fund or Group Insurance and Superannuation Scheme would continue to be applied to the Board.  
(7) After the expiry of the period of one year, or the extended period, as referred to in sub-section ( 2), 
all the officers and other employees transferred and appointed to the Board, other than those opting not to 
be the officers or employees of the Board within such period, shall be governed by the rules and 
regulations made by the Board in r espect of the service conditions of the officers and other employees of 
the said Board.  
CHAPTER V  
POWERS OF THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  
12. Directions by Central Government .—(1) The Board shall, in the discharge of its functions and 
duties under the relevant statute, be bound by the directions on questions of policy as the Central 
Government may give in writing to it from time to time:  9 
 Provided that the Board shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views 
before any direction is giv en. 
(2) The decision of the Central Government, whether a question is one of policy or not, shall be final.  
13. Supersession of Board .—(1) If at any time the Central Gov ernment is of the opinion that — 
(a) on account of grave emergency, the Board is unable to discharge the functions and duties 
imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or  
(b) the Board has persistently made default in complying with any direction issued by the Central 
Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions and duties imposed on it by or under 
the provisions of this Act and as a result of such default, the financial position of the Board or the 
administration of the Board has deteriorated; or  
(c) the circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public  interest so to do,  
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, supersede the Board for such period, 
not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Upon the  publication of a notification — 
(a) all the members  of the Board shall, as from the date of supersession vacate their offices as 
such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of the relevant Act, 
be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Board shall, until the  Board is reconstituted under 
sub-section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by such person or persons as the Central Government 
may direct; and  
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Board shall, until the Board is reconstituted, vest in 
the Central Government.  
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under                      
sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may reconstitute the Board by a fresh appointment and in such 
case any person or persons  who vacated their offices under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2), shall not be 
deemed disqualified for appointment:  
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time, before the expiration of the period of 
supersession, take action under this sub -section . 
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification to be issued under sub -section ( 1) and a full 
report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such action will be laid 
before each House of Parliament at the earliest.  
CHAPTER VI  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
14. Grants and loans by Central Government .—(1) The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law, in this behalf, make to the Board grants and loans of such sums 
of money as that Government  may consider necessary.  
(2) There shall be constituted a fund to be called the Jute Board Fund and there shall be credited 
thereto — 
(a) any grants and loans made to the Board by the Central Government;  
(b) all sums received by the Board from such other sources as may be decided upon by the 
Central Government.  
(3) The Fun d shall be applied for meeting — 
(a) salary, allowances and other remuneration of the members, officers and other employees of 
the Board;  10 
 (b) expenses of the Board in the discharge of its functions; and  
(c) expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by this Act.  
15. Budget .—The Board shall prepare in such form and at such time during each financial year, as 
may be prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing the estimate d receipts and expenditure 
of the Board, and forward the same to the Central Government.  
16. Annual report .—The Board shall prepare in such form and at such time, each financial year, as 
may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial 
year and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.  
17. Accounts and audit .—The accounts of the Board shall be maintained and audited in such manner 
as may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India, be prescribed and the Board 
shall furnish to the Central Government before such date, as may be prescribed, an audited copy of its 
accounts, together with the auditor's report thereon.  
18. Laying of annual and auditor’s report before Parliam ent.—The Central Government shall 
cause the annual report and auditor's report to be laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before 
each House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
19. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government, or the Board or any member of the Board, or any officer or other 
employee of the Central Government or of the Board or any other person authorised by the Central 
Government or the Board, for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act 
or the rules or regulations made thereunder.  
20. Officers and employees of Board to be public servant s.—All officers and employees of the 
Board shall, while acting or  purporting to act in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or of any rule or 
regulation made thereunder, be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the 
Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860).  
21. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Gov ernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the term of office and other conditions of service of the members of the Board under                   
sub-section ( 5) of section 3;  
(b) the powers and duties of the Chairperson under sub -section ( 7) of section 3;  
(c) the powers and functions of the Vice -Chairperson under sub -section ( 8) of section 3;  
(d) the form in which, and the time at which, the Board shall prepare its budget under section 
15; 
(e) the form in which, and the time at which, the Board shall prepare its annual report under 
section 16;  
(f) the manner in which the accounts of the Board shall be maintained and audited, and the date 
before which the audited copy of the accounts may be furnished to the Central Government under 
section 17;  
(g) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of which provision is to 
be, or may be, made by the rules.  
22. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with the provisions of 
this Act and the rules generally to carry out the purposes of this Act.  11 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matter s, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which the business of the Board shall be conducted under sub -section ( 9) of 
section 3; and  
(b) the terms and conditions of service of the Secretary and other officers and employees of the 
Board under section 4.  
23. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is 
in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprise d in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or 
both Houses a gree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to t he validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation.  
24. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, m ake such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every  order made under sub -section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament.  
25. Amendment of Act 28 of 1983 .—In the Jute Manufactures Cess Act,  1983, — 
(a) in section 3, — 
(i) in sub -section ( 1), for the words and figures “the Jute Manufactures Development Council 
Act, 1983 ”, the words and figures “the National Jute Board Act, 2008 (12 of 2009) ” shall be 
substituted;  
(ii) in sub -section ( 2), the words “and Salt ” shall be omitted;  
(iii) in sub-section ( 4), the words “and Salt ” shall be omitted;  
(b) in section 4, for the words, brackets and figures “the Jute Manufactures Development Council, 
from time to time, from out of such proceeds (after deducting the cost of collection which shall not 
exceed four per cent. of such proceeds) such sums of money as it may think fit for being utilised for the 
purposes of the Jute Manufacture s Development Council Act, 1983 (2 7 of 1983) , the words, brackets and 
figures “the National Jute Board from time to tim e, from out of such proceeds (after deducting the cost of 
collection which shall not exceed four per cent. of such proceeds) such sums of money as it may think fit 
for being utilised for the purposes of th e Nationa l Jute Board Act, 2008 (28 of 19 83), shall  be substituted.  
26. Repeal and savings .—(1) On and from the appointed day, the Jute Manufactures Development 
Council Act, 1983  (27 of 1983)  shall stand repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or 
taken under the Act so repealed shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
 
 
 
 
--------------------------The Prevention and Control of Infectious and Contagious Diseases in Animals Act, 2009--------------------------
1 
 THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN 
ANIMALS ACT, 2009  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
CONTROL OF SCHEDULED DISEASES  
 
3. Appointment of Veterinary Officers.  
4. Reporting scheduled diseases obligatory.  
5. Duty to segregate infected animals.  
6. Notification of controlled areas and free areas.  
7. Prohibition of movement of animals from controlled area.  
8. Vaccination, marking and issue of vaccination certificate.  
9. Contents of vaccination certificate.  
10. Entry and exit of animals into controlled area and free area.  
11. Precautionary measures in relation to controlled areas.  
12. Prohibition of markets, fairs, exhibition, etc., in the controlled areas.  
13. Prohibition of bringing of infected animals into market and other places.  
14. Check Posts and Quarantine Camps.  
15. Inspection and detention of animals at Check Posts and Quarantine Camps.  
16. Entry and exit of vaccinated animals into controlled and free areas.  
17. Appointment of Competent Officers.  
18. Cleaning and disinfection of carriers.  
19. Powers of entry and inspection.  
 
CHAPTER III  
INFECTED AREAS  
20. Declaration of infected areas.  
21. Effect of declaration of infected areas.  
22. Denotification  of infected area.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
INFECTED ANIMALS  
23. Segregation, examination and treatment of infected animals.  
24. Drawing samples from animals.  
25. Resort to euthanasia for infected animals.  
26. Disposal of carcass.  
27. Powers of Veterinary Officer and Veterinarian to hold post -mortem examination s. 
28. Seizure and  removal of certain animals.  
 2 
 CHAPTER V  
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES  
SECTIONS  
 
29. Enforcement of orders and recovery of expenses.  
30. Village Officers, etc., to assist.  
31. Penalty for issuing vaccination certificate without authority or administering defectiv e vaccine.  
32. Penalties.  
33. Penalty for placing infected animal or carcass in river, etc.  
34. Offences by  companies . 
 
CHAPTER VI  
PRECAUTIONARY MEASURES ON CAUSATIVE ORGANISM, ETC.  
35. Prevention of escape of causative organism.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
36. Power to delegate.  
37. Officers and authorities to function subject to Government control.  
38. Power to amend the Schedule.  
39. Power to issue directions.  
40. Certain persons to be public servants.  
41. Power to remove difficulties.  
42. Power of Central Government  to make rules.  
43. Power of State Government  to make rules.  
44. Laying of rules.  
45. Repeal and savings . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
  3 
 THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN 
ANIMALS ACT, 2009  
ACT NO. 27 OF 2009  
[20th March , 2009 .]  
An Act to provide for the prevention, control and eradication of infectious and contagious 
diseases affecting animals, for prevention of outbreak or spreading of such diseases from one 
State to another, and to meet the international obligations of India fo r facilitating import and 
export of animals and animal products and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto.  
WHEREAS  economic losses due to infectious and contagious diseases of animals are enormous in the 
country with some of these diseases constituting a serious threat to the public;  
AND WHEREAS  many of such animal diseases can be largely prevented by judicious imple mentation 
of vaccination programmes or by taking other appropriate and timely measures on scientific lines;  
AND WHEREA S such measures are necessary to facilitate the import and export of animals and animal 
products and to keep in tune with international p ractices;  
AND WHEREAS  it has been realised that the prevention, control and eradication of infectious and 
contagious diseases of animals from India has to be tackled on a national basis so as to avoid adverse 
impact of such diseases on the economy of the country and for this purpose harmonise the control 
procedures and to prevent inter -State transmission of animal diseases;  
AND WHEREAS the national level handling has to be done with the active involvement of the State 
Governments, particularly in regard t o the precautionary measures required to  be taken within their 
jurisdiction in respect of certain infectious and contagious diseases and the regulation of movement of 
animals outside their respective areas by timely adoption of appropriate measures;  
AND WHEREAS  India is a Member Country of the Office International Des Epizooties, Paris  and it is 
necessary to implement the general obligations, decisions and recommendations of the said Organisation 
and abide by the International Animal Health Code stipulated  by the said Organisation;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short ti tle, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Prevention and Control 
of Infectious and Contagious Diseases in Animals Bill, 2009.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint; 
and different dates may be appointed for different States or for different areas therein as well as for 
different provisions of this Act, and any reference in any such provision of this Act to the c ommencement 
of this Act shall be construed in relation to any State or area or provision as a reference to the coming into 
force of this Act or, as the case may be, of that provision, in such State or area.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requ ires,— 
(a) “animal ” means,— 
(i) cattle, buffalo, sheep, goat, yak, mithun;  
(ii) dog, cat, pig, horse, camel, ass, mule, poultry, bees; and  
(iii) any other animal or bird as the Central Government may, by notification, specify;  
                                                           
1. 25th August, 2009, vide notification No S. O. 2158(E), dated 24th August, 2009, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec.  3(ii). 
This Act shall come into force in all the States and Union territories except the State of Uttar Pradesh . 4 
 (b) “Check Post” means any place established as such by the Director to carry out checking of 
animals for the purpose of this Act;  
(c) “Competent Officer ” means any person or officer of the Government notified as a Competent 
Officer under section 17;  
(d) “compulsor y vaccination ” means vaccination of any animal against any scheduled disease in 
respect of which vaccination is made mandatory under the provisions of this Act;  
(e) “controlled area ” means any local area which has been declared as such by the State 
Govern ment under sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(f) “defective vaccine ” means any vaccine which is expired, breach in seal, contaminated, 
improperly stored, unlabelled or with mutilated label;  
(g) “Director ”, in relation to a State, means any officer in charge of the Department of Animal 
Husbandry or Veterinary Services, or both, notified by the State Government as such for the purpose 
of this Act;  
(h) “free area ” means any controlled area which has been declared as such under sub -section ( 5) 
of section 6;  
(i) “infected animal ” means an animal which is infected with any scheduled disease;  
(j) “infected area ” means an area declared as such under section 20;  
(k) “notification ” means notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(l) “prescribed ” means prescr ibed by rules made under this Act;  
(m) “publication ” includes propagation of information through the media or newspaper or any 
other mass media and the means of local communication such as declaration in loud voice and by 
beating drums in the area;  
(n) “Quarantine Camp ” means any place declared to carry out quarantine of animals and birds for 
the purpose of this Act;  
(o) “scheduled disease ” means any disease included in the Schedule;  
(p) “Veterinarian ” means a person having a recognised veterinary qualification who, under the 
law for the time being in force, is allowed to treat animal diseases;  
(q) “Veterinary Officer ” means any officer, appointed as such by the State Government under 
clause ( b) of section 3;  
(r) “Village Officer ”, in relation to a village, means any person who is authorised or designated as 
such in accordance with the qualifications prescribed by the State Government.  
CHAPTER II  
CONTROL OF SCHEDULED DISEASES  
3. Appoin tment of  Veterinary Officers .—The State Governmen t may, by notification, appoint — 
(a) such number of persons, as it deems proper, to be Veterinarians to undertake inspection and 
specifying the local limits of their respective jurisdiction; and  
(b) such number of V eterinarians, as it deems proper, to be Veterinary Officers, who shall 
exercise their powers and discharge their duties within the local limits of their jurisdiction as may be 
specified in the said notification.  
4. Reporting scheduled diseases obligatory .—(1) Every owner, or any other person,                     
non-governmental organisation, public bodies or the village panchayat, in charge of any animal which he 
or it has reason to believe to be infective of a scheduled disease shall report the fact to t he Village Officer 
or village panchayat in -charge, who may report the same in writing to the nearest available Veterinarian.  
(2) The Village Officer shall visit the area falling within his jurisdiction for reporting any outbreak of 
the disease.  5 
 (3) Every Veterinarian shall, on receipt of a report under sub -section ( 1), or otherwise, if he has 
reason to believe that any animal is infected with a scheduled disease, report the matter to the Veterinary 
Officer.  
(4) Where in any State there is any occurrence o f scheduled disease in relation to any animal, the 
Director shall send an intimation to the Directors of the States which are in the immediate neighbourhood 
of the place where there is such occurrence, for taking appropriate preventive measures against the  spread 
of the disease.  
5. Duty to segregate infected animals. —(1) Every owner or person in charge of an animal, which he 
has reason to believe is infective of a scheduled disease, shall segregate such animal and have it kept in a 
place away from all othe r animals which are healthy, and take all possible steps to prevent the infected 
animal from coming in contact with any other animal.  
(2) The owner or other person in charge of, or having control over, the animal referred to in             
sub-section ( 1) shall confine that animal and prevent it from grazing in a common place or to drink water 
from any common source including a vessel, pond, lake or river.  
(3) All other infected animals shall be segregated by the Municipality, Panchayat or other local 
administration.  
6. Notification of controlled areas and free areas. —(1) The State Government may, with the object 
of preventing, controlling or eradicating any scheduled disease, by notification, declare any area to be a 
controlled area in respect of any scheduled disease affecting any species of animal and any other species 
that may be susceptible to the disease specified in the said notification.  
(2) The State Government shall also cause the substance of the notification issued under                 
sub-section ( 1) to be published in a local newspaper in the vernacular language and by declaration in loud 
voice and by beating drums in the area.  
(3) Where a notification has been issued under sub -section ( 1), all animals of the species in the 
controlled area shall be subjected to compulsory vaccination against that disease, and be subjected to such 
other measures against the disease, in such manner and within such time as the State Government, may, 
by public notice, direct.  
(4) The State Government shall make available necessary vaccine and it shall be obligatory on the 
part of every owner, or the person in charge of an animal which is required to be va ccinated under                
sub-section ( 3), to get the animal compulsorily vaccinated.  
(5) Where the State Government is satisfied, on a report received from the Director or otherwise, that, 
in any controlled area, any of the scheduled diseases affecti ng any species of animal is no longer 
prevalent, it may, by notification, declare the area to be a free area in respect of that disease in relation to 
the particular species of animal.  
(6) Where a notification has been issued under sub -section ( 5), no animal of the species or of any 
other susceptible species with regard to which it is a free area shall be allowed to enter the free area unless 
duly immunized by vaccination against that particular disease.  
7. Prohibition of movement of animals from  controlled area .—(1) Where a notification has been 
issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 declaring any area as a controlled area in relation to any disease 
affecting any species of animals, no animal belonging to that species shall be moved from the p lace where 
it is kept.  
(2) The Director may, for the purpose of control, prevention or eradication of any scheduled disease, 
in respect of any area, by order published in the Official Gazette, prohibit the movement of all animals 
belonging to any species specified therein, from the place where it is kept, to any other place.  
  6 
 (3) Nothing contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be deemed to prohibit — 
(a) the movement of any animal referred to therein, from the place where it is kept, to the nearest 
place where it can be got vaccinated, so long as the animal is being moved for the purpose of its 
immunization by vaccination; or  
(b) the movement of any such animal, so long as it is accompanied by a valid certificate of 
vaccination to indicate that the a nimal is duly immunized against the particular disease and it bears 
proper mark of such vaccination.  
8. Vaccination, marking and issue of vaccination certificate. —(1) The vaccine to an animal may 
be administered by any person competent under the law for t he time being in force to administer it, and 
issue a certificate of administration of vaccination.  
(2) Where any animal has been vaccinated for any scheduled disease in compliance with the 
provisions of sub -section ( 1), the person vaccinating the animal s hall cause to put a mark by branding, 
tattooing or ear tagging, or in such other manner as the Director may, by general or special order, direct 
and the same shall, unless otherwise specified by the Director, shall not be removed.  
(3) The authority issuin g a certificate of vaccination shall specify the date of vaccination, dates of 
manufacture and expiry of the vaccine and the date up to which the vaccination of the animal with the 
particular vaccine shall be valid.  
9. Conte nts of vaccination certificate. —Every vaccination certificate issued under this Act shall be 
in such form and shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
10. Entry and exit of animals into controlled area and free area .—(1) Where any area has been 
declared as a controlled area under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 in respect of any disease affecting any 
species of animals, no animal belonging to that species shall be taken out of, or brought into that area save 
as provided in section 16.  
(2) The Direc tor may, by notice duly published in the Official Gazette and at least in one daily local 
newspaper in vernacular language, extend the prohibition contained in sub -section ( 1) to any other species 
of animals, if animals belonging to that species are also l ikely to be infected with that disease.  
(3) No carrier of goods or animal shall carry any animal from or out of a controlled area, free area or 
infected area by land, sea or air unless he complies with the provisions of section 16.  
(4) Nothing contained in sub -sections ( 1) to ( 3) shall apply to the carriage by railway of any animal 
referred to in those sub -sections through any area which, for the time being, is declared as a controlled 
area or infected area so long as the animal is not unloaded (for whats oever purpose or duration) in any 
place within that area:  
Provided that the State Government may, by notification, declare that any species of animal so carried 
through any local area within the State shall be duly immunized against such scheduled disease , in such 
manner and within such time as may be specified in that notification and a certificate of vaccination shall 
be a pre -requisite for the transportation of the animals by the railways through that area:  
 Provided further that, where any notification  as referred to in the first proviso has been issued, it shall 
be incumbent on the State Government to intimate that fact to the concerned railway authorities so as to 
enable them to satisfy themselves about the immunization of the animal before transporti ng it through the 
local area of the State.  
11. Precautionary measures in relation to controlled areas .—No person shall t ake out of the 
controlled area — 
(a) any animal, alive or dead, which is infected with, or reasonably suspected to have been 
infected with, any scheduled disease notified under sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(b) any kind of fodder, bedding or other material which has come into contact with any animal 
infected with such disease or could, in any manner, carry the in fection of the notified d isease;  or 
(c) the carcass, skin or any other part or product of such animal.  7 
 12. Prohibition of ma rkets, fairs, exhibition, etc., in the controlled areas .—No person, 
organisation or institution shall hold any animal market, animal fair, animal exhibition  and carry on any 
other activity which involves grouping or gathering of any species of animals within a controlled area:  
Provided that the Competent Officer may, suo motu or on application made to him in this behalf, 
relax the prohibition in relation to a ny species of animals, in a case where animals belonging to that 
species are not susceptible to the scheduled disease and are incapable of carrying it, if he is satisfied that 
in the public interest it is necessary to accord such relaxation.  
13. Prohibiti on of bringing of infected animals into market and other places. —No person shall 
bring or attempt to bring into market, fair, exhibition or other congregation of animals or to any public 
place, any animal which is known to be infected with a scheduled disease.  
14. Chec k Posts and Quarantine Camps .—(1) The Director may establish as many Quarantine 
Camps and Check Posts withi n the State as may be required — 
(a) for the detention of animals suffering from any scheduled disease or of animals which have 
come into contact with or have been kept in the proximity of any such inf ected animal;  
(b) for ensuring the prevention of entry into or exit from any controlled area or infected area or 
free area, of any animal belonging to the species of animals in respect of which a notification, issued 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 6, or  an order issued under sub -section ( 2) of section 7, is in force.  
(2) Any animal which is required to be detained, inspected, vaccinated, or marked, may be kept in the 
Quarantine Camp for such period as the Competent Officer may direct.  
(3) Every animal detained at a Quarantine Camp shall be under the custody of the person in charge of 
the camp, and shall be vaccinated and marked.  
(4) The officer in charge of the Quarantine Camp shall, at the time of release of an animal from the 
station, grant a permit,  in such form as may be prescribed by the State Government, to the person taking 
charge of the animal, and every such person shall be bound to produce the permit whenever required to do 
so by any Competent Officer.  
15. Inspection and detention of animals at Chec k Posts and Quarantine Camps .—(1) Every 
person in charge of any Check Post or Quarantine Camp shall inspect any animal stopped at the Check 
Post, or detained therein or at the Quarantine Camp.  
(2) The manner of inspection and the period of detention of the animal at the Check Post or at the 
Quarantine Camp for the purpose of inspection or for the administration of compulsory vaccination, the 
marking of animals and the form and manner in which perm it for entry in respect of any animal may be 
issued, shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
16. Entry and exit of vaccinated animals i nto controlled and free areas .—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in section 10, an animal belonging  to the species of animals  in respect of which an 
area has been declared as a controlled or free area in relation to any scheduled disease, which has been 
duly vaccinated against that disease, shall be allowed to enter into or be taken out of the controlle d area or 
free area, or to be taken out of any other place on the production of a certificate to the effect that vaccine 
against that disease has been administered and a period of not less than twenty -one days has elapsed 
thereafter.  
17. Appoi ntment of Co mpetent Officers. —The State Government may, for the proper 
implementation of the provisions of this Act, by notification, authorise any person to exercise any power 
or discharge any duty as a Competent Officer, under this Act, who shall exercise such powers and such 
duties within the local limits of his jurisdiction as may be specified in the notification.  
18. Cleaning and disinfection of carriers .—(1) Every common carrier whether a vessel or vehicle 
shall be cleaned and disinfected immediately before and after the transportation of any animal in that 
vessel or vehicle, and so also any other place where the animal has been kept in transit.  8 
 (2) Where any area has been declared as a controlled area or free area in respect of any scheduled 
disease affecti ng any species of animal, the Director may, by an order duly published in the Official 
Gazette and in a local newspaper in the vernacular language, direct the owner of every vehicle in which 
any animal belonging to that species is carried, to have the vehi cle properly cleaned and disinfected.  
19. Powers of entry and inspection .—Any Veterinary Officer or other Competent Officer may enter 
upon and inspect any land or building or place, vessel or vehicle, for the purpose of ensuring compliance 
of the provisio ns of this Act or the rules or orders made thereunder, by the persons responsible for such 
compliance.  
CHAPTER III  
INFECTED AREAS  
20. Declaratio n of infected areas. —If the Veterinary Officer, upon receipt of a report from a 
Veterinarian or otherwise, is satisfied that, in any place or premises falling within his jurisdiction, an 
animal has been infected with any scheduled disease, or that an animal, which he has reaso n to believe 
has been so infected, is kept, may, by notification and publication in at least one local newspaper in the 
vernacular language and by declaration in loud voice and by beating drums, declare such area as he may 
deem fit (including the place or premises aforesaid) to be an infected area.  
21. Effect of d eclaration of infected areas .—(1) Where an area has been declared as an infected 
area under section 20, all provisions of this Act which are applicable in relation to a controlled area shall 
mutat is mutandis  apply thereto as if for the words “controlled area ”, the words “infected area ” have been 
substituted.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the following 
further provisions shall apply in relat ion to an infected area, namely: — 
(a) in respect of every animal in that area which is infected or reasonably believed to be infected, 
with any scheduled disease, the owner or other person in charge of the animal, shall forthwith get it 
treated b y a Veterinarian;  
(b) all articles, which are likely to have come into contact with any animal referred to in                 
clause ( a), shall be treated or disposed off in such a manner as the Veteri narian may direct;  
(c) every Veterinarian shall, for t he purpose of inspection, have the power to enter any place or 
premises where any animal is kept or is likely to be kept;  
(d) the owner or any other person in charge of the animal referred to in clause ( a) shall keep the 
animal in isolation forthwith, and also take such other measures as may be necessary for the 
prevention, treatment and control of the disease as the Veterinarian may direct.  
22. Denotificatio n of infected area .—If the Veterinary Officer, after such enquiry as he may deem 
fit, is satisfied that there is no longer the threat or danger of any animal being infected with the scheduled 
disease in any infected area, by notification and publication in a local newspaper in vernacular language, 
declare that the area is no longer an infected area as aforesaid, whereupon all the restrictions referred to in 
section 21 shall cease to apply.  
CHAPTER IV  
INFECTED ANIMALS  
23. Segregation, examination and t reatment of infected animals. —(1) Where the Veterinarian 
has, on receipt of a report or otherwise, reason to believe that any animal  is infected with a scheduled 
disease, he may, by order in writing, direct the owner or any other p erson in charge of such animal — 
(a) to keep it segregated from other apparently healthy animals; or  
(b) to subject it to such treatment as may be required under the circumstances.  
  9 
 (2) Where any action has been taken in pursuance of sub -section ( 1), the Veterinarian shall forthwith 
give a detailed report of the incidence of the disease to the Veterinary Officer.  
(3) On receipt of a report from the Veterinarian, the Veterinary Officer shall, as soon as possible, 
examine that animal as well as any o ther animal which could have come in contact with it, and for that 
purpose, submit the animal to such test and medical examination as may be required under the 
circumstances.  
(4) If, after such test and examination, the Veterinary Officer is of the opinio n that an animal is not 
infected with any of the scheduled diseases, he shall issue a certificate in writing that the animal is not 
infected with any such disease.  
24. Drawing samples from animals. —(1) Where the Veterinary Officer considers it necessary f or 
the purpose of ascertaining whether the animal which is suspected to have been infected with any 
scheduled disease or susceptible to such infection is actually infected, or for the purpose of ascertaining 
the nature of the scheduled disease with which a n animal is infected, he may draw such samples, as may 
be required, from the animal for the purpose of carrying out such investigations as he may deem 
necessary under the circumstances.  
(2) The Veterinary Officer or any other Competent Officer shall draw s amples from any animal for 
the purposes of ascertaining whether the animal h as been vaccinated against any disease, or whether the 
vaccination of the animal has been effective in conferring it immunity and have the samples examined, in 
such manner as he may deem necessary.  
25. Resort to euthanasia for infected animals .—If the Veterinary Officer deems it ne cessary that an 
animal, which is infected with a scheduled disease, euthanasia has to be resorted to, for preventing the 
spread of the disease to other animals in the area or to protect public health if the disease is of zoonotic 
importance, he may, notwit hstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, by 
an order in writing, direct euthanasia of the animal and the carcass disposed of immediately to his 
satisfaction.  
26. Disposal of carcass. —Every person in possession of carcass ( or any part thereof) of any animal, 
which, at the time of its death, was infected with any scheduled disease or was suspected to have been 
infected, shall dispose it of in such manner as may be prescribed . 
27. Powers of Veterinary Officer and Veterinarian to hold post -mortem examination. —(1) 
Where the Veterinary Officer or any Veterinarian has reason to believe that the death of an animal has 
been caused by an infection of any scheduled disease, he may make or cause to be made a post -mortem 
examination of t he animal and for that purpose he may cause the carcass of any such animal to be 
exhumed where required followed by proper disposal after necessary examination and post -mortem.  
(2) Every examination and post -mortem referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be conducted in such 
manner, and the report of post -mortem shall be in such form, as may be prescribed.  
28. Seizure an d removal of certain animals. —Where any animal which is infected or suspected to 
have been infected is found without any person c laiming to be its owner, or where a valid order or 
direction given in relation to any such animal is not promptly complied with by the owner or other person 
in control of the animal, it shall be open to the Veterinary Officer or any other Competent Officer , to seize 
the animal and remove it to a place of isolation or segregation, as he may deem proper.  
CHAPTER V  
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES  
29. Enforcement of order s and recovery of expenses .—(1) Where by any rule, notification, notice, 
requisition, order or d irection made under this Act, any person is required to take any measure or to do 
anything— 
(a) in respect of any animal, carcass of any animal or other thing in his custody or charge, the 
same shall be promptl y complied with by that person;  10 
  (b) in case of any stray or ownerless animal, carcass of such animal or parts thereof, the same 
shall be promptly complied with by the municipality or Panchayat, as the case may be, at its cost.  
(2) If the measures as referred to in sub -section ( 1) are not taken within such time as may be allowed 
for the purpose, the authority issuing the notice, requisition, order or direction, may cause the measures to 
be taken at the cost of the person or municipality or Panchayat, as the case may be, who or which was 
required to take the measures.  
(3) The costs of any measures taken under sub -section ( 2), shall be recoverable from the person or the 
municipality or Panchayat, as the case may be, concerned in the manner provided by the C ode of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 o f 1974)  for the recovery of fines imposed by a Court, as if such costs were a 
fine imposed by a Court.  
30. Village Officers, etc., to assist. —All Municipal, Panchayat or Village Officers and all officers of 
the rural and dairy development, revenue, agricul ture, animal husbandry and veterinary departments of 
the St ate Government, shall be bound — 
(a) to give immediate information to the Veterinary Officer and to the Veterinarian having 
jurisdiction in the area regarding the prevalence of a scheduled disease a mongst any animal or s pecies 
of animals, in the area;  
(b) to take all necessary measures to prevent the outbreak or spread of any scheduled disease; and  
(c) to assist the Veterinary Officer and the Veterinarian in the discharge of their duties or in the 
exercise of their powers under this Act.  
31. Penalty for issuing vaccination certificate without authority or administering defective 
vaccine .—If any person  issues a vaccination certificate, — 
(a) without authority or competence in that behalf, or  
(b) after administering the vaccine which is known to be defective in any manner,  
he shall be guilty of an offence punishable with a fine of five thousand rupees o r in case of non -payment 
of fine with imprisonment which may extend to one month, and in the case of any subsequent offence, 
with fine of ten thousand rupees or with imprisonment which may extend to three months.  
32. Penalties .—Any person who contravenes the provisions of this Act or obstructs the Competent 
Officer in performing his duties shall be guilty of an offence punishable with fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees, and in case of failure to pay the penalty with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one month; and in the case of any subsequent offence (whether under the same provision or any 
other provision of this Act except in case of sections 31 and 33) with a fine of two thousand rupees, or 
with imprisonment for a term which may exte nd to two months in case of non -payment of the penalty.  
33. Penalty for placing infected animal or carcass in river, etc .—Whoever places or causes or 
permits to be placed in any river, lake, canal or any other water body, the carcass or any part of the 
carcass of any animal which at the time of its death was known to be infected, shall be guilty of an 
offence and, on convicti on, be punished, in the case of a first offence with fine of two thousand rupees or 
with imprisonment of one month in case of non -payment of fine and in the case of subsequent conviction 
with a fine of five thousand rupees or imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with 
both.  
34. Offences by companies. —(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the c onduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proc eeded and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render such person liable to any punishment 
provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
  11 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where  an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the co mpany, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a)  “company ” means any body corporate and includes a co -operative society registered or 
deemed to be registered under any law for the time being in force, a firm or other association of 
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the fi rm.  
CHAPTER VI  
PRECAUTIONARY MEASURES ON CAUSATIVE ORGANISM, ETC.  
35. Prevention of  escape of causative organism. —(1) In every institution, laboratory or clinic, 
engaged in the manufacture, testing or research, related to  vaccines, sera, diagnostics or chemotherapeutic 
drugs and aimed at the prevention or treatment of any scheduled disease, adequate precaut ionary 
measures shall be taken — 
(a) to ensure that the causative organism of any scheduled disease does not escape or otherwise 
get released;  
(b) to guard against any such escape or release; and  
(c) to warn and to protect everyone concerned in the event of any escape.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the tim e being in force, every animal — 
(a) used for the manufacture, testing or research as referred to sub -section ( 1), or 
(b) which is likely to carry or transmit any scheduled disease,  
shall be promptly administered euthanasia and disposed of by the person in charge of or having control of 
the institution, laboratory or clinic, as the case may be, referred to in that sub -section.  
(3) Every person who is in charge of or having control of an institution, laboratory or clinic referred 
to in sub -section ( 1) comply with the provisions of sub -section (1) and sub -section ( 2); and in the event of 
non-compliance h e shall be guilty of an offence punishable with fine which may extend to twenty 
thousand rupees or imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with both, and in case the 
establishment is in commercial manufacturing of vaccines or medicine, a temporary suspension of licence 
up to a period of one year may also be imposed.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
36. Power to delegate. —The State Government may, by notification, delegate to any officer or 
authority subordinate to it, all or any of the powers conferred on it by or under this A ct, except the powers 
to make rules under sub -section ( 2) of section 42.  
37. Officers and authorities to function su bject to Government control. —All officers and 
authorities under this Act shall exercise their powers and discharge their duties conferred o r imposed on 
them by or under this Act, in accordance with such orders, not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Act, as the Central Government or the State Governmen t may, from time to time, make.  
38. Power to amend the Schedule .—(1) The Central Gover nment may, by notification, add to, or 
omit from the Schedule any animal disease and the said disease shall, as from the date of the notification, 
be deemed to have been added to, or omitted from, the Schedule.  
(2) Every notification issued under sub-section ( 1) shall, as soon as may be after it is issued, be laid 
before each House of Parliament.  12 
 39. Power to issue directions .—The Central Government may, with the object of prevention, control 
and eradication of any infectious or contagious disease of animals, issue such directions to the State 
Government or other authorities under this Act, from time to time, including direction s for furnishing 
such returns and statistics on scheduled diseases, and vaccination, as it may deem fit and every such 
direction shall be complied with.  
40. Certain persons to be public servants. —Every Competent Officer, Director and Veterinary 
Officer, w hile exercising any power or performing any duty under this Act, shall be deemed to be a public 
servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) .  
41. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect  to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provi ded that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
 (2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
42. Power of Central Government to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, subject to 
the condition of previous publication, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this 
Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the form of vaccination certificate and the particulars which such certificate shall contain, 
under section 9;  
(b) the manner of disposal of carcass, unde r section 26;  
(c) the manner of conducting examination and post -mortem under sub -section ( 1) and the form of 
report of post -mortem under sub -section ( 2) of section 27;  
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed or in respect of which rules are required to be made 
by the Central Government.  
43. Power of St ate Government to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by notification 
and with the prior approval of the Central Government, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this 
Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the form of permit to be granted by the officer in charge of a Quarantine Camp, under                 
sub-section ( 4) of section 14;  
(b) the manner of inspection and the period of detention of an animal at a Check Post or at a 
Quarantine Camp for the administration of compulsory vaccination and marking of animals and the 
form and manner of issue of entr y permit, under sub -section ( 2) of section 15;  
(c) any other matter in respect of which rule is to be or may be made by the State Government.  
44. Laying of rules .—(1) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more  successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 13 
 be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule.  
(2) Every rule mad e by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before the State Legislature.  
45. Repeal and savings. —On the commencement of this Act — 
(i) The Glanders and Farcy Act, 1899  (13 o f 1899) ; 
(ii) The Dourine Act, 191 0 (5 of 1910) ; and  
(iii) any other corresponding law of any State, so far as it is inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act,  
shall stand repealed:  
Provided that nothing c ontained in this section shall — 
(a) affect the previous operation of any such provision of law or anything duly done or suffered 
thereunder;  
(b) affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under any such 
provision of law;  
(c) affect any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of a ny offence committed 
against any such provision of law; or  
(d) affect any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid; and every such investigation , legal 
proceeding or remedy may be continued, instituted or enforced, and any such penalty, forfeiture and 
punishment may be imposed, as if the aforesaid p rovisions of law had continued:  
Provided further that, anything done or any action taken under any s uch provision of law, including 
any notification, order, notice or receipt issued or declaration made, shall in so far as it is not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done, taken, issued or made under the 
corresponding pro visions of this Act, and shall continue in force accordingly, unless and until superseded 
by anything done or any action taken under this Act.  
  14 
  
THE SCHEDULE  
[See sections 2 ( o) and 38]  
(a) Multiple species diseases  
1. Anthrax.  
2. Aujeszky's dis ease.  
3. Bluetongue.  
4. Brucellosis.  
5. Crimean Congo haemorrhagic fever.  
6. Echinococcosis/hydatidosis.  
7. Foot and mouth disesase.  
8. Heartwater.  
9. Japanese encephalitis.  
10. Leptospirosis.  
11. New world screwworm ( Cochliomyia hominivorax ).  
12. Old wor ld screwworm ( Chrysomya bezziana ).  
13. Paratuberculosis.  
14. Q fever.  
15. Rabies.  
16. Rift Valley fever.  
17. Rinderpest.  
18. Trichinellosis.  
19. Tularemia.  
 20. Vesicular stomatitis.  
21. West Nile fever.  
(b) Cattle diseases  
1. Bovine anaplasmosis.  
2. Bovine babesiosis.  
3. Bovine genital campylobacteriosis.  
4. Bovine spongiform encephalopathy.  
5. Bovine tuberculosis.  
6. Bovine viral diarrhoea.  
7. Contagious bovine pleuropneumonia.  
8. Enzootic bovine leucosis.  
9. Haemorrhagic septicaemia.  
10. Infecti ous bovine rhinotracheitis/infectious pustular vulvovaginitis.  
11. Lumpy skin disease.  15 
 12. Malignant catarrhal fever.  
13. Theileriosis.  
14. Trichomonosis.  
15. Trypanosomosis.  
(c) Sheep and goat diseases  
1. Caprine arthritis/encephalitis.  
2. Contagious agalactia.  
3. Contagious caprine pleuropneumonia.  
4. Enzootic abortion of ewes (ovine chlamydiosis).  
5. Maedi -visna.  
6. Nairobi sheep disease.  
7. Ovine epididymitis ( Brucella ovis ). 
8. Peste des petits ruminants.  
9. Salmonellosis (S. abortusovis).  
10. Scrapie.  
11. Sheep pox and goat pox.  
(d) Equine diseases  
1. African horse sickness.  
2. Contagious equine metritis.  
3. Dourine.  
4. Equine encephalomyelitis (Eastern).  
5. Equine encephalomyelitis (Western).  
6. Equine infectious anaemia.  
7. Equine Influenza.  
8. Equine piroplasmosis.  
9. Equine rhinopneumonitis.  
10. Equine viral arteritis.  
11. Glanders.  
12. Surra ( Trypanosoma evansi).  
13. Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis.  
(e) Swine diseases  
1. African swine fever.  
2. Classical swine fever.  
3. Nipah virus encephalitis.  
4. Porcine cysticercosis.  
5. Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome.  
6. Swine vesicular disease.  16 
 7. Transmissible gastroenteritis.  
(f) Avian diseases  
1. Avian chlamydiosis.  
2. Avian infectious bronchitis.  
3. Avian infectious laryngotr acheitis.  
4. Avian mycoplasmosis ( M. gallisepticum ). 
5. Avian mycoplasmosis ( M. synoviae ). 
6. Duck virus hepatitis.  
7. Fowl cholera.  
8. Fowl typhoid.  
9. Highly pathogenic avian influenza and low pathogenic avian influenza in poultry.  
10. Infectious bursal disease (Gumboro disease).  
11. Marek's disease.  
12. Newcastle disease.  
13. Pullorum disease.  
14. Turkey rhinotracheitis.  
(g) Lagomorph diseases  
 1. Myxomatosis.  
 2. Rabbit haemorrhagic disease.  
(h) Bee diseases  
 1. Acarapisosis of honey bees.  
 2. American foulbrood of honey bees.  
3. European foulbrood of honey bees.  
4. Small hive bettle infestation ( Aethina tumida ). 
5. Tropilae laps infestation of honey bees.  
6. Varroosis of honey bees.  
(i) Fish diseases  
1. Epi zootic haematopoietic necrosis.  
2. Infectious haematopoietic necrosis.  
3. Spring viraemia of carp.  
4. Viral haemorrhagic septicaemia.  
5. Infectious pancreatic necrosis.  
6. Infectious salmon anaemia.  
7. Epizootic ulcerative syndrome.  
8. Bacterial kidney diseas e (Renibacterium salmoninarum ). 
9. Gyrodactylosis ( Gyrodactylus salaris).  
10. Red sea bream iridoviral disease.  17 
 (j) Mollusc diseases  
1. Infection with Bonamia ostreae.  
2. Infection with Bonamia exitiosa.  
3. Infection with Marteilia refringens . 
4. Infection with Mikrocytos mackini . 
5. Infection with Perkinsus marinus . 
6. Infection wi th Perkinsus olseni . 
7. Infection with Xenohaliotis californiensis.  
(k) Crustacean diseases  
 1. Taura syndrome.  
2. White spot disease.  
3. Yellowhead disease.  
4. Tetrahedral baculovirosis ( Baculovirus pena ei).  
5. Spherical baculovirosis ( Penaeus monodon -type baculovirus ). 
6. Infectious hypodermal and haematopoietic necrosis.  
7. Crayfish plague ( Aphanomyces astaci ).  
(l) Other diseases  
1. Camelpox.  
2. Leishmaniosis.  
--------------------------The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009--------------------------
1 
 THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY EDUCATION ACT, 2009  
__________________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
RIGHT TO FREE AND COMPULSORY EDUCATION  
3. Right of child to free and compulsory education.  
4. Special provisions for children not admitted to, or who have not completed, elementary 
education.  
5. Right of transfer to other school.  
 
CHAPTER III  
DUTIES OF APPROPRIATE GOVERNMENT, LOCAL AUTHORITY AND PARENTS  
6. Duty of appropriate Government and local authority to establish school.  
7. Sharing of financial and other responsibilities.  
8. Duties of appropriate Government.  
9. Duties of local authority.  
10. Duty of parents and guardian.  
11. Appropriate Government to provide for pre -school education.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
RESPONSIBILITIES OF SCHOOLS AND TEACHERS  
12. Extent of school ’s responsibility for free and compulsory education.  
13. No capitation fee and screening procedure for admission.  
14. Proof of age for admission.  
15. No denial of ad mission.  
16. Prohibition of holding back and expulsion.  
17. Prohibition of physical punishment and mental harassment to child.  
18. No school to be established without obtaining certificate of recognition.  
19. Norms and standards for school.  
20. Power to amend Schedule.  
21. School  Management Committee.  
22. School Development Plan.  
23. Qualifications for appointment and terms and conditions of service of teachers.  2 
 SECTIONS  
24. Duties of teachers and redressal of grievances.  
25. Pupil -Teacher Ratio.  
26. Filling up vacancies of teachers.  
27. Prohibition of deployment of teachers for non -educational purposes.  
28. Prohibition of private tuition by teacher.  
 
CHAPTER V  
CURRICULUM AND COMPLETION OF ELEMENTARY EDUCATION  
29. Curriculum and evaluation procedure.  
30. Examination and completion certificate.  
 
CHAPTER  VI 
PROTECTION  OF RIGHT OF CHILDREN  
31. Monitoring of child ’s right to education.  
32. Redressal of grievances.  
33. Constitution of National Advisory Council.  
34. Constitution of State Advisory Council.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
 MISCELLANEOUS   
35. Power to issue directions.  
36. Previous sanction for prosecution.  
37. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
38. Power of appropriate Government to make rules.  
39. Power of Central Government to remove difficulties.  
THE SCHEDULE.  
 
  3 
 THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY EDUCATION ACT, 2009  
ACT NO. 35 OF 2009  
[26th August , 2009 .] 
An Act to provide for free and compulsory education to all children of the age of six to fourteen 
years.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short  title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Right of Children to Free  
and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.  
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the  Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official  Gazette, appoint.  
2[(4) Subject to the provisions of articles 29 and 30 of the Constitution, the provisions of this Act shall  
apply to conferment of rights on children to free and compulsory education . 
(5) Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to Madrasas, Vedic Pathsalas and educational 
institutions  primarily imparting religious instruction.]  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appropriate Government ” means — 
(i) in relation to a school established, owned or controlled by the Central Government, or the  
administrator of the Union territory, having no legislature, the Central Government;  
(ii) in relation to a school, other than the school referred to  in sub-clause ( i), established 
within  the territory of — 
(A) a State, the State Government;  
(B) a Union territory having legislature, the Government of that Union territory;  
(b) “capitation fee ” means any kind of donation or contributio n or payment other than the fee 
notified  by the school;  
(c) “child ” means a male or female child of the age of six to fourteen years;  
(d) “child belonging to disadvantaged group ” means 3[a child with d isability or] a child belonging 
to the Scheduled Caste,  the Scheduled Tribe, the socially and educationally backward class or such 
other  group having disadvantage owing to social, cultural, economical, geographical, linguistic, 
gender or  such other factor, as may be specified by the appropriate Government, by notification;  
(e) “child belonging to weaker section ” means a child belonging to such parent or guardian whose  
annual income is lower than the minimum limit specified by the appropriate Government, by  
notification;  
3[(ee) “child with disability ” includes, — 
(A) a child with “disability ” as defined in clause ( i) of section 2 of the Persons with 
Disabilities  (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and  Full Participation) Act, 1995                         
(1 of 1996);  
                                                        
1. 1st April, 2010, vide notification No. S.O. 428(E), dated 16th February, 2010, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,    
sec. 3( ii). 
2. Ins. by Act 30 of 2012, s.  2 (w.e.f. 1 -8- 2012).  
3. Ins. by s.  3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -8-2012).  4 
 (B) a child, being a person with disability as defined in clause ( j) of section 2 of the National  
Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple  
Disabilities Act, 1999  (44 of 1999) ; 
(C) a child with “severe disability ” as defined in clause ( o) of section 2 of the Na tional Trust 
for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities 
Act, 1999  (44 of 1999 ).]  
(f) “elementary education ” means the education from first class to eighth class;  
(g) “guardian ”, in relation to a child, means a person having the care and custody of that child and  
includes a natural guardian or guardian appointed or declared by a court or a statute;  
(h) “local authority ” means a Municipal Corporation or Munici pal Council or Zila Parishad or 
Nagar  Panchayat or Panchayat, by whatever name called, and includes such other authority or body 
having  administrative control over the school or empowered by or under any law for the time being in 
force to  function as a loc al authority in any city, town or village;  
(i) “National Commission for Protection of Child Rights ” means the National Commission for 
Protection  of Child Rights constituted under section 3 of the Commissions for Protection of Child 
Rights Act, 2005  (4 of 2 006); 
(j) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(k) “parent ” means either the natural or step or adoptive father or mother of a child;  
(l) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(m) “Schedule ” means the  Schedule annexed to this Act;  
(n) “school ” means any recognised school imparting ele mentary education and includes — 
(i) a school established, owned or controlled by the appropriate Government or a local  
authority;  
(ii) an aided school receiving aid or grants to meet whole or part of its expenses from the  
appropriate Government or the local authority;  
(iii) a school belonging to specified category; and  
(iv) an unaided school not receiving any kind of aid or grants to meet its expenses from the  
appropriat e Government or the local authority;  
(o) “screening procedure ” means the method of selection for admission of a child, in preference 
over another, other than a random method;  
(p) “specified category ”, in relation to a school, means a school known as Kendri ya Vidyalaya,  
Navodaya Vidyalaya, Sainik School or any other school having a distinct character which may be  
specified, by notification, by the appropriate Government;  
(q) “State Commission for Protection of Child Rights ” means the State Commission for 
Protection of  Child Rights constituted under section 3 of the Commissions for Protection of Child 
Rights Act, 2005  (4 of 2006 ). 
CHAPTER II  
RIGHT TO FREE AND COMPULSORY EDUCATION  
3. Right of child to free and compulsory education .—1[(1) Every child of the age of six to fourteen  
years, including a child referred to in clause ( d) or clause ( e) of section 2, shall have the right to free  and 
compulsory education in a neighbourhood school till the completion of his or her elementary  education.]  
(2) For the purpose of sub -section ( 1), no child shall be liable to pay any kind of fee or charges or 
expenses which may prevent him or her from pursuing and completing the elementary education.  
                                                        
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 2012, s.  4, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -8-2012).  5 
 1*   *   *   *   *  
2[(3) A child with disability referred to in sub -clause ( A) of clause ( ee) of section 2 shall, without  
prejudice to the provisions of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights  and 
Full Participation) Act, 1995  (1 of 1996 ), and a child referred to in sub -clauses ( B) and ( C) of clause ( ee) 
of section 2, have the same rights to pursue free and compulsory elementary education which children  
with disabilities have under the provisions of Chapter V of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal  
Opportunities, Protection of Rights and  Full Participa tion) Act, 1995:  
Provided that a child with “multiple disabilities ” referred to in clause ( h) and a child with “severe  
disability ” referred to in clause ( o) of section 2 of the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism,  
Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retar dation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999  (44 of 1999 ) may also have the 
right to opt for  home -based education.]  
4. Special provisions for children not admitted to, or who have not completed, elementary  
education .—Where a child above six years of age has not been admitted in any school or though  
admitted, could not complete his or her elementary education, then, he or she shall be admitted in a  class 
appropriate to his or her age:  
Provided that where a child is directly admitted in a class appropriate to h is or her age, then, he or she  
shall, in order to be at par with others, have a right to receive special training, in such manner, and  within 
such time -limits, as may be prescribed:  
Provided further that a child so admitted to elementary education shall be  entitled to free education 
till completion of elementary education even after fourteen years.  
5. Right of transfer to other school .—(1) Where in a school, there is no provision for completion of  
elementary education, a child shall have a right to seek tra nsfer to any other school, excluding the  school 
specified in sub -clauses ( iii) and ( iv) of clause ( n) of section 2, for completing his or her  elementary 
education.  
(2) Where a child is required to move from one school to another, either within a State or o utside, for  
any reason whatsoever, such child shall have a right to seek transfer to any other school, excluding the  
school specified in sub -clauses ( iii) and ( iv) of clause ( n) of section 2, for completing his or her  
elementary education.  
(3) For seeking admission in such other school, the Head -teacher or in -charge of the school where 
such child was last admitted, shall immediately issue the transfer certificate:  
Provided that delay in producing transfer certificate shall not be a ground for either delayin g or 
denying  admission in such other school:  
Provided further that the Head -teacher or in -charge of the school delaying issuance of transfer  
certificate shall be liable for disciplinary action under the service rules applicable to him or her.  
CHAPTER III  
DUTIES OF APPROPRIATE GOVERNMENT, LOCAL AUTHORITY AND PARENTS  
6. Duty of appropriate Government and local authority to establish school .—For carrying out the  
provisions of this Act, the appropriate Government and the local authority shall establish, within such 
area or limits of neighbourhood, as may be prescribed, a school, where it is not so established, within a  
period of three years from the commencement of this Act.  
7. Sharing of financial and other responsibilities .—(1) The Central Government and the S tate 
Governments shall have concurrent responsibility for providing funds for carrying out the provisions of  
this Act.  
(2) The Central Government shall prepare the estimates of capital and recurring expenditure for the  
implementation of the provisions of t he Act.  
                                                        
1. Proviso omitted by  Act 30 of 2012, s.  4 (w.e.f. 1 -8-2012).  
2. Ins. by s. 4 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -8-2012).  6 
 (3) The Central Government shall provide to the State Governments, as grants -in-aid of revenues,  
such percentage of expenditure referred to in sub -section ( 2) as it may determine, from time to time,  in 
consultation with the State Governments.  
(4) The Central Government may make a request to the President to make a reference to the Finance  
Commission under sub -clause ( d) of clause ( 3) of article 280 to examine the need for additional  resources 
to be provided to any State Government so that the said State Government may provide its  share of funds 
for carrying out the provisions of the Act.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 4), the State Government shall, taking into  
consideration the sums provided by the Central Government to a St ate Government under sub -section  (3), 
and its other resources, be responsible to provide funds for implementation of the provisions of the  Act. 
(6) The Central Government shall — 
(a) develop a framework of national curriculum with the help of academic autho rity specified  
under section 29;  
(b) develop and enforce standards for training of teachers;  
(c) provide technical support and resources to the State Government for promoting innovations,  
researches, planning and capacity building.  
8. Duties of appropriate  Government .—The appropriate Government shall — 
(a) provide free and compulsory elementary education to every child:  
Provided that where a child is admitted by his or her parents or guardian, as the case may be, in a  
school other than a school established, owned, controlled or substantially financed by funds provided  
directly or indirectly by the appropriate Government or a local authority, such child or his or her  
parents or guardian, as the case may be, shall not be entitled to make a claim for reimburseme nt of  
expenditure incurred on elementary education of the child in such other school.  
Explanation .—The term “compulsory education ” means obligation of the appropriate 
Government to — 
(i) provide free elementary education to every child of the age of six to fourteen years; and  
(ii) ensure compulsory admission, attendance and completion of elementary education by 
every  child of the age of six to fourteen years;  
(b) ensure availability of a neighbourhood school as specified in section 6;  
(c) ensure that the child belonging to weaker section and the child belonging to disadvantaged 
group  are not discriminated against and prevented from pursuing and completing elementary 
education on  any grounds;  
(d) provide infrastructure including school building, teaching st aff and learning equipment;  
(e) provide special training facility specified in section 4;  
(f) ensure and monitor admission, attendance and completion of elementary education by every 
child;  
(g) ensure good quality elementary education conforming to the sta ndards and norms specified in 
the Schedule;  
(h) ensure timely prescribing of curriculum and courses of study for elementary education; and  
(i) provide training facility for teachers.  
9. Duties of local authority .—Every local authority shall — 
(a) provide fr ee and compulsory  elementary education to every child:  
Provided that where a child is admitted by his or her parents or guardian, as the case may be, in a  
school other than a school established, owned, controlled or substantially financed by funds provided  7 
 directly or indirectly by the appropriate Government or a local authority, such child or his or her  
parents or guardian, as the case may be, shall not be entitled to make a claim for reimbursement of  
expenditure incurred on elementary education of the child in such other school;  
(b) ensure availability of a neighbourhood school as specified in section 6;  
(c) ensure that the child belonging to weaker section and the child belonging to disadvantaged 
group  are not discriminated against and prevented from p ursuing and completing elementary 
education on  any grounds;  
(d) maintain records of children up to the age of fourteen years residing within its jurisdiction, in 
such manner as may be prescribed;  
(e) ensure and monitor admission, attendance and completion of elementary education by every 
child  residing within its jurisdiction;  
(f) provide infrastructure including school building, teaching staff and learning material;  
(g) provide special training facility specified in section 4;  
(h) ensure good quality eleme ntary education conforming to the s tandards and norms specified in 
the Schedule;  
(i) ensure timely prescribing of curriculum and courses of study for elementary education;  
(j) provide training facility for teachers;  
(k) ensure admission of children of migr ant families;  
(l) monitor functioning of schools within its jurisdiction; and  
(m) decide the academic calendar.  
10. Duty of parents and guardian .—It shall be the duty of every parent or guardian to admit or 
cause  to be admitted his or her child or ward, as  the case may be, to an elementary education in the  
neighbourhood school.  
11. Appropriate Government to provide for pre -school education .—With a view to prepare  
children above the age of three years for elementary education and to provide early childhood care and  
education for all children until they complete the age of six years, the appropriate Government may  make 
necessary arrangement for providing free pre -school education for such children.  
CHAPTER IV  
RESPONSIBILITIES OF SCHOOLS AND TEACHERS  
12. Exten t of school's responsibility for free and compulsory education .—(1) For the purposes of  
this Act, a school, — 
(a) specified in sub -clause ( i) of clause ( n) of section 2 shall provide free and compulsory 
elementary  education to all children admitted therein;  
(b) specified in sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( n) of section 2 shall provide free and compulsory 
elementary  education to such proportion of children admitted therein as its annual recurring aid or 
grants so  received bears to its annual recurring expenses, subject to a minimum of twenty -five per 
cent.;  
(c) specified in sub -clauses ( iii) and ( iv) of clause ( n) of section 2 shall admit in class I, to the 
extent of  at least twenty -five per cent. of the strength of that class, children belonging to weaker 
sectio n and  disadvantaged group in the neighbourhood and provide free and compulsory elementary 
education till  its completion:  
Provided that where a school specified in clause ( n) of section 2 imparts pre -school education,  the 
provisions of clauses ( a) to ( c) shall apply for admission to such pre -school education.  8 
 (2) The school specified in sub -clause ( iv) of clause ( n) of section 2 providing free and compulsory  
elementary education as specified in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) shall be reimbursed expenditure so  
incurred by it to the extent of per -child -expenditure incurred by the State, or the actual amount  charged 
from the child, whichever is less, in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that such reimbursement shall not exceed per -child -expenditure incur red by a school 
specified  in sub -clause ( i) of clause ( n) of section 2:  
Provided further that where such school is already under obligation to provide free education to a  
specified number of children on account of it having received any land, building, equipment or other  
facilities, either free of cost or at a concessional rate, such school shall not be entitled for  reimbursement 
to the extent of such obligation.  
(3) Every school shall provide such information as may be required by the appropriate Govern ment or  
the local authority, as the case may be.  
13. No capitation fee and screening procedure for admission .—(1) No school or person shall,  
while admitting a child, collect any capitation fee and subject the child or his or her parents or guardian  to 
any screening procedure.  
(2) Any school or person, if in contravention of the provisions of sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) receives capitation fee, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to ten times the 
capitation  fee charged;  
(b) subjects a child to screening  procedure, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 
twenty -five thousand rupees for the first contravention and fifty thousand rupees for each subsequent  
contraventions.  
14. Proof of age for admission .—(1) For the purposes of admission to element ary education, the age  
of a child shall be determined on the basis of the birth certificate issued in accordance with the  provisions 
of the Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act, 1886  (6 of 1886 ) or on the basis of such other  
document, as may be prescribed.  
(2) No child shall be denied admission in a school for lack of age proof.  
15. No denial of admission .—A child shall be admitted in a school at the commencement of the  
academic year or within such extended period as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no child shall be denied admission if such admission is sought subsequent to the  
extended period:  
Provided further that any child admitted after the extended period shall complete his studies in such  
manner as may be prescribed by  the appropriate Government.  
16. Prohibition of holding back and expulsion .—No child admitted in a school shall be held back in  
any class or expelled from school till the completion of elementary education.  
17. Prohibition of physical punishment and mental  harassment to child .—(1) No child shall be  
subjected to physical punishment or mental harassment.  
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be liable to disciplinary action under  
the service rules applicable to such person.  
18. No School to be established without obtaining certificate of recognition .—(1) No school,  other 
than a school established, owned or controlled by the appropriate Government or the local  authority, shall, 
after the commencement of this Act, be established or fu nction, without obtaining a  certificate of 
recognition from such authority, by making an application in such form and manner, as  may be 
prescribed.  
(2) The authority prescribed under sub -section ( 1) shall issue the certificate of recognition in such  
form, within such period, in such manner, and subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed:  9 
 Provided that no such recognition shall be granted to a school unless it fulfils norms and standards  
specified under section 19.  
(3) On the contravention of the condi tions of recognition, the prescrib ed authority shall, by an order 
in writing, withdraw recognition:  
Provided that such order shall contain a direction as to which of the neighbourhood school, the 
children  studying in the derecognised school, shall be admit ted: 
Provided further that no recognition shall be so withdrawn without giving an opportunity of being 
heard  to such school, in such manner, as may be prescribed.  
(4) With effect from the date of withdrawal of the recognition under sub -section ( 3), no such  school  
shall continue to function.  
(5) Any person who establishes or runs a school without obtaining certificate of recognition, or  
continues to run a school after withdrawal of recognition, shall be liable to fine which may extend to  one 
lakh rupees and in case of continuing contraventions, to a fine of ten thousand rupees for each day  during 
which such contravention continues.  
19. Norms and standards for school .—(1) No school shal l be established, or recognised  under  
section 18, unless it fulfils the norms and standards specified in the Schedule.  
(2) Where a school established before the commencement of this Act does not fulfil the norms and  
standards specified in the Schedule, it shall take steps to fulfil such norms and standards at its own  
expenses,  within a period of three years from the date of such commencement.  
(3) Where a school fails to fulfil the norms and standards within the period specified under            
sub-section  (2), the authority prescribed under sub -section ( 1) of section 18 shall withdraw recognition 
granted to  such school in the manner specified under sub -section ( 3) thereof.  
(4) With effect from the date of withdrawal of recognition under sub -section ( 3), no school shall  
continue to function.  
(5) Any person who continues to run a  school after the recognition is withdrawn, shall be liable to 
fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and in case of continuing contraventions, to a fine of ten  
thousand rupees for each day during which such contravention continues.  
20. Power to amend Sc hedule .—The Central Government may, by notification, amend the Schedule  
by adding to, or omitting therefrom, any norms and standards.  
21. School Management Committee .—(1) A school, other than a school specified in sub -clause ( iv) 
of clause ( n) of section 2, shall constitute a School Management Committee consisting of the elected  
representatives of the local authority, parents or guardians of children admitted in such school and  
teachers:  
Provided that at  least three -fourth of members of such Committee shal l be parents or guardians:  
Provided further that proportionate representation shall be given to the parents or guardians of 
children  belonging to disadvantaged group and weaker section:  
Provided also that fifty per cent. of Members of such Committee shall be women.  
(2) The School Management Committee shall perform th e following functions, namely: — 
(a) monitor the working of the school;  
(b) prepare and recommend school development plan;  
(c) monitor the utilisation of the grants received from the appropriate Government or local  
authority or any other source; and  
(d) perform such other  functions as may be prescribed:  10 
 1[Provided that the School Management Committee constituted under sub -section ( 1) in respect of, — 
(a) a school established and administered by minority whether based on religion or language;  and 
(b) all other aided schools as defined in sub -section ( ii) of clause ( n) of section 2,  
shall perform  advisory function only.]  
22. School Development Plan. —(1) Every 2[School Management Committee, except t he School  
Management Committee in respect of a school established and administered by minority, whether  based 
on religion or language and an aided school as defined in sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( n) of section  2, 
constituted] under sub -section ( 1) of sectio n 21, shall prepare a School Development Plan, in such  manner 
as may be prescribed.  
(2) The School Development Plan so prepared under sub -section ( 1) shall be the basis for the plans  
and grants to be made by the appropriate Government or local authority, as the case may be.  
23. Qualifications for appointment and terms and conditions of service of teachers .—(1) Any  
person possessing such minimum qualifications, as laid down by an academic authority, authorised by  the 
Central Government, by notification, sha ll be eligible for appointment as a teacher.  
(2) Where a State does not have adequate institutions offering courses or training in teacher 
education,  or teachers possessing minimum qualifications as laid down under sub -section ( 1) are not 
available in  sufficient numbers, the Central Government may, if it deems necessary, by notification, relax 
the minimum qualifications required for appointment as a teacher, for such period, not exceeding five  
years, as may be specified in that notification:  
Provided that a  teacher who, at the commencement of this Act, does not possess minimum  
qualifications as laid down under sub -section ( 1), shall acquire such minimum qualifications within a  
period of five years:  
3[Provided further that every teacher appointed or in position as on the 31st March, 2015, who does 
not possess minimum qualifications as laid down under sub -section ( 1), shall acquire such minimum 
qualifications within a period of four years from the date of commencement of the Right of Children to 
Free and Compulsory Education (Amendment) Act, 2017  (24 of 2017) .] 
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and the terms and conditions of service of, teachers shall be  
such as may be prescribed.  
24. Duties of teach ers and redressal of grievances. —(1) A teacher appointed under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 23 shall perform  the following duties, namely: — 
(a) maintain regularity and punctuality in attending school;  
(b) conduct and complete the curriculum in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 29; 
(c) complete entire curriculum within the specified time;  
(d) assess the learning ability of each child and accordingly supplement additional instructions,  if 
any, as required;  
(e) hold regular meetings with parents and guardians and apprise them about  the regularity in  
attendance, ability to learn, progress made in learning and any other relevant information about  the 
child; and  
(f) perform such other duties as may be prescribed.  
(2) A teacher committing default in performance of duties specified in su b-section ( 1), shall be liable 
to disciplinary action under the service rules applicable to him or her:  
                                                        
1. Ins. by Act 30 of 2012, s.  5 (w.e.f. 1 -8-2012).  
2. Subs. by s.  6, ibid., for “School Management Committee, constituted ” (w.e.f. 1 -8-2012).  
3. Ins. by Act 24 of 2017, s. 2  (w.e.f. 1 -4-2015).  11 
 Provided that before taking such disciplinary action, reasonable opportunity of being heard shall be  
afforded to such teacher.  
(3) The grievances, if an y, of the teacher shall be redressed in such manner as may be prescribed.  
25. Pupil -Teacher Ratio. —(1) 1[Within three years] from the date of commencement of this Act, the  
appropriate Government and the local authority shall ensure that the Pupil -Teacher Ratio, as specified  in 
the Schedule, is maintained in each school.  
(2) For the purpose of maintaining the Pupil -Teacher Ratio under sub -section ( 1), no teacher posted in  
a school shall be made to serve in any other school or office or deployed for any non -educational  purpose, 
other than those specified in section 27.  
26. Filling up vacancies of teachers .—The appointing authority, in relation to a school established,  
owned, controlled or substantially financed by funds provided directly or indirectly by the appropriate  
Government or by a local authority, shall ensure that vacancy of teacher in a school under its control  shall 
not exceed ten per cent. of the total sanctioned strength.  
27. Prohibition of deployment of teachers for non -educational purposes .—No t eacher shall be  
deployed for any non -educational purposes other than the decennial population census, disaster relief  
duties or duties relating to elections to the local authority or the State Legislatures or Parliament, as  the 
case may be.  
28. Prohibition  of private tuition by teacher .—No teacher shall engage himself or herself in private  
tuition or private teaching activity.  
CHAPTER V  
CURRICULUM AND COMPLETION OF ELEMENTARY EDUCATION  
29. Curriculum and evaluation procedure .—(1) The curriculum and the evaluation procedure for  
elementary education shall be laid down by an academic authority to be specified by the appropriate  
Government, by notification.  
(2) The academic authority, while laying down the curriculum and the evaluation procedure under 
sub-section  (1), shall take into consid eration the following, namely: — 
(a) conformity with the values enshrined in the Constitution;  
(b) all round development of the child;  
(c) building up child's knowledge, potentiality and talent;  
(d) development of physical and mental abilities to the fullest extent;  
(e) learning through activities, discovery and exploration in a child friendly and child -centered  
manner;  
(f) medium of instructions shall, as far as practicable, be in child's mother tongue;  
(g) making the child  free of fear, trauma and anxiety and helping the child to express views  
freely;  
(h) comprehensive and continuous evaluation of child's understanding of knowledge and his or  
her ability to apply the same.  
30. Examination and completion certificate .—(1) No child shall be required to pass any Board  
examination till completion of elementary education.  
(2) Every child completing his elementary education shall be awarded a certificate, in such form and 
in such manner, as may be prescribed.  
  
                                                        
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 2012, s.  7, for “Within six months ” (w.e.f. 1 -8-2012).  12 
 CHAPTER VI  
PROTECTIO N OF RIGHT OF CHILDREN  
31. Monitorin g of child's right to education. —(1) The National Commission for Protection of Child  
Rights constituted under section 3, or, as the case may be, the State Commission for Protection of  Child 
Rights constituted under section 17, of the Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005            
(4 of 2006), shall, in addition to the functions assigned to them under that Act, also perform the  following 
functions, namely: — 
(a) examine and review the safeguards for rig hts provided by or under this Act and recommend  
measures for their effective implementation;  
(b) inquire into complaints relating to child's right to free and compulsory education; and  
(c) take necessary steps as provided under sections 15 and 24 of the sa id Commissions for  
Protection of Child Rights Act.  
(2) The said Commissions shall, while inquiring into any matters relating to child's right to free and  
compulsory education under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1), have the same powers as assigned to them  
respectively under sections 14 and 24 of the said Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act.  
(3) Where the State Commission for Protection of Child Rights has not been constituted in a State, the  
appropriate Government may, for the purpose of performing the functions specified in clauses ( a) to ( c) of 
sub-section ( 1), constitute such authority, in such manner and subject to such terms and conditions,  as 
may be prescribed.  
32. Redressal of grievances .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 31, any person  
having any grievance relating to the right of a child under this Act may make a written complaint to the  
local authority having jurisdiction.  
(2) After receiving the complaint under sub -section ( 1), the local authority shall decide the matter  
within a period of three months after affording a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the parties  
concerned.  
(3) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the local authority may prefer an appeal to the State  
Commission for Protection of Child Rights or t he authority prescribed under sub -section ( 3) of section  31, 
as the case may be.  
(4) The appeal preferred under sub -section ( 3) shall be decided by State Commission for Protection of  
Child Rights or the authority prescribed under sub -section ( 3) of section  31, as the case may be, as  
provided under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 31.  
33. Constitution of National Advisory Council .—(1) The Central Government shall constitute, by  
notification, a National Advisory Council, consisting of such number of Members, not exceeding fifteen,  
as the Central Government may deem necessary, to be appointed from amongst persons having  
knowledge and practical experience in the field of elementary education and child development.  
(2) The functions of the National Advisory Council shall be to advise the Central Government on  
implementation of the provisions of the Act in an effective manner.  
(3) The allowances and other terms and conditions of the appointment of Members of the National  
Advisory Council shall be such  as may be prescribed.  
34. Constitution of State Advisory Council .—(1) The State Government shall constitute, by  
notification, a State Advisory Council consisting of such number of Members, not exceeding fifteen, as  
the State Government may deem necessary,  to be appointed from amongst persons having knowledge  and 
practical experience in the field of elementary education and child development.  
(2) The functions of the State Advisory Council shall be to advise the State Government on  
implementation of the pro visions of the Act in an effective manner.  
(3) The allowances and other terms and conditions of appointment of Members of the State Advisory  
Council sha ll be such as may be prescribed.  13 
 CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
35. Power to issue directions .—(1) The Central Government may issue such guidelines to the  
appropriate Government or, as the case may be, the local authority, as it deems fit for the purposes of  
implementation of the provisions of this Act.  
(2) The appropriate Government may issue guidelines an d give such directions, as it deems fit, to the  
local authority or the School Management Committee regarding implementation of the provisions of  this 
Act. 
(3) The local authority may issue guidelines and give such directions, as it deems fit, to the School  
Management Committee regarding implementation of the provisions of this Act.  
36. Previous sanction for prosecution .—No prosecution for offences punishable under sub -section  
(2) of section 13, sub -section ( 5) of section 18 and sub -section ( 5) of section 19  shall be instituted  except 
with the previous sanction of an officer authorised in this behalf, by the appropriate  Government, by 
notification.  
37. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the  
Central Go vernment, the State Government, the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights,  the 
State Commission for Protection of Child Rights, the local authority, the School Management  Committee 
or any person, in respect of anything which is in good faith d one or intended to be done, in  pursuance of 
this Act, or any rules or order made thereunder.  
38. Power of appropriate Government to make rules .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by  
notification, make rules, for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may  
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of giving special training and the time -limit thereof, under first proviso to     
section 4;  
(b) the area or limits for establishment of a neighbourhood school, under section 6;  
(c) the manner of maintenance of records of children up to the age of fourteen years, under   
clause ( d) of section 9;  
(d) the manner and extent of reimbursement of expenditure, under sub -section ( 2) of section  12; 
(e) any other document for determining the age of child under sub -section ( 1) of section 14;  
(f) the extended period for admission and the manner of completing study if admitted after the  
extended period, under section 15;  
(g) the authority, the form and manner of making application for certificate of recognition,  under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 18;  
(h) the form, the period, the manner and the conditions for issuing certificate of recognition,  
under sub -section ( 2) of section 18;  
(i) the manner of giving opportunity of hearing under second proviso to sub -section ( 3) of   
section 18;  
(j) the Other functions to be performed by School Management Committee under clause (d) of 
sub-section  (2) of section 21;  
(k) the manner of preparing School Development Plan under sub -section ( 1) of section 22;  
(l) the salary and allowances payable to, and the ter ms and conditions of service of  teacher,  under 
sub-section ( 3) of section 23;  
(m) the duties to be performed by the teacher under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of section 24;  14 
 (n) the manner of redressing grievances of teachers under sub -section ( 3) of section 24;  
(o) the form and manner of awarding certificate for completion of elementary education under  
sub-section ( 2) of section 30;  
(p) the authority, the manner of its constitution and the terms and conditions therefor, under     
sub-section ( 3) of section 31;  
(q) the allowances and other terms and conditions of appointment of Members of the National  
Advisory Council un der sub -section ( 3) of section 33;  
(r) the allowances and other terms and conditions of appointment of Members of the State  
Advisory Council under sub -section ( 3) of section 34.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act and every notification issued under section s 20 and 23 by the  
Central Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament,  
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two  or 
more successive sessions,  and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session  or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or  notification or 
both Houses agree that the rule or notification should not be made , the rule or  notification shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may  be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of  anything previously done under 
that rule or notification.  
(4) Every rule or notification made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as  
may be after it is made; before the State Legislatures.  
1[39. Power of Central Government to remove difficulties .—(1) If any diffic ulty arises in giving  
effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official  
Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to  be 
necessary for removing the  difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from the  
commencement of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (Amendment) Act, 2012    
(30 of 2012) . 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each  
House of Parliament.]   
                                                        
1. Ins. by Act 30 of 2012, s.  8 (w.e.f. 1 -8-2012).  15 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See sections 19 and 25)  
NORMS AND STANDARDS FOR A SCHOOL  
 
Sl. No.  Item Norms and Standards  
1. Numbers of teachers:   
 (a) For first class to fifth class  Admitted children  Number of teachers  
Up to Sixty  Two 
Between sixty -one to 
ninety  Three  
Between Ninety -one to 
one hundred and twenty  Four  
Between One hundred 
and twenty -one to two 
hundred  Five 
Above One hundred and 
fifty children  Five plus one Head -
teacher  
Above Two hundred 
children  Pupil -Teacher Ratio 
(excluding Head -teacher) 
shall not exceed forty.  
 (b) For sixth class to eighth class  (1) At least one teacher per class so that there shall be 
at least one teacher each for — 
(i) Science and Mathematics;  
(ii) Social Studies;  
(iii) Languages.  
(2) At least one teacher for every thirty -five children.  
(3) Where admission of children is above one 
hundred — 
(i) a full time head -teacher;  
(ii) part time instructors for — 
(A) Art Education;  
(B) Health and Physical Education;  
(C) Work Education.  
2. Building  All-weather building consisting of — 
(i) at least one class -room for every teacher and an 
office -cum-store -cum-Head teacher ’s room;  
(ii) barrier -free access;  
(iii) separate toilets for boys and girls;  
(iv) safe and adequate drinking water facility to all 
children;  
  16 
 Sl. No.  Item Norms and Standards  
  (v) a kitchen where mid -day meal is cooked in the 
school;  
(vi) Playground;  
(vii) arrangements for securing the school building by 
boundary wall or fencing.  
3. Minimum number of working 
days/instructional hours in an 
academic year  (i) two hundred working days for first class to fifth 
class;  
(ii) two hundred and twenty working days for sixth 
class to eighth class;  
(iii) eight hundred instructi onal hours per academic 
year for first class to fifth class;  
(iv) one thousand  instructional hours per academic year 
for sixth class to eighth class.  
4. Minimum number of working hours 
per week for the teacher  forty -five teaching including preparation hours.  
5. Teaching learning equipment  Shall be provided to each class as required.  
6. Library  There shall be a library in each school providing 
newspaper, magazines and books on all subjects, 
including story -books.  
7. Play material, games and sports 
equipment  Shall be provided to each class as required.  
 
--------------------------The Science and Engineering Research Board Act, 2008--------------------------
1 
 THE SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING RESEARCH BOARD  ACT, 2008  
  ACT NO. 9 OF 2009  
[17th January,  2009.]  
An Act to provide for the constitution of a Board for promoting basic research in Science and 
Engineering and to provide financial assistance to persons engaged  in such research, 
academic institutions, research and development laboratories, industrial concerns and other 
agencies fo r such research and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Science and Engineering 
Research Board Act, 2008.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Board” means the Science and Engineering Research Board constituted under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 3;  
(b) “Chairperson ” means the Chairperson of the Board;  
(c) “Fund” means the Fund for Science and Engineering Research constituted under                      
sub-section ( 1) of section 10;  
(d) “member” means a member of the Board and includes the Chairperson;  
(e) “Oversight Committee ” means the Oversight Committee of Experts constituted under             
sub-section ( 1) of section 5;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “Secretary ” means the Secretary of the Board appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 4.  
CHAPTER II  
SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING  RESEARCH BOARD  
3. Constitution and incorporation of Board .—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, constitute, for the purposes of this Act, a Board to be called the Science and 
Engineering Research Board.  
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and a 
common seal with power, subject to the provi sions of this Act, to contract and shall, by the said name, sue 
and be sued.  
(3) The Board shall consist of the following persons, namely: — 
(a) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Science and Technology,                
ex officio—Chairperson;  
(b) Member -Secretary, Planning Commission, ex officio—Member;  
(c) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Biotechnology,                                  
ex officio—Member;  
(d) Secretary to the Government of India in the Depa rtment of Scientific and Industrial Research, 
ex officio—Member;  2 
 (e) Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Earth Sciences,  ex officio—Member;  
(f) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance 
or his nominee, ex officio—Member;  
(g) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Health Research,                                  
ex officio—Member ; 
(h) not  more than three members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst 
persons having experience in scientific research in different disciplines in academic institutions;  
(i) not more than three members to be appointed by the Central Government fr om amongst 
persons having experience in scientific research in different disciplines in Government research 
laboratories;  
(j) not more than four members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst 
persons having experience in scientific research  in different disciplines in the industry, international 
projects on science and technology, socio -economic sectors and other Government research 
laboratories.  
(4) The Head Office of the Board shall be at Delhi or in the National Capital Region.  
(5) The qualifications and experience, term of office and allowances of the members specified in 
clauses ( h) to ( j) of sub -section ( 3) shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(6) The Chairperson shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of the Board, exercise and 
discharge such powers and duties, as may be prescribed or delegated to him by the Board.  
(7) No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalidated merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board;  
(b) any defect  in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Board;  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits of the case.  
4. Secretary and other officers and employees of Board .—(1) The Board may appoint an eminent 
Scientist  not below the rank of Additional Secretary to the Government of India as the Secretary of the 
Board, in consultation with the Central Government.  
(2) The Board may appoint such other officers and employees as it considers necessary for the 
efficient disch arge of its functions under this Act.  
(3) The qualifications and experience, terms and conditions of service including salary and 
allowances of the Secretary and other officers and employees of the Board shall be such as may be 
specified in the regulations  made by the Board.  
(4) The Board may engage the services of personnel, both from within and outside the country as 
consultants, visiting scientists on such terms and conditions and remunerations as may be specified in the 
regulations made by the Board and  shall facilitate their operations within the country.  
5. Oversight Committee of Experts .—(1) Subject to the rules made in this behalf, the Board shall 
constitute an Oversight Committee of Experts consisting of experts, eminent scientists and academics to 
advise and assist the Board.  
(2) The Oversight Committee shall consist of the following persons, namely: — 
(i) a scientist of emi nence and international repute —Chairperson;  
(ii) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Science and Technology,                      
ex officio—Vice -Chairperson;  
(iii) Presidents of Indian National Science Academy, Indian Academy of Sciences and Indian 
National Academy of Engineering, ex officio—Members;  3 
 (iv) not more than three members to be appointed by  the Central Government from amongst 
distinguished experts in different areas of science and technology; and  
(v) Secretary to the Board, ex officio—Member.  
6. Committees of Board .—(1) Subject to the rules made in this behalf, the Board may appoint such 
committees as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of its duties and performance of its functions 
under this Act.  
(2) The Board shall have the power to co -opt as members of any committee appointed under           
sub-section ( 1), such number of persons who are not members of the Board as it may think fit, and the 
person so co -opted shall have the right to attend the meetings of the committee, and take part in the 
proceedings of the committee.  
7. Powers and functions of Board .—(1) The Board shall serve as a premier multi -disciplinary 
research funding agency for planning, promoting and funding basic research in the emerging areas of 
science and engineering.  
(2) The powers and functions of the Board shall, inter alia , include— 
(i) serving as a premie r multi -disciplinary research agency for planning, promoting and funding 
of internationally competitive research in emerging areas;  
(ii) considering and taking decisions on the recommendations and suggestions m ade by the 
Oversight Committee;  
(iii) identify ing major inter -disciplinary research areas, and individuals, groups or institutions and 
funding them for undertaking research;  
(iv) evolving nationally coordinated programmes in various identified areas involving institutions 
that will have a multiplier e ffect in promoting research;  
(v) assisting in setting up infrastructure and environment for scientific pursuit;  
(vi) achieving synergy between academic institutions, research and development laboratories and 
industry for promoting basic research in science  and engineering;  
(vii) evolving a management system to speedily provide for funding research, including 
monitoring and evaluation, by adopting modern management practices;  
(viii) evolving participation in international collaborative projects, wherever nec essary or 
desirable; and  
(ix) taking over and continuance of the basic research projects and programmes undertaken or 
funded by the Central Government under the existing Science and Engineering Research Council 
scheme.  
(3) The Board may provide financial a ssistance for the purposes specified in sub -section ( 2), in the 
form of grants and loans to individuals, academic institutions, research and development laboratories, 
industries and other organisations.  
CHAPTER III  
APPLICATION FOR SANCTION OF FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE  
8. Application for availing of financial assistance .—(1) An application for availing of financial 
assistance for the purposes specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 7 shall be made to the Board in such 
form as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Board m ay, after examining the application and after making such enquiries or seeking such 
clarifications as it considers necessary, by order in writing, either sanction the financial assistance or 
refuse the same.   4 
 CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
9. Grant s and loans by Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law, in this behalf, make to the Board grants and loans of such sums 
of money as that Government may consider necessary.  
10. Fund for Science and E ngineering Research .—(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be 
called the Fund for Science and Engineering Research and there shall be credited to the Fund — 
(a) any grants and loans made to the Board by the Central Government under section 9;  
(b) all sum s received by the Board including donations from any other source;  
(c) recoveries made of the amounts granted from the Fund; and  
(d) any income from investment of the amount of the Fund.  
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting — 
(a) expenses  on the object and for the purposes authorised by this Act;  
(b) salaries, allowances and other expenses of the members, officers and other employees of the 
Board;  
(c) remunerations of the consultants and visiting scientists; and  
(d) expenses of the Board i n the discharge of its functions under this Act.  
11. Budget .—The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year, as may 
be prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the 
Board and forward the same to the Central Government.  
12. Annual report .—The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year, 
as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous fin ancial 
year, and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.  
13. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any other person appointed by him in 
connection with the auditing of the accounts of the Board under this Act shall have the s ame rights and 
privileges and the authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of 
India has in connection with the auditing of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the 
right to demand the production of bo oks, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers 
and to inspect any of the office of the Board under this Act.  
(3) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
annually and any expenditure incur red in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Board to the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General.  
(4) The Board shall furnish to the Central Government, before such date as may be prescribed, its 
audited copy of accounts together with auditor's repor t. 
14. Annual report and auditor's report to be laid before Parliament .—The Central Government 
shall cause the annual report and auditor's report to be laid, as soon as may be after they are received, 
before each House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOU S 
15. Returns to be furnished to Board .—(1) An industrial concern or an institution receiving 
financial assistance from the Board shall furnish return to the Board in such form and at such time as may 
be specified by regulations.  5 
 (2) The Board may authoris e an officer to visit any industrial concern or institution referred to in            
sub-section ( 1) at any time to verify the accuracy of any return made under this section.  
16. Power of Central Government to issue directions .—(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing 
provisions of this Act, the Board shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, be 
bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from 
time to time:  
Provided that the Board shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views 
before any direction is given under this sub -section.  
(2) The decision of the Central Government, whether a question is one of the policy or not, shall be 
final.  
17. Power of Central Government to supersede Board .—(1) If at any time the Centr al Government 
is of the opinion — 
(a) that on account of grave emergency, the Board is unable to discharge the functions and the 
duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or 
(b) that the Board has persistently made default in complying with any direction issued by the 
Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions and duties imposed on it by or 
under the provisions of this Act and as a result of such  default the financial position of the Board or 
the administration of the Board has deteriorated; or  
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest so to do,  
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette , supersede the Board for such period, 
not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section ( 1) superseding the Board, — 
(a) all the members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be 
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Board shall, until the Board is reconstituted under      
sub-section  (3), be exercised and discharged by such person or persons as the Central Government 
may direct; and  
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Board shall, until the Board is reconstituted under    
sub-section ( 3), vest in the Central Government.  
(3) On the expi ration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under              
sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may reconstitute the Board by a fresh appointment and in such 
case any person or persons who vacated their offices under cl ause ( a) of sub -section ( 2), shall not be 
deemed to be disqualified for appointment:  
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time, before the expiration of the period of 
supersession, take action under this sub -section.  
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub -section ( 1) and a full report of 
any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid before each 
House of Parliament at the earliest.  
18. Delegation .—The Board may, by gene ral or special order in writing, delegate to the Chairperson 
or any other member or to any officer of the Board subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as 
may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act (except th e power under 
section 21) as it may deem necessary.  
19. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against the Central Government or the Board or any committee appointed by it or any member of the 
Board or such committee, or any officer or employee of the Government or the Board or any other person 
authorised by the Central Government or the Board for anything which is in good faith done or intended 
to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.  6 
 20. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the qualifications and experience, term of office and other allowances of the members of the 
Board, under sub -section ( 5) of section 3;  
(b) the powers and duties of the Chairperson under sub -section ( 6) of section 3;  
(c) the constitution of Oversight Committee under section 5;  
(d) the constitution of committees under sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(e) the form of application under sub -section ( 1) of section 8;  
(f) the form in which, and the time at which the Board shall prepare its budget under section 11 
and its annual report under section 12;  
(g) the form of annual statement of accounts under sub -section ( 1) of section 13 and the date 
before whic h audited copy of the accounts may be furnished to the Central Government under                  
sub-section ( 4) of that section;  
(h) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed or in respect of which provision is to be, 
or may be, made by rules.  
21. Power of Board to make regulations .—(1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the 
Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and 
the rules generally to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the qualifications and experience, terms and conditions of service including salaries  and 
allowances of the Secretary and other officers and employees of the Board under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 4;  
(b) the form in which and the time at which the returns may be furnished to the Board under           
sub-section ( 1) of section 15.  
22. Rules  and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be co mprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or 
both Ho uses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudic e to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation.  
 
_____________  
--------------------------The South Asian University Act, 2008--------------------------
1 
 THE SOUTH ASIAN UNIVERSITY ACT, 2008  
____ _________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
 
SECTION S 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Provisions of Agreement to have force of law.  
4. Incorporation of South Asian University.  
5. Jurisdiction.  
6. Governing Board.  
7. Objectives of University.  
8. Powers of University.  
9. University open to all persons.  
10. Visitor.  
11. Officers of University.  
12. President and its powers.  
13. Other officers.  
14. Privileges and immunities of President and academic staff.  
15. Authorities of University . 
16. Executive Council.  
17. Academic Council.  
18. Constitution of other authorities.  
19. Faculties and Departments.  
20. Statutes.  
21. Regulations . 
22. Bye-laws.  
23. Power to give retrospective effect to Statutes and Regulations.  
24. Annual report.  
25. Audit of accounts.  
26. Conditions of service of  employees.  
27. Procedure of arbitration in disciplinary cases against students.  
28. Proceedings of University authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
30. Reference to SAARC Arbitration Council.  
31. Statutes and Regula tions and bye -laws to be published in Official Gazette and to be laid before 
Parliament.  
32. Power to remove difficulties . 
THE SCHEDULE  
 
 
  2 
 THE SOUTH ASIAN UNIVERSITY ACT, 2008  
ACT NO. 8 OF 2009  
[11th January , 2009.]  
An Act to give effect to the Agreement for the establishment of South Asian University and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  an Agreement for the establishment of the South Asian University was signed on behalf of 
the respective Governments of the Member States of the S outh Asian Association for Regional                        
Co-operation (SAARC) on the 4th day of April, 2007;  
AND WHE REAS  Article 1 of the said Agreement provides that the main campus of the University shall 
be located in India, therefore, it is expedient  to make provisions for giving effect to the said Agreement;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -ninth Year of the Republic of Ind ia as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the South Asian University 
Act, 2008 . 
(2) It extends to the whole of India and to campuses and centres established outside India in the 
SAARC region.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates m ay be appointed for different provisions of this Act.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless  the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Academic Council ” means the Academic Council of the University;  
(b) “academic staff ” means such categories of staff as are designated as academic staff by the 
Statutes;  
(c) “Agreement ” means the Agreement for the establishment of the South Asian University;  
(d) “bye-laws” means the bye -laws of the University;  
(e) “Centre” means a unit of the University or of a University Institute providing teaching, 
consultancy and research facilities and includes a Regional Centre;  
(f) “employee ” means any person appointed by the University and includes teachers and other 
staff of the Un iversity;  
(g) “Executive Council ” means the Executive Council of the University;  
(h) “Faculty” means a Faculty of the University;  
(i) “Governing Board ” means a Governing Board of the University constituted under section 6;  
(j) “Hall” means a unit of reside nce, by whatever name called, for students of the University 
provided, maintained or recognised by it;  
(k) “Host Country ” means the Republic of India;  
(l) “Host Government ” means the Government of the Host Country;  
(m) “Member States ” means the Member Stat es of the SAARC;  
(n) “prescribed ” means prescribed by Statutes, Regulations or bye -laws;  
(o) “President” means the President of the University appointed under  section 12;  
(p) “Project Office ” means the project office set up for the purpose of carrying out necessary 
tasks for establishing the main campus of the University;  
(q) “Recognised institution ” means an institution of higher learning maintained or recognised by, 
or associated with, the U niversity;  3 
 (r) “Regional Centre ” means a centre established or maintained by the University at any place in 
the SAARC region for the purpose of coordinating and supervising the work of campuses or centres 
in such region and for performing such functions as  may be conferred on such centre by the 
Governing Board;  
(s) “Regulations ” means the Regulations of the University;  
(t) “SAARC” means an organisation known as the South Asian Association for Regional                   
Co-operation established by the Charte r of the South Asian Association for Regional Co -operation 
signed on eighth day of December, 1985;  
(u) “SAARC region ” means the region comprising the territories of the Member States;  
(v) “Schedule” means the Schedule of the Act;  
(w) “Statutes” means the Statutes of the University;  
(x) “teacher” means professor, reader, lecturer and research staff of the University appointed or 
recognised by the University for imparting instructions in the University or for giving guidance to 
students for pursui ng any course of study of the University; and  
(y) “University ” means the South Asian University incorporated under  section 4.  
3. Provisions of A greement to have force of law. —Notwithstanding anything contrary contained in 
any other law, the provisions of t he Agreement set out in the Schedule shall have the force of law in India . 
4. Incorpor ation of South Asian University. —(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shal l be established, 
for the purposes of giving effect to provisions of the Agreement, a University to be called as South Asian 
University.  
(2) The University shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal and 
shall sue and be sued by  the said name.  
(3) The Headquarters of the University shall be at Delhi.  
(4) The University may establish or maintain campuses and centres at such other places within India 
and outside India in the SAARC region as it may deem fit.  
5. Jurisdiction .—The jur isdiction of the University shall extend to whole of India and to campuses 
and centres established outside India in the SAARC region:  
Provided that where the University establishes and maintains any campus or centre outside India at 
any place in the SAARC region, then the jurisdiction of the University shall extend to such campus or 
centre, subject to the provision of the Agreement and laws in force in any of the Member States within 
which such campus or centre is situated.  
6. Governing Board. —(1) There sha ll be a Governing Board of the University consisting of two 
members from each of the Member States of the SAARC and the President of the University:  
Provided that until the first Governing Board is formed, the Inter -Governmental Steering Committee 
of the S AARC shall function as an interim Governing Board.  
(2) The Governing Board shall be headed by the Chairperson who shall be elected from amongst the 
members of the Governing Board.  
(3) The members of the Governing Board shall be selected in such manner and for such term as 
provided in Article 5 of the Schedule.  
(4) The President of the University shall be the ex officio  member of the Governing Board.  
(5) The Governing Board shall be responsible for all the policies and directions of the University and 
manage ment of its affairs.  
(6) The Chairperson of the Board shall exercise such powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  4 
 7. Objectives of University .—The object ives of the University shall be — 
(a) to disseminate and advance knowledge, wisdom and understanding by providing instructional 
and research facilities in such branches of learning as it may deem fit;  
(b) to take appropriate measures for promoting innovations in teaching -learning process,                  
inter-disciplinary studies and application of knowledge to social advancement, and human welfare 
and to the promotion of regional peace and security;  
(c) to impart liberal and humane education towards capacity building of the South Asian nations 
in the domain of science, technology and other areas of higher learning vital for improving their 
quality of life and to give students the analytical tools needed for the pursuit of profession and 
inculcate in them the quality of leadership;  
(d) to foster in the students sound civic sense and to train them to become useful citizens of 
democratic societies;  
(e) to build a South Asian community of learning where students from countries of South Asia are 
able to develop their fullest intellectual potential and to create a South Asian community by 
strengthening regional consciousness; and  
(f) to harmonise the academic standards and accreditation norms in teaching, research and 
curriculum that are acceptable to all Member States.  
8. Powers of University .—The University shall hav e the following powers, n amely:— 
(i) to provide for instruction in such branches of learning as the University may, from time to 
time, determine and to make provisions for research and for the advancement and dissemination of 
knowledge;  
(ii) to establish such special centres and s pecialised laboratories and such other units for research 
and instruction as are necessary for the furtherance of its objects;  
(iii) to plan and prescribe courses of study for degrees, diplomas, certificates or for any other 
purpose;  
(iv) to grant, subject  to such conditions as the University may determine, diplomas or certificates 
and confer degrees or other academic distinctions on the basis of examinations, evaluation or any 
other method of testing and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificates, degrees  or other academic 
distinctions for good and sufficient cause;  
(v) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner prescribed by the Statutes;  
(vi) to organise and to undertake open learning programmes, extramural studies, training and 
exten sion services;  
(vii) to institute Chairs, principalships, professorships, readerships and lecturerships and other 
teaching and academic positions, required by the University and to appoint persons to such Chairs, 
Principalships, Professorships, Readerships  and lecturerships and other teaching and academic 
positions;  
(viii) to appoint visiting professors, Emeritus professors, consultants, scholars and such other 
persons who may contribute to the advancement of the objects of the University;  
(ix) to recognise  persons as Professors, Readers or Lecturers or otherwise as teachers of the 
University;  
(x) to create administrative and other posts as the University may deem necessary from time to 
time and to make appointments thereto;  
(xi) to lay down conditions of se rvice of all categories of employees, including their code of 
conduct;  
(xii) to establish and maintain campuses, Centres, Regional Centres as may be determined from 
time to time;  5 
 (xiii) to admit to its privileges institutions situated within its jurisdiction as the University 
institutions and to withdraw all or any of those privileges in accordance with such conditions as may 
be prescribed by the Statutes;  
(xiv) to co -operate or collaborate or associate with any other University or authority or in stitution 
of higher learning or any other public or private body, having in view the promotion of purposes and 
objects similar to those of the University, in such manner as may be prescribed and for such purposes 
as may be determined or agreed upon by the University;  
(xv) to determine standards of admission, including examination, evaluation or any other method 
of testing, to the University, and the institutions maintained by or admitted to the privileges of the 
University;  
(xvi) to demand and receive payme nt of fees and other charges as may be prescribed;  
(xvii) to establish Halls and to recognise, guide, supervise and control Halls not maintained by the 
University and other accommodation for students, and to withdraw any such recognition;  
(xviii) to make a rrangements for promoting health and general welfare of students and employees 
of the University;  
(xix) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the employees, and to take such 
disciplinary measures in this regard as may be deemed by the U niversity to be necessary;  
(xx) to institute and award Fellowships, Scholarships, Studentships and prizes;  
(xxi) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts in accordance with the regulations made by the 
Governing Board as per norms of the SAARC and to ac quire, hold, manage and dispose of any 
property, movable or immovable, including trust and endowment properties, for the purposes or 
objects of the University and to invest funds in such manner as it deems fit;  
(xxii) to borrow, with the approval of the Go verning Board, on the security of the University 
property, money for purposes of the University;  
(xxiii) to recognise for any purpose, either in whole or in part, any institution or members or 
students thereof on such terms and conditions as may, from time  to time, be prescribed and to 
withdraw such recognition;  
(xxiv) to enter into any agreement for the incorporation of any other institution in the University 
and for taking its rights, properties and liabilities and for any other purpose not repugnant to t his Act;  
(xxv) to make provision for research and advisory services and for that purpose to enter into such 
arrangements with other institutions or bodies as it may deem necessary;  
(xxvi) to provide for the printing, reproduction and publication of researc h and other work which 
may be issued by the University;  
(xxvii ) to exercise such other powers accorded to it under the Agreement; and  
(xxviii ) to do all such other acts as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the promotion of 
all or any of the objects of the University.  
9. University open to all persons .—The University shall be open to all persons irrespective of 
gender, caste, creed, disability, ethnicity or socio -economic background and it shall not be lawful for the 
University to adopt or imp ose on any person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order 
to entitle him to be appointed as a teacher of the University or to hold any office therein or be admitted as 
a student in the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy o r exercise any privilege thereof.  
10. Visitor. —(1) The Foreign Minister of the current Chair of the SAARC shall be the Visitor of the 
University.  
(2) The Visitor shall have such powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  6 
 11. Officers of University .—(1) There shall be a President of the University, and such other officers 
appointed in such manner as may be prescribed, who shall exercise such powers and functions as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) The President shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the University.  
12. President and its powers. —(1) The President shall be appointed by the Governing Board in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that until the President is appointed, the Chief Executive Officer of the Project Office shall 
exercise  the powers of the President and function as Chief Executive Officer of the University.  
(2) The President shall, as the Chief Executive Officer, exercise general supervision and control over 
the affairs of the University and shall be responsible for implem enting the objectives of the University 
and fulfilling the policy directives of the Governing Board.  
(3) The President may, if he is of the opinion that immediate action is necessary on any matter, 
exercise any power conferred on any authority of the Unive rsity by or under this Act and shall report to 
such authority at its next meeting the action taken by him on such matter:  
Provided that such exercise of power shall be made only in emergent situations and in no case in 
respect of creation and upgradation o f posts, and appointments thereto:  
Provided further that if the authority concerned is of the opinion that such action ought not to have 
been taken, it may refer the matter to the Governing Board whose decision thereon shall be final.  
(4) The President, if  he is of the opinion that any decision of any authority of the University is beyond 
the powers of the authority conferred by the provisions of this Act and the Statutes or that any decision 
taken is not in the interest of the University, may ask the autho rity concerned to review its decision within 
sixty days of such decision and if the authority refuses to review the decision either in whole or in part or 
no decision is taken by it within the said period of sixty days, the matter shall be referred to the 
Governing Board whose decision thereon shall be final.  
(5) The President or any officer of the University, authorised by him in this behalf, shall have the 
power to enter into agreements, sign documents and authenticate records on behalf of the University.  
(6) The President shall exercise such other powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
13. Other officers. —The manner of appointment and powers and duties of other officers of the 
University shall be such as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
14. Privil eges and immunities of President and academic staff. —The University, the President and 
the members of the academic staff and, where applicable, their dependents or members of the family, 
shall enjoy such privileges and immunities as the Central Government may notify under section 3 of the 
United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947  (46 of  1947) . 
15. Authorities of University. —The following shall be th e authorities of the University — 
(a) the Executive Council,  
(b) the Academic Council, and  
(c) such other authorities as may be declared by the Governing Board in the Statutes to be the 
authorities of the University.  
16. Executive Council .—(1) The Executive Council shall be the executive body of the University 
and shall exercise powers to give effect to the directions or decisions of the President and the Governing 
Board.  
(2) The constitution of the Executive Council, the term of office of its members and its powers and 
functions shall be such as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
17. Academic Council .—(1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the 
University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and Regulations, co -ordinate and 
exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University.  7 
 (2) The  constitution of the Academic Council, the term of office of its members and its powers and 
functions shall be such as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
18. Constitu tion of other authorities. —The constitution of the authorities under clause ( c) of    
section 15, the terms of the office of the members of such authorities and their powers and duties shall be 
such as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
19. Faculties and De partments. —(1) The University shall have such faculties as may be prescribed 
by the Statu tes. 
(2) Each Faculty shall have such Departments or Schools of Studies as are prescribed by the Statutes, 
and each Department or Schools of Studies shall have such subjects of study as may be assigned to it by 
Regulations.  
20. Statutes. —(1) Subject to the  provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of  the 
following matters, namely: — 
(a) powers of the Visitor;  
(b) powers of the Chairperson of the Governing Board;  
(c) manner of appointment of the President and its powers;  
(d) the constitu tion, powers and functions of the Executive Council, Academic Council and other 
authorities and bodies of the University;  
(e) categories of academic staff;  
(f) appointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees of the University;  
(g) establishment  of faculties of the University;  
(h) the conditions under which institution may be admitted to the privileges of the University and 
the withdrawal of such privileges;  
(i) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(j) delegation of powers vested in the authoritie s or officers of the University;  
(k) setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances between employees or the students and 
the University; and  
(l) all other matters which by this Act are to be or may be provided for by the Statutes.  
(2) The First Statutes shall be those as may be made for the operation of the University by the               
Inter -Governmental Steering Committee of the SAARC.  
(3) The Governing Board may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend or 
repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 2): 
Provided that the Governing Board shall not make, amend or repeal any Statute affecting the status, 
powers or constitution of any authority of the University until such authority has been given an 
opportunity of exp ressing an opinion in writing on the proposed changes, and any opinion so expressed 
has been considered by the Governing Board.  
21. Regulations. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Regulations may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission and enrolment of students to the University and institutions maintained by, or 
admitted to, the privileges of the University;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates o f the 
University;  
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;  8 
 (d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions, the qualifications 
for the same and the means to be taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the same;  
(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission to the 
examinations, degrees and diplomas of the University;  
(f) the institution of, and conditions for award of, fellowships, scholarships, studentships and 
prizes;  
(g) the c onduct of examinations, including  the term of office and manner of appointment and the 
duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators;  
(h) the conditions of residence of students of the University;  
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may  be made for the residence, discipline and teaching 
of women students and the prescribing of special courses of studies for them;  
(j) the establishment of Centres, University Institutes, Departments, Schools of Studies, Boards of 
Studies, specialised labor atories and Committees;  
(k) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is considered necessary for 
improving the academic life of the University;  
(l) the manner of co -operation and collaboration with other Universities, institutions an d other 
bodies or associations; and  
(m) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes are to be or may be provided for by the 
Regulations.  
(2) The First Regulations shall be made by the Chief Executive Officer of the Project Office with the 
prior app roval of the Inter -Governmental Steering Committee and the Regulations so made may be 
amended, repealed or added to any time by the Governing Board in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.  
22. Bye -laws.—The authorities of the University may make bye -laws consistent with this Act, the 
Statutes and the Regulations for the conduct of their own business and not provided for by this Act, the 
Statutes or the Regulations, in the manner as may be prescribed by Statutes.  
23. Power to give retrospective eff ect to St atutes and Regulations. —The power to make Statutes 
or Regulations shall include the power to give retrospective effect, from a date not earlier than the date of 
commencement of this Act, to the Statutes or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective ef fect shall 
be given to any Statute or Regulation so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom 
such Statute or Regulation may be applicable.  
24. Annual report. —(1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of 
the Governing Board and shall be considered by the University at its annual meeting. The annual report of 
the University shall also be presented to the session of the Council of Ministers of the SAARC.  
(2) The annual report of the University shall be circulated to all the SAARC Member States through 
the SAARC Secretariat.  
25. Audit of accounts .—(1) The accounts of the University shall, once at least in every year and at 
intervals of not more than fifteen months, be audited by any person or fir m authorised by the Governing 
Board.  
(2) The accounts of the University shall be audited, as per existing norms as laid down by the 
SAARC.  
(3) The accounts, when audited shall be published, and a copy of the accounts together with the 
audited report shall be submitted to the Secretary -General of the SAARC.  
26. Condit ions of service of employees. —(1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed 
under a written contract, which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be furnished 
to the employee concerned.  9 
 (2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any employee shall be referred 
to the Tribunal for Arbitration constituted for that purpose.  
(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final and no suit shall lie in any court in respect of the 
matters decided by the Tribunal.  
(4) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal under sub -section ( 2) shall be prescribed by 
the Statutes.  
27. Procedure of arbitration in disciplinary cases against students .—Any dispute arising out of 
any disciplinary action taken by the University against a student shall, at the request of such student, be 
referred to a Tribunal for Arbitration and the provisions of sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4) of section 26 shall, 
as far as m ay be, apply to the reference made under this section.  
28. Proceedings of University authorities or bodies  not invalidated by vacancies. —No act or 
proceedings of the University or any of its authorities or bodies shall be invalid merely by reason of the 
existence of a vacancy or vacancies  among its members.  
29. Protection  of action taken in good faith. —No suit or other legal proceeding shal l lie against the 
University , any of its officers or employees for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act.  
30. Referen ce to SAARC Arbitration Council. —All differences arising out of the  interpretation or 
application of the Agreement shall be referred to the SAARC Arbitration Council, unless in any case it is 
agreed by the parties to have recourse to another mode of settlement.  
31. Statutes and Regulations and bye -laws to be published in Official Gazette a nd to be laid 
before Parliament. —(1) The Statutes, Regulations and bye -laws made under this Act shall be published 
in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute, Regulation or bye -law made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be afte r it 
is made, before each House of Parliament.  
32. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of the period of three 
years from the commencement of this  Act. 
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament.  
  10 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 3)  
PROVISIONS OF THE AGREEMENT TO HAVE THE FORCE OF LAW  
Article 1  
Establishment of the South Asian University  
1. There is hereby established an institution to be known as the South Asian University (hereinafter 
referred to as the “University ”), which shall be a non -state, non -profit self governing international 
educational institution with a regio nal focus for the purposes set forth in this agreement and shall have 
full academic freedom for the attainment of its objectives.  
2. The main campus of the University shall be located in India.  
3. The University shall have full legal Personality.  
4. The legal capacity of the University shall, inter alia , include:  
(a) the power to confer degrees, diplomas and certificates;  
(b) the capacity to contract;  
(c) to sue and be sued in its name;  
(d) to acquire, hold and dispose of properties;  
(e) to establi sh campuses and centres in the region; and  
(f) to make rules, regulations and bye -laws for the operation of the University.  
Article 2  
Objectives and Functions of the South Asian University  
The objectives and functions of the University shall, inter alia , include:  
1. To create a world class institution of learning that will bring together the brightest and the most 
dedicated students from all countries of South Asia irrespective of gender, caste, creed, disability, 
ethnicity or socio -economic background to impart to them liberal and humane education and to give them 
the analytical tools needed for the pursuit of a profession and inculcate in them the qualities of leadership.  
2. To build a South Asian community of learning where every student will be able to develop her/his 
fullest intellectual potential and to create a South Asian community by strengthening regional 
consciousness.  
3. To impart education towards capacity building of the South Asian nations in the domain of science, 
technology and other areas o f higher learning vital for improving their quality of life.  
4. To contribute to the promotion of regional peace and security by bringing together the future 
leaders of South Asia, and enhancing their understanding of each others' perspectives.  
5. To foste r in the students sound civic sense and to train them to become useful citizens of 
democratic societies.  
Article 3  
Funding  
The University shall be non -profit public -private partnership, which will seek support from each of 
the national Governments of member states and from other sources but will be autonomous and 
accountable to its board of trustees/governors.  
  11 
 Article 4  
The Fiscal Status  
1. The University and its campuses and centres shall be exempted, in the state where it is located, 
from paying an d from collecting all direct and indirect forms of taxes and duties for the establishment and 
operations of the University.  
2. The University shall enjoy treatment in relation to priorities, rates and charges for utilities that are 
not less favourable than  that accorded to state owned enterprises and universities.  
3. The University has the right to accept inter vivos  as well as testamentary gifts, contributions, and 
donations in cash or in kind for the objectives of the University. All such gifts and donations from any 
legal or physical person are fully deductible without any limit against the income of such donor or 
contributor in the respective Founding States.  
4. Taxation and social protection of the citizens of the Founding States employed by the University 
shall be regulated in accordance with the respective national legislation of the respective States. The 
emplo yees of the University from countries other than the host country will be governed by the income -
tax laws of the home countries and will not be taxed as per the laws of the host country.  
Article 5  
Governance Structure  
1. The University shall be governed by  a Governing Board, composed of two members from each 
member state, and will be headed by a Chairperson. The Chairperson shall be elected from among the 
members of the Governing Board.  
2. Each member of the Governing Board shall serve office for a fixed te rm of three years and shall 
not hold office for more than two consecutive terms. The members shall be selected from amongst the 
distinguished persons from the region and shall be responsible for the overall policies and directions of 
the University. The po wers and functions of the Chairperson of the Governing Board and the role of the 
Board shall be decided as per the rules and regulations of the University.  
3. The University shall be headed by a President, appointed by the Governing Board. The 
appointment,  tenure, powers and functions shall be decided as per the rules and regulations of the 
University.  
4. The President shall also be the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and an ex officio  member of the 
Governing Board. The President as the CEO of the University,  will report to the Board and hold office at 
the pleasure of the Board. He will be responsible for implementing the vision and the foundation 
statement of the University, ensuring the purpose and objectives of the University, upholding uniformly 
high acade mic standards, and fulfilling the policy directives of the Board of the University.  
5. The President as the Chief Executive Officer of the University shall act under direction of the 
Governing Board. The President shall be assisted by an Executive Council.  The President shall constitute 
the Academic Council, different committees and appoint the principal officers of the University as per 
bye-laws.  
Article 6  
Visa and Resident Permit  
The Member States shall provide appropriate visas to the students, faculty and staff for travel in all 
the SAARC Member States and grant necessary resident permit for students, faculty and administrative 
staff to work in the University and its different campuses, centres and collaborative educational 
institutions.  
  12 
 Article 7  
Recognition of the Degrees  
This Agreement shall facilitate the mutual recognition of degrees and certificates awarded by the 
University in all the SAARC Member States at par with the degrees and certificates issued by their 
respective national universities/in stitutions.  
