--------------------------The Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage Act, 2010--------------------------
1 
 THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010  
––––––––––  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
––––––––––  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE  
3. Atomic Energy Regulatory Board to notify nuclear incident.  
4. Liability of operator.  
5. Operator not liable in certain circumstances.  
6. Limits of liability.  
7. Liability of Central Government.  
8. Operator to maintain insurance or financial securities.  
 
CHAPTER III  
CLAIMS COMMISSIONER  
9. Compensati on for nuclear damage and its adjudication.  
10. Qualifications for appointment as Claims Commissioner.  
11. Salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Claims Commissioner.  
12. Adjudication procedure and powers of Claims Commissioner.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
CLAIMS AND AWARDS  
13. Inviting application for claims by Claims Commissioner.  
14. Person entitled to make application for nuclear damage.  
15. Procedure for making application before Claims Commissioner.  
16. Award by Claims Commissioner.  
17. Operator's right of recourse.  
18. Extinct ion of right to claim.  
 
CHAPTER V  
NUCLEAR DAMAGE CLAIMS COMMISSION  
19. Establishment of Nuclear Damage Claims Commission.  
20. Composition of Commission.  
21. Term of office.  
22. Salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members.  
23. Fillin g up of vacancies.  
24. Resignation and removal.  2 
 SECTIONS  
25. Chairperson or Member deemed to retire from service.  
26. Suspension of pension.  
27. Prohibition of acting as arbitrator.  
28. Prohibition of practice.  
29. Powers of Chairperson.  
30. Officers and other employees of Commission . 
31. Application for compensation before Commission.  
32. Adjudication procedure and powers of Commission.  
33. Transfer of pending cases to Commission.  
34. Proceedings before Claims Commissioner or Commission to be judicial proceedings.  
35. Exclusion of jurisdiction of civil courts.  
36. Enforcement of awards.  
37. Annual report.  
38. Dissolution of Commission in certain circumstances.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
39. Offences and penalties.  
40. Offences by companies.  
41. Offences by Government Departments.  
42. Cognizance of offences.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
43. Power to give directions.  
44. Power to call for information.  
45. Exemption from application of this Act.  
46. Act to be in addition to any other law.  
47. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
48. Power to make rules.  
49. Power to remove difficulties.  3 
  
THE CIVIL LIA BILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010  
ACT NO. 38 OF 2010  
[21st September,  2010.]  
An Act to provide for civil liability for nuclear damage and prompt compensation to the victims 
of a nuclear incident through a no -fault liability regime channeling liability to  the operator, 
appointment of Claims Commissioner, establishment of Nuclear Damage Claims 
Commission and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -first Year of the Republic of India as follows: – 
CHAPTE R I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement .–(1) This Act may be called the Civil 
Liability for Nuclear Damage Act, 2010.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It also app lies to nuclear damage suffered – 
(a) in or over the mari time areas beyond the territorial waters of India;  
(b) in or over the exclusive economic zone of India as referred to in section 7 of the Territorial 
Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and Other Maritime Zones Act, 1976  (80 of 
1976) ; 
(c) on board or by a ship registered in India under section 22 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 
(44 of 1958)  or under any other law for the time being in force;  
(d) on board or by an aircraft registered in India under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 2) of section 5  of 
the Aircraft Act, 1934 (22 of 1934)  or under any other law for the time being in force;  
(e) on or by an artificial island, installation or structure under the jurisdiction of India.  
(4) It applies only to the nuclear installation owned or controlled by  the Central Government either by 
itself or through any authority or corporation established by it or a Government company.  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this sub -section, "Government company" shall have the same 
meaning as assigned to it in clause ( bb) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962  
(33 of 1962) . 
(5) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint; and 
different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act, and any reference in any such 
provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of 
that provision.  
2. Definitions. –In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, - 
(a) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson o f the Commission appointed under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 20;  
(b) "Claims Commissioner" means the Claims Commissioner appointed under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 9;  
(c) "Commission" means the Nuclear Damage Claims Commission established under section 19;  
(d) "environment" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( a) of section 2 of the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986  (29 of 1986) ; 4 
 (e) "Member" means a Member of the Commission appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 20;  
(f) "notificati on" means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the term "notify" shall 
be construed accordingly;  
(g) "nuclear damage'' means – 
(i) loss of life or personal injury (including immediate and long term health impact) to a 
person; or  
(ii) loss of , or damage to, property,  
caused by or arising out of a nuclear incident, and includes each of the following to the extent 
notified by the Central Government;  
(iii) any economic loss, arising from the loss or damage referred to in  sub-clauses ( i) or ( ii) 
and not included in the claims made under those  sub-clauses, if incurred by a person entitled to 
claim such loss or damage;  
(iv) costs of measures of reinstatement of impaired environment caused by a nuclear incident, 
unless such impairment is insignifican t, if such measures are actually taken or to be taken and not 
included in the claims made under sub -clause ( ii); 
(v) loss of income derived from an economic interest in any use or enjoyment of the 
environment, incurred as a result of a significant impairme nt of that environment caused by a 
nuclear incident, and not included in the claims under sub -clause ( ii); 
(vi) the costs of preventive measures, and further loss or damage caused by such measures;  
(vii) any other economic loss, other than the one caused b y impairment of the environment 
referred to in sub -clauses ( iv) and ( v), in so far as it is permitted by the general law on civil 
liability in force in India and not claimed under any such law,  
in the case of sub -clauses ( i) to ( v) and ( vii) above, to the extent the loss or damage arises out of, or results 
from, ionizing radiation emitted by any source of radiation inside a nuclear installation, or emitted from 
nuclear fuel or radioactive products or waste in, or of, nuclear material coming from, originatin g in, or 
sent to, a nuclear installation, whether so arising from the radioactive properties of such matter, or from a 
combination of radioactive properties with toxic, explosive or other hazardous properties of such matter;  
(h) "nuclear fuel" means any ma terial which is capable of producing energy by a self -sustaining chain 
process of nuclear fission;  
(i) "nuclear incident" means any occurrence or series of occurrences having the same origin which 
causes nuclear damage or, but only with respect to preventi ve measures, creates a grave and imminent 
threat of causing such damage;  
(j) "nuclear installation" means – 
(A) any nuclear reactor other than one with which a means of transport is equipped for use as a 
source of power, whether for propulsion thereof or fo r any other purpose;  
(B) any facility using nuclear fuel for the production of nuclear material, or any facility for the 
processing of nuclear material, including re -processing of irradiated nuclear fuel; and  
(C) any facility where nuclear material is st ored (other than storage incidental to the carriage of 
such material).  
Explanation. –For the purpose of this clause, several nuclear installations of one operator which are 
located at the same site shall be considered as a single nuclear installation;  
 5 
 (k) "nuclear material" means and includes – 
(i) nuclear fuel (other than natural uranium or depleted uranium) capable of producing energy by 
a self -sustaining chain process of nuclear fission outside a nuclear reactor, either by itself or in 
combination with so me other material; and  
(ii) radioactive products or waste;  
(l) "nuclear reactor" means any structure containing nuclear fuel in such an arrangement that a self -
sustaining chain process of nuclear fission can occur therein without an additional source of ne utrons;  
(m) "operator", in relation to a nuclear installation, means the Central Government or any authority or 
corporation established by it or a Government company who has been granted a licence pursuant to the 
Atomic Energy Act, 1962 (33 of 1962) for th e operation of that installation;  
(n) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(o) "preventive measures" means any reasonable measures taken by a person after a nuclear incident 
has occurred to prevent or minimise damage referred to in s ub-clauses ( i) to ( v) and ( vii) of clause ( g), 
subject to the approval of the Central Government;  
(p) "radioactive products or waste" means any radioactive material produced in, or any material made 
radioactive by exposure to, the radiation incidental to t he production or utilisation of nuclear fuel, but 
does not include radioisotopes which have reached the final stage of fabrication so as to be usable for any 
scientific, medical, agricultural, commercial or industrial purpose;  
(q) "Special Drawing Rights" means Special Drawing Rights as determined by the International 
Monetary Fund.  
CHAPTER II  
LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE  
3. Atomic Energy Regulatory Board to notify nuclear incident. –(1) The Atomic Energy 
Regulatory Board constituted under the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 (33 of 1962) shall, within a period of 
fifteen days from the date of occurrence of a nuclear incident, notify such nuclear incident:  
Provided that where the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board is satisfied that the gravity of threat and 
risk involved in a nuclear incident is insignificant, it shall not be required to notify such nuclear incident.  
(2) The Atomic Energy Regulatory Board shall, immediately after the notification under sub -section 
(1) is issued,  cause wide publicity to be given to the occu rrence of such nuclear incident, in such manner 
as it may deem fit.  
4. Liability of operator. –(1) The operator of the nuclear installation shall be liable for nuclear 
damage caused by a nuclear incident – 
(a) in that nuclear installation; or  
(b) involving nuclear material coming from, or originating in, that nuclear installation and 
occurring before – 
(i) the liability for nuclear incident involving such nuclear material has been assumed, 
pursuant to a written agreement, by another operator; or  
(ii) another  operator has taken charge of such nuclear material; or  
(iii) the person duly authorised to operate a nuclear reactor has taken charge of the nuclear 
material intended to be used in that reactor with which means of transport is equipped for use as a 
source  of power, whether for propulsion thereof or for any other purpose; or  6 
 (iv) such nuclear material has been unloaded from the means of transport by which it was sent 
to a person within the territory of a foreign State; or  
(c) involving nuclear material sen t to that nuclear installation and occurring after – 
(i) the liability for nuclear incident involving such nuclear material has been transferred to 
that operator, pursuant to a written agreement, by the operator of another nuclear installation; or  
(ii) that  operator has taken charge of such nuclear material; or  
(iii) that operator has taken charge of such nuclear material from a person operating a nuclear 
reactor with which a means of transport is equipped for use as a source of power, whether for 
propulsio n thereof or for any other purpose; or  
(iv) such nuclear material has been loaded, with the written consent of that operator, on the 
means of transport by which it is to be carried from the territory of a foreign State.  
(2) Where more than one operator is liable for nuclear damage, the liability of the operators so 
involved shall, in so far as the damage attributable to each operator is not separable, be joint and several:  
Provided that the total liability of such operators shall not exceed the extent of li ability specified 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 6.  
(3) Where several nuclear installations of one and the same operator are involved in a nuclear 
incident, such operator shall, in respect of each such nuclear installation, be liable to the extent of lia bility 
specified under sub -section ( 2) of section 6.  
(4) The liability of the operator of the nuclear installation shall be strict and shall be based on the 
principle of no -fault liability.  
Explanation .–For the purposes of this section, – 
(a) wh ere nuclear damage is caused by a nuclear incident occurring in a nuclear installation on 
account of temporary storage of material -in-transit in such installation, the person responsible for 
transit of such material shall be deemed to be the operator;  
(b) where a nucl ear damage is caused as a result of nuclear incident during the transportation of 
nuclear material, the consignor shall be deemed to be the operator;  
(c) where any written agreement has been entered into between the consignor and the consignee 
or, as the case may be, the consignor and the carrier of nuclear material, the person liable for any 
nuclear damage under such agreement shall be deemed to be the operator;  
(d) where both nuclear damage and damage other than nuclear damage have been caused by a 
nuclear incident or, jointly by a nuclear incident and one or more other occurrences, such other 
damage shall, to the extent it is not separable from the nuclear damage, be deemed to be a nuclear 
damage caused by such nuclear incident.  
5. Operator not liable i n certain circumstances. –(1) An operator shall not be liable for any nuclear 
damage where such damage is caused by a nuclear incident directly due to -  
(i) a grave natural disaster of an exceptional character; or  
(ii) an act of armed conflict, hostility, civil war, insurrection or terrorism.  
(2) An operator shall not be liable for any nuclear damage caused to – 
(i) the nuclear installation itself and any other nuclear installation including a nuclear installation 
under construction, on the site where such i nstallation is located; and  7 
 (ii) to any property on the same site which is used or to be used in connection with any such 
installation; or  
(iii) to the means of transport upon which the nuclear material involved was carried at the time of 
nuclear incident:  
Provided that any compensation liable to be paid by an operator for a nuclear damage shall not 
have the effect of reducing the amount of his liability in respect of any other claim for damage under 
any other law for the time being in force.  
(3) Where any nuclear damage is suffered by a person on account of his own negligence or from his 
own acts of commission or omission, the operator shall not be liable to such person.  
6. Limits of liability. –(1) The maximum amount of liability in respect of each nuclear incident shall 
be the rupee equivalent of three hundred million Special Drawing Rights or such higher amount as the 
Central Government may specify by notification:  
Provided that the Central Government may take additional measures, where necessary, if the 
compensation to be awarded under this Act exceeds the amount specified under this sub -section.  
(2) The liability of an operator for each nuclear incident shall be – 
(a) in respect of nuclear reactors having thermal power equal to or above ten MW, rupees one 
thousand five hundred crores;  
(b) in respect of spent fuel reprocessing plants, rupees three hundred crores;  
(c) in respect of the research reactors having thermal power below ten MW, fuel cycle facilities 
other than spent fuel reprocessing plants and tran sportation of nuclear materials, rupees one hundred 
crores:  
Provided that the Central Government may review the amount of operator's liability from time to 
time and specify, by notification, a higher amount under this sub -section:  
Provided further that the  amount of liability shall not include any interest or cost of proceedings.  
7. Liability of Central Government. –(1) The Central Government shall be liable for nuclear damage 
in respect of a nuclear incident, – 
(a) where the liability exceeds the amount of l iability of an operator specified under sub -section 
(2) of section 6, to the extent such liability exceeds such liability of the operator;  
(b) occurring in a nuclear installation owned by it; and  
(c) occurring on account of causes specified in clauses ( i) and ( ii) of sub -section ( 1) of section 5:  
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, assume full liability for a nuclear 
installation not operated by it if it is of the opinion that it is necessary in public interest.  
(2) For the purpose of  meeting part of its liability under clause ( a) or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1), the 
Central Government may establish a fund to be called the Nuclear Liability Fund by charging such 
amount of levy from the operators, in such manner, as may be prescribed.  
8. Operator to maintain insurance or financial securities. –(1) The operator shall, before he begins 
operation of his nuclear installation, take out insurance policy or such other financial security or 
combination of both, covering his liability under sub -section ( 2) of section 6, in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) The operator shall from time to time renew the insurance policy or other financial security 
referred to in sub -section ( 1), before the expiry of the period of validity thereof.  8 
 (3) The provi sions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall not apply to a nuclear installation owned by the 
Central Government.  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this section, "financial security" means a contract of indemnity or 
guarantee, or shares or bonds or such instrume nt as may be prescribed or any combination thereof.  
CHAPTER III  
CLAIMS COMMISSIONER  
9. Compensation for nuclear damage and its adjudication. –(1) Whoever suffers nuclear damage 
shall be entitled to claim compensation in accordance with the provisions of thi s Act.  
(2) For the purposes of adjudicating upon claims for compensation in respect of nuclear damage, the 
Central Government shall, by notification, appoint one or more Claims Commissioners for such area, as 
may be specified in that notification.  
10. Qual ifications for appointment as Claims Commissioner. –A person shall not be qualified for 
appointment as a Claims Commissioner unless he – 
(a) is, or has been, a District Judge; or  
(b) in the service of the Central Government and has held the post not below th e rank of 
Additional Secretary to the Government of India or any other equivalent post in the Central 
Government.  
11. Salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Claims Commissioner. –The 
salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of Claims Commissioner shall 
be such as may be prescribed.  
12. Adjudication procedure and powers of Claims Commissioner. –(1) For the purposes of 
adjudication of claims under this Act, the Claims Commissioner shall follow such proc edure as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) For the purpose of holding inquiry, the Claims Commissioner may associate with him such 
persons having expertise in the nuclear field or such other persons and in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) Where any person is as sociated under sub -section ( 2), he shall be paid such remuneration, fee or 
allowance, as may be prescribed.  
(4) The Claims Commissioner shall, for the purposes of discharging his functions under this Act, 
have the same powers as are vested in a civil court  under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , 
while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely: – 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from any court or office;  
(e) issuing of commission for the examination of any witness;  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(5) The Claims Commissioner shall  be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and 
Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 9 
 CHAPTER IV  
CLAIMS AND AWARDS  
13. Inviting application for claims by Claims Commissioner. –After the notification of nuclear  
incident under sub -section ( 1) of section 3, the Claims Commissioner, having jurisdiction over the area, 
shall cause wide publicity to be given, in such manner as he deems fit, for inviting applications for 
claiming compensation for nuclear damage.  
14. Pe rson entitled to make application for nuclear damage. –An application for compensation 
before the Claims Commissioner or the Commission, as the case may be, in respect of nuclear damage 
may be made by –  
(a) a person who has sustained injury; or  
(b) the owne r of the property to which damage has been caused; or  
(c) the legal representatives of the deceased; or  
(d) any agent duly authorised by such person or owner or legal representatives.  
15. Procedure for making application before Claims Commissioner. –(1) Every application for 
compensation before the Claims Commissioner for nuclear damage shall be made in such form, 
containing such particulars and accompanied by such documents, as may be prescribed.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 18, every applicati on under sub -section ( 1) shall be made 
within a period of three years from the date of knowledge of nuclear damage by the person suffering such 
damage.  
16. Award by Claims Commissioner. –(1) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 15, the Claims Commissioner shall, after giving notice of such application to the operator and 
affording an opportunity of being heard to the parties, dispose of the application within a period of three 
months from the date of such receipt and make an award ac cordingly.  
(2) While making an award under this section, the Claims Commissioner shall not take into 
consideration any benefit, reimbursement or amount received by the applicant in pursuance of contract of 
insurance taken by him or for members of his famil y or otherwise.  
(3) Where an operator is likely to remove or dispose of his property with the object of evading 
payment by him of the amount of the award, the Claims Commissioner may, in accordance with the 
provisions of rules 1 to 4 of Order XXXIX of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 
of 1908) , grant a temporary injunction to restrain such act.  
(4) The Claims Commissioner shall arrange to deliver copies of the award to the parties within a 
period of fifteen days from the date of th e award.  
(5) Every award made under sub -section ( 1) shall be final.  
17. Operator's right of recourse. –The operator of the nuclear installation, after paying the 
compensation for nuclear damage in accordance with section 6, shall have a right of recourse wh ere– 
(a) such right is expressly provided for in a contract in writing;  
(b) the nuclear incident has resulted as a consequence of an act of supplier or his employee, which 
includes supply of equipment or material with patent or latent defects or sub -standa rd services;  
(c) the nuclear incident has resulted from the act of commission or omission of an individual done 
with the intent to cause nuclear damage.  10 
 18. Extinction of right to claim. –The right to claim compensation for nuclear damage shall 
extinguish,  if such claim is not made within a period of – 
(a) ten years, in the case of damage to property;  
(b) twenty years, in the case of personal injury to any person,  
from the date of occurrence of the incident notified under sub -section ( 1) of section 3:  
Provi ded that where a nuclear damage is caused by a nuclear incident involving nuclear material 
which, prior to such nuclear incident, had been stolen, lost, jettisoned or abandoned, the said period of ten 
years shall be computed from the date of such nuclear i ncident, but, in no case, it shall exceed a period of 
twenty years from the date of such theft, loss, jettison or abandonment.  
CHAPTER V  
NUCLEAR DAMAGE CLAIMS COMMISSION  
19. Establishment of Nuclear Damage Claims Commission. –Where the Central Government, 
having regard to the injury or damage caused by a nuclear incident, is of the opinion that it is expedient in 
public interest that such claims for such damage be adjudicated by the Commission instead of a Claims 
Commissioner, it may, by notification, establ ish a Commission for the purpose of this Act.  
20. Composition of Commission. –(1) The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and such other 
Members, not exceeding six, as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint.  
(2) The Chairperson and other  Members of the Commission shall be appointed on the 
recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting of three experts from amongst the persons having at 
least thirty years of experience in nuclear science and a retired Supreme Court Judge.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairperson of the Commission unless he 
has attained the age of fifty -five years and is or has been or qualified to be a Judge of a High Court:  
Provided that no appointment of a sitting judge shall be made exc ept after consultation with the Chief 
Justice of India.  
(4) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Member unless he has attained the age of 
fifty-five years and – 
(a) has held or is holding or qualified to hold, the post of Additional Secretar y to the Government 
of India or any other equivalent post in the Central Government and  possesses special knowledge in 
law relating to nuclear liability arising out of nuclear incident; or  
(b) has been a Claims Commissioner for five years.  
21. Term of offi ce.–The Chairperson or a Member, as the case may be, shall hold office as such for a 
term of three years from the date on which he enters upon his office and shall be eligible for re -
appointment for another term of three years:  
Provided that no person sha ll hold office as such Chairperson or Member after he has attained the age 
of sixty -seven years.  
22. Salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members. –
The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and condition s of service, including pension, 
gratuity and other retirement benefits, of the Chairperson and other Members shall be such as may be 
prescribed:  
Provided that no salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson or 
other Memb ers shall be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.  11 
 23. Filling up of vacancies. –If, for reasons other than temporary absence, any vacancy occurs in the 
office of the Chairperson or Member, as the case may be, the Central Government shall appoin t another 
person in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy and the proceedings may be 
continued before the Commission from the stage at which it was, before the vacancy is filled.  
24. Resignation and removal. –(1) The Chairperson or  a Member may, by a notice in writing under 
his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign his office:  
Provided that the Chairperson or the Member shall, unless he is permitted by the Central Government 
to relinquish his office sooner, continue to ho ld office until the expiry of three months from the date of 
receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until the 
expiry of his term of office, whichever is earlier.  
(2) The Central Government shall re move from office the Chairperson or a Member who – 
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude; or  
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of a cting as a Member; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
a Member; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office detrimental to the public 
interest:  
Provided th at no Member shall be removed under clause ( d) or clause ( e) unless he has been given an 
opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
25. Chairperson or Member deemed to retire from service. –A person who, immediately before 
the date of assuming office as a C hairperson or a Member, was in service of the Government, shall be 
deemed to have retired from service on the date on which he enters upon office as such, but his 
subsequent service as the Chairperson or a Member shall be reckoned as continuing approved se rvice 
counting for pension in service to which he belonged.  
26. Suspension of pension. –If a person who, immediately before the date of assuming office as the 
Chairperson or a Member was in receipt of or being eligible so to do, has opted to draw, a pension , other 
than a disability or wound pension, in respect of any previous service under the Central Government, his 
salary in respect of service as the Chairpers on or a Member shall be reduced – 
(a) by the amount of that pension; and  
(b) if he had, before assu ming office, received, in lieu of a portion of the pension due to him in 
respect of such previous service, the commuted value thereof, by the amount of that portion of the 
pension.  
27. Prohibition of acting as arbitrator. –No person shall, while holding off ice as a Chairperson or a 
Member, act as an arbitrator in any matter.  
28. Prohibition of practice .–On ceasing to hold office, the Chairperson or a Member shall not 
appear, act or plead before the Commission.  
29. Powers of Chairperson. –The Chairperson shall  have the power of superintendence in the general 
administration of the Commission and exercise such powers as may be prescribed.  
30. Officers and other employees of Commission. –(1) The Central Government shall provide the 
Commission with such officers and  other employees as it may deem fit.  12 
 (2) The salary and allowances payable to and the terms and other conditions of service of officers and 
other employees of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.  
31. Application for compensation before Commis sion.–(1) Every application for compensation 
before the Commission for nuclear damage shall be made in such form, containing such particulars and 
accompanied by such documents, as may be prescribed.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 18, every applic ation under sub -section ( 1) shall be made 
within a period of three years from the date of knowledge of nuclear damage by the person suffering such 
damage.  
32. Adjudication procedure and powers of Commission. –(1) The Commission shall have original 
jurisdict ion to adjudicate upon every application for compensation filed before it under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 31 or transferred to it under section 33, as the case may be.  
(2) Upon transfer of cases to the Commission under section 33, the Commission shall hea r such 
applications from the stage at which it was before such transfer.  
(3) The Chairperson may constitute benches comprising of not more than three Members of the 
Commission for the purpose of hearing of claims and any decision thereon shall be rendered by a majority 
of the Members hearing such claims.  
(4) The Commission shall not be bound by the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908  (5 of 1908)  but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and subject to the other provisions  
of this Act and of any rules made thereunder, the Commission shall have the power to regulate its own 
procedure including the places and the times at which it shall have its sittings.  
(5) The Commission shall have, for the purposes of discharging its func tions under this Act, the same 
powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, (5 of 1908) while trying a 
suit, in respect of the following matters, namely: – 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examin ing him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from any court or office;  
(e) issuing of commission for the examination of any witness;  
(f) any oth er matter which may be prescribed.  
(6) The Commission shall, after giving notice of application to the operator and after affording an 
opportunity of being heard to the parties, dispose of such application within a period of three months from 
the date of s uch receipt and make an award accordingly.  
(7) While making an award under this section, the Commission shall not take into consideration any 
benefit, reimbursement or amount received by the applicant in pursuance of any contract of insurance or 
otherwise.  
(8) Where an operator is likely to remove or dispose of his property with the object of evading 
payment by him of the amount of the award, the Commission may, in accordance with the provisions of 
rules 1 to 4 of Order XXXIX of the First Schedule to the Co de of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 19 08), grant 
a temporary injunction to restrain such act.  
(9) The Commission shall arrange to deliver copies of the award to the parties concerned within a 
period of fifteen days from the date of such award.  
(10) Every awa rd made under sub -section ( 6) shall be final.  13 
 33. Transfer of pending cases to Commission. –Every application for compensation pending before 
the Claims Commissioner immediately before the date of establishment of the Commission under section 
19 shall stand  transferred on that date to the Commission.  
34. Proceedings before Claims Commissioner or Commission to be judicial proceedings. –Every 
proceeding before the Claims Commissioner or the Commission under this Act shall be deemed to be 
judicial proceeding wit hin the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228 of, and for the purposes of section 
196 of , the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
35. Exclusion of jurisdiction of civil courts. –Save as otherwise provided in section 46, no civil court 
(except the Supreme Court a nd a High Court exercising jurisdiction under articles 226 and 227 of the 
Constitution) shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceedings in respect of any matter which the 
Claims Commissioner or the Commission, as the case may be, is empowered to adjudicate under this Act 
and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be 
taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act.  
36. Enforcement of awards. –(1) When an award is made und er sub -section ( 1) of section 16 or 
under sub-section ( 6) of section 32, – 
(a) the insurer or any person, as the case may be, who under the contract of insurance or financial 
security under section 8 is required to pay any amount in terms of such award and to the extent of his 
liability under such contract, shall deposit that amount within such time and in such manner as the 
Claims Commissioner or the Commission, as the case may be, may direct; and  
(b) the operator shall, subject to the maximum liability spe cified under sub -section ( 2) of section 
6, deposit the remaining amount by which such award exceeds the amount deposited under clause ( a). 
(2) Where any person referred to in sub -section ( 1) fails to deposit the amount of award within the 
period specified in the award, such amount shall be recoverable from such person as arrears of land 
revenue.  
(3) The amount deposited under sub -section ( 1) shall be disbursed to such person as may be specified 
in the award within a period of fifteen days from the date of s uch deposit.  
37. Annual report. –The Commission shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial 
year, as may be prescribed, an annual report giving full account of its activities during that financial year 
and submit a copy thereof to the Cen tral Government which shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
38. Dissolution of Commission in certain circumstances. –(1) Where the Central Government is 
satisfied that the purpose for which the Commission established under section  19 has served its purpose, 
or where the number of cases pending before such Commission is so less that it would not justify the cost 
of its continued function, or where it considers necessary or expedient so to do, the Central Government 
may, by notificat ion, dissolve the Commission.  
(2) With effect from the date of notification of dissolution of Commission under  sub-section ( 1),– 
(a) the proceeding, if any, pending before the Commission as on the date of such notification 
shall be transferred to the Claim s Commissioner to be appointed by the Central Government under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 9;  
(b) the Chairperson and all Members of the Commission shall be deemed to have vacated their 
offices as such and they shall not be entitled to any compensation for premature termination of their 
office;  
(c) officers and other employees of the Commission shall be transferred to such other authority or 
offices of the Central Government, in such manner, as may be prescribed:  14 
 Provided that the officers and other employee s so transferred, shall be entitled to the same terms 
and conditions of service as would have been held by them in the Commission:  
Provided further that where an officer or an employee of the Commission refuses to join the 
services in such other authority or office, he shall be deemed to have resigned and shall not be entitled 
to any compensation for premature termination of contract of service;  
(d) all assets and liabilities of the Commission shall vest in the Central Government.  
(3) Notwithstanding the di ssolution of the Commission under sub -section ( 1), anything done or any 
action taken or purported to have been done or taken including any order made or notice issued or any 
appointment, confirmation or declaration made or any document or instrument execut ed or any direction 
given by the Commission before such dissolution, shall be deemed to have been validly done or taken.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the Central Government to establish the 
Commission subsequent to the dissolut ion of the Commission in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act. 
CHAPTER VI  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
39. Offences and penalties. –(1) Whoever –  
(a) contravenes any rule made or any direction issued under this Act; or  
(b) fails to comply with the provisio ns of section 8; or  
(c) fails to deposit the amount under section 36,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or with fine or with 
both.  
(2) Whoever fails to comply with any direction issued under section 43 or obst ructs any authority or 
person in the exercise of his powers under this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year or with fine or with both.  
40. Offences by companies. –(1) Where an offence under this Act has been comm itted by a company, 
every person who at the time the offence was committed, was directly in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence a nd shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment under this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge  or that he 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been commit ted with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this section, – 
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals;  
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, mea ns a partner in the firm.  
41. Offences by Government Departments. –Where an offence under this Act has been committed 
by any Department of the Government, the Head of the Department shall be deemed to be guilty of the 
offence and shall be liable to be proce eded against and punished accordingly:  15 
 Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render such Head of the Department liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligenc e to prevent the commission of such offence.  
42. Cognizance of offences. –No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence under this Act:  
Provided that cognizance of such offence shal l not be taken except on a complaint made by the 
Central Government or any authority or officer authorised in this behalf by that Government.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
43. Power to give directions. –The Central Government may, in exercise of its powers and 
performance of its functions under this Act, issue such directions, as it may deem fit, for the purposes of 
this Act, to any operator, person, officer, authority or body and such operator, person, officer, authority or 
body shall be bound to comply with su ch directions.  
44. Power to call for information. –The Central Government may call for such information from an 
operator as it may deem necessary.  
45. Exemption from application of this Act. –The Central Government may, by notification, exempt 
any nuclear in stallation from the application of this Act where, having regard to small quantity of nuclear 
material, it is of the opinion that the risk involved is insignificant.  
46. Act to be in addition to any other law. –The provisions of this Act shall be in additio n to, and 
not in derogation of, any other law for the time being in force, and nothing contained herein shall exempt 
the operator from any proceeding which might, apart from this Act, be instituted against such operator.  
47. Protection of action taken in g ood faith. –No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Central Government or the person, officer or authority in respect of anything done by it or 
him in good faith in pursuance of this Act or of any rule or order made, or directi on issued, thereunder.  
48. Power to make rules. –(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers such rules may 
provide  for –  
(a) the other financial security and the manner thereof under sub -section ( 1) of section 8;  
(b) the salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of Claims 
Commissioner under section 11;  
(c) the procedure to be fol lowed by Claims Commissioner under sub -section ( 1) of section 12;  
(d) the person to be associated by Claims Commissioner and the manner thereof, under sub -
section ( 2) of section 12;  
(e) the remuneration, fee or allowances of associated person under sub -section ( 3) of section 12;  
(f) any other matter under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 4) of section 12;  
(g) the form of application, the particulars it shall contain and the documents it shall accompany, 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 15;  
(h) the salary and all owances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson 
and other Members, under section 22;  
(i) the powers of Chairperson under section 29;  16 
 (j) the salary and allowances payable to and the terms and other conditions of service of offi cers 
and other employees of the Commission, under sub -section ( 2) of section 30;  
(k) the form of application, the particulars it shall contain and the documents it shall accompany, 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 31;  
(l) any other matter under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 5) of section 32;  
(m) the form and the time for preparing annual report by the Commission under section 37;  
(n) the manner of transfer of officers and other employees of the Commission under clause ( c) of 
sub-section ( 2) of section 38.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more s uccessive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
49. Power to remove diffi culties.–(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be nece ssary or expedient for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be  laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
 
--------------------------The Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010--------------------------
1 
 THE CLINICAL ESTABLISHMENTS (REGISTRATION AND REGULATION)  ACT, 2010  
____________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title , application and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR CLINICAL ESTABLI SHMENTS  
3. Establishment of National Council.  
4. Disqualifications for appointment as member.  
5. Functions of National Council.  
6. Power to seek advice or assistance.  
7. National Council to follow consultative  process . 
 
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION AND STANDA RDS FOR CLINICAL ESTABLISHMENTS  
8. State Council of clinical  establishments . 
9. Providing information to National Council.  
10. Authority for registration.  
11. Registration for clinical establishment s. 
12. Condition for registration.  
13. Classification of clinical establishment s. 
 
CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE FOR REGISTRATION  
14. Application for provisional certificate of registration.  
15. Provisional certificate.  
16. No inquiry pr ior to provisional registration.  
17. Validity of provisional registration.  
18. Display of certificate of registration.  
19. Duplicate  certificate.  
20. Certificate to be non -transferable.  
21. Publication of expiry of registration.  
22. Renewal of registration.  
23. Time limit for provisional registration.  
  2 
 SECTIONS  
24. Application for permanent registration.  
25. Verification of application.  
26. Display of information for filing objections.  
27. Communication of objections.  
28. Standards for permanent registration.  
29. Allowing or disallowing of registration.  
30. Certificate of permanent registration.  
31. Fresh application for permanent registration.  
32. Cancellation of registration . 
33. Inspection of registered clinical establishments.  
34. Power to enter.  
35. Levy of fee by State Government  Appe al. 
36. Appeal.  
 
CHAPTER V  
REGISTER OF CLINICAL ESTABLISHMENT S 
37. Register of clinical establishment s. 
38. Maintenance of State Register of clinical establishment s. 
39. Maintenance of National Register of clinical establishment s. 
 
CHAPTER VI  
PENALTIES  
40. Penalty.  
41. Monetary penalty for non -registration.  
42. Disobedience of direction, obstruction and refusal of information.  
43. Penalty for minor deficiencies.  
44. Contravention by companies.  
45. Offences by Government Departments.  
46. Recovery of fine.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
47. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
48. Furnishing of returns, etc.  
49. Power to give directions.  
50. Employees of the authority, etc., to be public servants.  
51. Power to remove difficulties.  
52. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
53. Laying of rules.  
54. Power of State Government to make rules.  
55. Laying of rules.  
56. Savings.  
 3 
  
 
 
 
 
THE CLINICAL ESTABLISHMENTS (REGISTRATION AND  
REGULATION) ACT, 2010  
ACT NO. 23 OF 2010  
[18th August , 2010.]  
An Act to provide for the registration and regulation of clinical establishments in the country and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS , it is considered expedient to provide for the registration and regulation of clinical  
establishments with a view to prescribe minimum standards of facilities and services which may be 
provided by them so that mandate of article 47 of the Constitution for improvement in public health may 
be achieved;  
ANDWHEREAS,  Parliament has no power to make laws for the States with respect to any of the matters 
aforesaid except as provided in articles 249 and 250 of the Constitution;  
ANDWHEREAS , in pursuance of clause ( 1) of article 252 of the Constitution, resolutions have been 
passed by all the Houses of the Legislatures of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, 
Mizoram and Sikkim to the effect that the matters aforesaid should be regulated in those  States by 
Parliament by law;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -first Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, applicat ion and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Clinical 
Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010.  
(2) It applies, in the first instance, to the whole of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, 
Mizoram and Sikkim and the Union territories; and it shall apply to such other State which adopts this 
Act by resolution passed in that behalf under clause ( 1) of article 252 of the Constitution.  
(3) It shall come into force at once in the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Mizoram 
and Sikkim and the Union territories, on such date as the Central Government may, by notification, 
appoint and in any other State which adopts this Act under clause ( 1) of article 252 of the Constitution, on 
the date of such adoption; and any reference in this Act to the commencement of this Act shall, in relation 
to any State or Union territory, mean the date on which this Act comes into force in such State or Union 
territory:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different categories of clinical establishments and 
for different recognised systems of medicine.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “authority” means the district registering authority set -up under section 10;  
(b) “certificate ” means certificate of registration issued under section 30;  
  4 
 (c) “clinical establishment ” means— 
(i) a hospital, maternity home, nursing home, dispensary, clinic, sanatori um or an institution 
by whatever name called that offers services, facilities requiring diagnosis, treatment or care for 
illness, injury, deformity, abnormality or pregnancy in any recognised system of medicine 
established and administered or maintained by  any person or body of persons, whether 
incorporated or not; or  
(ii) a place established as an independent entity or part of an establishment referred to in              
sub-clause ( i), in connection with the diagnosis or treatment of diseases where pathol ogical, 
bacteriological, genetic, radiological, chemical, biological investigations or other diagnostic or  
investigative services with the aid of laboratory or other medical equipment, are usually carried 
on, established and administered or maintained by a ny person or body of persons, whether 
incorporated or not,  
and shall include a clinical establishment owned, contro lled or managed by — 
(a) the Government or a department of the Government;  
(b) a trust, whether public or private;  
(c) a corporation (including a society) registered under a Central, Provincial or State Act, whether 
or not owned by the Government;  
(d) a local authority; and  
(e) a single doctor,  
but does not include the clinical establishments owned, controlled or managed by the Armed Fo rces. 
Explanation .—For the purpose of this clause “Armed Forces ” means the forces constituted under the 
Army Act, 1950  (46 of 1950) , the Air Force Act, 1950  (45 of 1950)  and the Navy Act, 1957                              
(62 of 1957) ; 
(d) “emergency medical condition ” means a medical condition manifesting itself by acute 
symptoms of sufficient severity (including severe pain) of such a nature that the absence of immediate 
medical attention could reas onably be expected to result in — 
(i) placing the hea lth of the individual or, with respect to a pregnant women, the health of the 
woman or her unborn child, in serious jeopardy; or  
(ii) serious impairment to bodily functions; or  
(iii) serious dysfunction of any organ or part of a body;  
(e) “National Council ” means the National Council for clinical establishments established under 
section 3;  
(f) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act by the Central Government or, as  
the case may be, the State Government;  
(h) “recognised system of medicine ” means Allopathy, Yoga, Naturopathy, Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy, Siddha and Unani System of medicines or any other system of medicine as may be 
recognised by the Central Government;  
(i) “register” means the register maintained by the authority, State Government and the Central 
Government under sections 37, 38 and 39 respectively of this Act containing the number of clinical 
establishments registered;  
(j) “registration ” means to register u nder section 11 and the expression registration or registered 
shall be construed accordingly;  5 
 (k) “rules” means rules made under this Act;  
(l) “Schedule” means the Schedule appended to this Act;  
(m) “standards ” means the conditions that the Central Governm ent may prescribe under section 
12, for the registration of clinical establishments;  
(n) “State Government ”, in relation to a Union territory, means the Administrator thereof 
appointed under article 239 of the Constitution; and  
(o) “to stabilise (with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions) ” means, with respect to 
an emergency medical condition specified in clause ( d), to provide such medical treatment of the 
condition as may be necessary to assure, within reasonable medical probability, that no  material 
deterioration of the condition is likely to result from or occur during the transfer of the individual 
from a clinical establishment . 
CHAPTER II  
THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR CLINICAL ESTABLISHMENTS  
3. Establishme nt of National Council. —(1) With effec t from such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification appoint in this behalf, there shall be established for the purposes of this Act, a 
Council to be called the National Council for clinical establishments.  
(2) The Na tional Council shall consist  of— 
(a) Director -General of Health Service, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,  ex officio,  who 
shall be the Chairperson;  
(b) four representatives out of whic h one each to be elected by the — 
(i) Dental Council of India constituted under section 3 of the Dentists  Act, 1948  (16 of 1948) ; 
(ii) Medical Council of India constituted under section 3 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 
1956  (102 of 195 6); 
(iii) Nursing Council of India constituted under section 3 of the Indian Nursing Council Act, 
1947  (48 of 1947) ; 
(iv) Pharmacy Council of India constituted under section 3 of the Pharmacy Act, 1948                        
(8 of 1948) ; 
(c) three representatives to be elected by the Central Council of Indian Medicine representing the 
Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani systems of medicine constituted under section 3 of the Indian Medicine 
Central Council Act, 1970  (48 of 1970) ; 
(d) one representative to be elected by the Central Council of Homoeopathy constituted under 
section 3 of the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 19 73 (59 of 1973) ; 
(e) one representative to be elected by the Central Council of the Indian Medical Association;  
(f) one representative of Bureau of the Indian Sandards constituted under section 3 of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards Act, 1986  (63 of 1986) ; 
(g) two representatives from the Zonal Council set -up under section 15 of the States 
Reorganisation Act, 1956  (37 of 1956) ; 
(h) two representatives from the North -Eastern Council set -up under section 3 of the                
North -Eastern Council Act, 1971  (84 of 1971) ; 
(i) one representative from the line of paramedical systems excluding systems that have been 
given representation under clause ( b); 6 
 (j) two representatives from National Level Consumer Group to be nominated by the Central 
Government;  
(k) one representative from the Associations of Indian Systems of Medicines relating to 
Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani to be nominated by the Central Government;  
(l) the Secretary -General of the Quality Council of India, ex officio.  
(3) The nominated members of the Na tional Council shall hold office for three years but shall be 
eligible for re -nomination for maximum of one more term of three years.  
(4) The elected members of the National Council shall hold office for three years, but shall be eligible 
for re -election:  
Provided that the person nominated or elected, as the case may be, shall hold office for such period 
till he holds appointment of the office by virtue of which he was nominated or elected to the council.  
(5) The members of the National Council shall be ent itled for such allowances as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government.  
(6) The National Council may, subject to the previous approval of the Central Government, make 
bye-laws fixing a quorum and regulating its own procedure and the conduct of all busine ss to be 
transacted by it.  
(7) The National Council shall meet at least once in three months.  
(8) The National Council may constitute sub -committees and may appoint to such sub -committee, as 
it deems fit, persons, who are not members of the National Counci l, for such period, not exceeding two 
years, for the consideration of particular matters.  
(9) The functions of the National Council may be exercised notwithstanding any vacancy therein.  
(10) The Central Government shall appoint such person to be the Secret ary of the National Council as 
the Central Government may prescribe, and may provide the National Council with such other secretarial 
and other staff as the Central Government considers necessary.  
4. Disqualifica tions for appointment as member. —A person shall be disqualified for being 
appointed as a member of the National Council if he — 
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which, in the opinion of the 
Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or  
(b) is an undischarged in solvent; or  
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or  
(d) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the Government or a Corporation owned or 
controlled by the Government; or  
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, such financial or other interest in the Council as 
is likely to affect prejudicially the discharge by him of his functions as a member.  
5. Functio ns of National Council. —The National Council shall — 
(a) compile and publish a National Register of  clinical establishments within two years from the 
date of the commencement of this Act;  
(b) classify the clinical establishments into different categories;  
(c) develop the minimum standards and their periodic review;  7 
 (d) determine within a period of two years from its establishment, the first set of standards for 
ensuring proper healthcare by the clinical establishments;  
(e) collect the statistics in respect of clinical establishments;  
(f) perform any other function determined by the Central Government fr om time to time.  
6. Power to seek advice or assistance .—The National Council may associate with itself any person 
or body whose assistance or advice it may desire in carrying out any of the provisions of this Act.  
7. National Council to follow consultative  process.—The National Council shall follow a 
consultative process for determining the standards and for classification of clinical establishments in 
accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION AND STANDARDS FOR CLINICAL E STABLISHMENTS  
8. State Counc il of clinical establishments .—(1) Every State Government shall by notification 
constitute a State Council for clinical establishments or the Union territory Council for clinical 
establishments, as the case may be.  
(2) The State  Council or the Union territory Council, as the case may be, shall consist of  the 
following members, namely: — 
(a) Secretary, Health —ex officio , who shall be the Chairman;  
(b) Director of Health Services —ex officio  member -secretary;  
(c) Directors of different stream s of Indian Systems of Medicine —ex officio  members;  
(d) one representative each to be electe d by the executive committee of — 
(i) State Medical Council of India;  
(ii) State Dental Council of India;  
(iii) State Nursing Council of India;  
(iv) State Pharmacy Council of India;  
(e) three representatives to be elected by the Executive of the State Council or the Union territory 
Council, as the case may be, of Indian Medicine representing the Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani 
systems of medicine;  
(f) one r epresentative to be elected by the State Council of the Indian Medical Association;  
(g) one representative from the line of paramedical systems;  
(h) two representatives from State level consumer groups or reputed non -Governmental 
organisations working in t he field of health.  
(3) The nominated member of the State Council or the Union territory Council, as the case may be, 
shall hold office for a term of three years, but shall be eligible for re -nomination for maximum of one 
more term of three years . 
(4) The elected members of the State Council or the Union territory Council, as the case may be, shall 
hold office for three years, but shall be eligible for re -election:  
Provided that the person nominated or elected, as the case may be, shall hold office for so l ong as he 
holds the appointment of the office by virtue of which he was nominated or elected to the State Council or 
the Union territory Council, as the case may be.  8 
 (5) The State Council or the Union territory Council shall perform the following functions , namely:— 
(a) compiling and updating the State Registers of clinical establishment;  
(b) sending monthly returns for updating the National Register;  
(c) representing the State in the National Council;  
(d) hearing of appeals against the orders of the author ity; and  
(e) publication on annual basis a report on the state of implementation of standards within their 
respective States.  
9. Providing information to National Council .—It shall be the responsibility of the State Council 
for clinical establishments to c ompile and update the State Register of clinical establishments of the State 
and further to send monthly returns in digital format for updating the National Register.  
10. Authority for registration. —(1) The State Government shall, by notification, set -up an authority 
to be called the district registering authority for each district for registration of clinical establishments, 
with the following members, namely: — 
(a) District Collector — Chairperson;  
(b) District Health Officer —Convenor;  
(c) three members with such qualifications and on such terms and conditions as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), for the purposes of provisional registration 
of clinical establishments under section 14, t he District Health Officer or the Chief Medical Officer (by 
whatever name called) shall exercise the powers of the authority as per procedure that may be prescribed.  
11. Registration for clinical establishments .—No person shall run a clinical establishment  unless it 
has been duly registered in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
12. Condition for registration. —(1) For registration and continuation, every clinical establishment 
shall fulfil th e following conditions, namely: — 
(i) the minimum standards  of facilities and services as may be prescribed;  
(ii) the minimum requirement of personnel as may be prescribed;  
(iii) provisions for maintenance of records and reporting as may be prescribed;  
(iv) such other conditions as may be prescribed.  
(2) The clinical establishment shall undertake to provide within the staff and facilities available, such 
medical examination and treatment as may be required to stabilise the emergency medical condition of 
any individual who comes or is brought to such clinical e stablishment.  
13. Classification of clinical establishments .—(1) Clinical establishment of different systems shall 
be classified into such categories, as may be prescribed by the Central Government, from time to time.  
(2) Different standards may be prescri bed for classification of different categories referred to in                 
sub-section ( 1): 
Provided that in prescribing the standards for clinical establishments, the Central Government shall 
have regard to the local conditions.  
  9 
 CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE FOR REGISTRATION  
14. Application for provisional certificate of registration .—(1) For the purposes of registration of 
the clinical establishment under section 10, an application in the prescribed proforma along with the 
prescribed fee shall be made to the authority.  
(2) The application shall be filed in person or by post or online.  
(3) The application shall be made in such form and shall be accompanied by such details as may be 
prescribed under this Act or rules made thereunder.  
(4) If any clinical establis hment is in existence at the time of the commencement of this Act, an 
application for its registration shall be made within one year from the date of the commencement of this 
Act and a clinical establishment which comes into existence after commencement of  this Act, shall apply 
for permanent registration within a period of six months from the date of its establishment.  
(5) If any clinical establishment is already registered under any existing law requiring registration of 
such establishments, even then it s hall apply for registration as referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
15. Provisional certificate .—The authority shall, within a period of ten days from the date of receipt 
of such application, grant to the applicant a certificate of provisional registration in s uch form and 
containing such particulars and such information, as may be prescribed.  
16. No inquiry pr ior to provisional registration. —(1) The authority shall not conduct any inquiry 
prior to the grant of provisional registration.  
(2) Notwithstanding the grant of the provisional certificate of registration, the authority shall, within a 
period of forty -five days from the grant of provisional registration, cause to be published in such manner, 
as may be prescribed, all particulars of the clinical establishm ent so registered provisionally.  
17. Valid ity of provisional registration. —Subject to the provisions of section 23, every provisional 
registration shall be valid to the last day of the twelfth month from the date of issue of the certificate of 
registration  and such registration shall be renewable.  
18. Display of certificate of registration .—The certificate shall be kept affixed in a conspicuous 
place in the clinical establishment in such manner so as to be visible to every one visiting such 
establishment.  
19. Duplicate certificate. —In case the certificate is lost, destroyed, mutilated or damaged, the 
authority shall issue a duplicate certificate on the request of the clinical establishment and on the payment 
of such fees as may be prescribed . 
20. Cer tificate  to be non -transferable. —(1) The certificate of registration shall be non -transferable.  
(2) In the event of change of ownership or management, the clinical establishment shall inform the 
authority of such change in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) In the event of change of category, or location, or on ceasing to function as a clinical 
establishment, the certificate of registration in respect of such clinical establishment shall be surrendered 
to the authority and the clinical establishment shall apply afresh for grant of certificate of registration.  
21. Publicat ion of expiry of registration. —The authority shall cause to be published within such 
time and in such manner, as may be prescribed, the names of clinical establishments whose registration 
has exp ired. 
22. Renewal of registration. —The application for renewal of registration shall be made thirty days 
before the expiry of the validity of the certificate of provisional registration and, in case the application 10 
 for renewal is made after the expiry of t he provisional registration, the authority shall allow renewal of 
registration on payment of such enhanced fees, as may be prescribed.  
23. Time limit  for provisional registration. —Where the clinical establishments in respect of which 
standards have been no tified by the Central Government, provisional registration shall no t be granted or 
renewed beyond, — 
(i) the period of two years from the date of notification of the standards in case of clinical 
establishments which came into existence before the commencem ent of this Act;  
(ii) the period of two years from the date of notification of the standards for clinical 
establishments which come into existence after the commencement of this Act but before the 
notification of the standards; and  
(iii) the period of six months from the date of notification of standards for clinical establishments 
which come into existence after standards have been notified.  
24. Application for permanent registration .—Application for permanent registration by a clinical 
establishment shall  be made to the authority in such form and be accompanied by such fees, as may be 
prescribed.  
25. Verification of application. —The clinical establishment shall submit evidence of having 
complied with the prescribed minimum standards in such manner, as may be prescribed.  
26. Display of in formation for filing objections. —As soon as the clincial establishment submits the 
required evidence of having complied with the prescribed minimum standards, the authority shall cause to 
be displayed for information of the public at large and for filing objections, if any, in such manner, as may 
be prescribed, all evidence submitted by the clinical establishment of having complied with the prescribed 
minimum standards for a period of thirty days before processing for grant o f permanent registration.  
27. Communication of objections. —If objections are received within the period referred to in the 
preceding section, such objections shall be communicated to the clinical establishment for response 
within a period of forty -five day s. 
28. Standards for permanent registration .—Permanent registration shall be granted only when a 
clinical establishment fulfils the prescribed standards for registration by the Central Government.  
29. Allowing or disallowing of registration .—The authority shall pass an order immediately after 
the expiry of the prescribed period and within the next thirty days thereafter eith er— 
(a) allowing the application for permanent registration; or  
(b) disallowing the application:  
Provided that the authority shall reco rd its reasons, if it disallows an application, for permanent 
registration.  
30. Certificate of permanent registration .—(1) The authority shall, if it, allows an application of 
the clinical establishment, issue a certificate of permanent registration in suc h form and containing such 
particulars, as may be prescribed.  
(2) The certificate shall be valid for a period of five years from the date of issue.  
(3) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the provisions of sections 18, 19, 20 and 21 shall also apply.  
(4) The applications for renewal of permanent registration shall be made within six months before the 
expiry of the validity of the certificate of permanent registration and,  in case the application of renewal is 
not submitted within the stipulated period, the  authority may allow renewal of registration on payment of 
such enhanced fees and penalties as may be prescribed.  11 
 31. Fresh applica tion for permanent registration. —The disallowing of an application for 
permanent registration shall not debar a clinical esta blishment from applying afresh for permanent 
registration under section 24 and after providing such evidence, as may be required, of having rectified 
the deficiences on which grounds the earlier application was disallowed.  
32. Cancellation of registration. —(1) If, at any time after any clinical establishment has been 
registered, t he authority is satisfied that, — 
(a) the conditions of the registration are not being complied with; or  
(b) the person entrusted with the management of the clinical establishment has been convicted of 
an offence punishable under this Act,  
it may issue a notice to the clinical establishment to show cause within three months' time as to why its 
registration under this Act should not be cancelled for the reasons to be mentioned in the notice.  
(2) If after giving a reasonable opportunity to the clinical establis hment, the authority is satisfied that 
there has been a breach of any of the provisions of this Act o r the rules made thereunder, it may, by an 
order, without prejudice to any other action that it may take against such clinical establishment, cancel its 
registration.  
(3) Every order made under sub -section ( 2) shall take effect — 
(a) where no appeal has bee n preferred against such order immediately on the expiry of the period 
prescribed for such appeal; and  
(b) where such appeal has been preferred and it has been dismissed from the date of the order of 
such dismissal:  
Provided that the authority, after cance llation of registration for reasons to be recorded in writing, 
may restrain immediately the clinical establishment from carrying on if there is imminent danger to the 
health and safety of patients.  
33. Inspection of registered clinical establishments .—(1) The authority or an officer authorised by 
it shall have the right to cause an inspection of, or inquiry in respect of any registered clinical 
establishment, its building, laboratories and equipment and also of the work conducted or done by the 
clinical est ablishment, to be made by such multi -member inspection team as it may direct and to cause an 
inquiry to be made in respect of any other matter connected with the clinical establishment and that 
establishment shall be entitled to be represented thereat.  
(2) The authority shall communicate to the clinical establishment the views of that authority with 
reference to the results of such inspection or inquiry and may, after ascertaining the opinion of the clinical 
establishment thereon, advise that establishment upon the action to be taken.  
(3) The clinical establishment shall report to the authority, the action, if any, which is proposed to be 
taken or has been taken upon the results of such inspection or inquiry and such report shall be furnished 
within such tim e, as the authority may direct.  
(4) Where the clinical establishment does not, within a reasonable time, take action to the satisfaction 
of the authority, it may, after considering any explanation furnished or  representation made by the clinical 
establishment, issue such directions within such time as indicated in the direction, as that authority deems 
fit, and the clinical establishment shall comply with such directions.  
34. Power to enter. —The authority or an officer authorised by it may, if the re is any reason to 
suspect that anyone is carrying on a clinical establishment without registration, enter and search in the 
manner prescribed, at any reasonable time and the clinical establishment, shall offer reasonable facilities 
for inspection or inqu iry and be entitled to be represented thereat:  12 
 Provided that no such person shall enter the clinical establishment without giving notice of his 
intention to do so.  
35. Levy of fee by State Government .—The State Government may charge fees for different 
categories of clinical establishments, as may be prescribed.  
36. Appeal .—(1) Any person, aggrieved by an order of the registering authority refusing to grant or 
renew a certificate of registration or revoking a certificate of registration may, in such manner a nd within 
such period as may be prescribed, prefer an appeal to the State Council:  
Provided that the State Council may entertain an appeal preferred after the expiry of the prescribed 
period if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient  cause from preferring the appeal in 
time.  
(2) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be made in such form and be accompanied by such fee as 
may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER V  
REGISTER OF CLINICAL ESTABLISHMENTS  
37. Registe r of clinical establishments .—(1) The  authority shall within a period of two years from 
its establishment, compile, publish and maintain in digital format a register of clinical establishments, 
registered by it and it shall enter the particulars of the certificate so issued in a register to b e maintained in 
such form and manner, as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
(2) Each authority, including any other authority set -up for the registration of clinical establishments 
under any other law for the time being in force, shall supply in digital format to the State Council of 
clinical establishments a copy of every entry made in the register of clinical establishments in such 
manner, as may be prescribed to ensure that the State Register is constantly up -to-date with the registers 
maintain ed by the registering authority in the State.  
38. Maintenance of State Regi ster of clinical establishments. —(1) Every State Government shall 
maintain in digital and in such form and containing such particulars, as may be prescribed by the Central 
Governmen t a register to be known as the State Register of clinical establishments in respect of clinical 
establishments of that State.  
(2) Every State Government shall supply in digital format to the Central Government, a copy of the 
State Register of clinical est ablishments and shall inform the Central Government all additions to and 
other amendments in such register made, for a particular month by the 15th day of the following month.  
39. Maintenance of National Regi ster of clinical establishments. —The Central Government shall 
maintain in digital format an All India Register to be called as the National Register of clinical 
establishments that shall be an amalgam of the State Register of clinical establishments maintained by the 
State Governments and shall cause  the same to be published in digital format.  
CHAPTER  VI 
PENALTIES  
40. Penalty. —Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act shall, if no penalty is provided 
elsewhere, be punishable for the first offence with fine which may extend to ten thousand  rupees , for any 
second offence with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees and for any subsequent offence with 
fine which may extend to five lakh rupees.  
  13 
 41. Moneta ry penalty for non -registration. —(1) Whoever carries on a clinical establishment 
without  registration shall, on first contravention, be liable to a monetary penalty up to fifty thousand 
rupees, for second contravention with a monetary penalty which may extend to two lakh rupees and for 
any subsequent contravention with a monetary penalty whic h may extend to five lakh rupees.  
(2) Whoever knowingly serves in a clinical establishment which is not duly registered under this Act, 
shall be liable to a monetary penalty which may extend to twenty -five thousand rupees.  
(3) For the purpose of adjudging under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), the authority shall hold an inquiry in 
the prescribed manner after giving any person concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard for the 
purpose of imposing any monetary penalty.  
(4) While holding an inquiry the author ity shall have power to summon and enforce the attendance of 
any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case to give evidence or to produce any 
document which in the opinion of the authority, may be useful for or relevant to the subject matter of the 
inquiry and if, on such inquiry, it is satisfied that the person has failed to comply with the provisions 
specified in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), it may by order impose the monetary penalty specified in those                 
sub-sections to be  deposited within thirty days of the order in the account referred to in sub -section ( 8) of 
section 42. 
(5) While determining the quantum of monetary penalty, the authority shall take into account the 
category, size and type of the clinical establishment a nd local conditions of the area in which the 
establishment is situated.  
(6) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the authority may prefer an appeal to the State Council 
within a period of three months from the date of the said decision.  
(7) The manner o f filing the appeal referred to in sub -section ( 6) shall be such as may be prescribed.  
42. Disobedience of direction, obstruction and refusal of information .—(1) Whoever wilfully 
disobeys any direction lawfully given by any person or authority empowered under this Act to give such 
direction, or obstructs any person or authority in the discharge of any functions which such person or 
authority is required or empowered under this Act to discharge, shall be liable to a monetary penalty 
which may extend to fiv e lakh rupees.  
(2) Whoever being required by or under this Act to supply any information wilfully withholds such 
information or gives information which he knows to be false or which he does not believe to be true, shall 
be liable to a monetary penalty whic h may extend to five lakh rupees.  
(3) For the purpose of adjudging under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), the authority shall hold an inquiry in 
the prescribed manner after giving any person concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard for the 
purpose of imp osing any monetary penalty.  
(4) While holding an inquiry the authority shall have power to summon and enforce the attendance of 
any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case to give evidence or to produce any 
document which in the opin ion of the authority, may be useful for or relevant to the subject matter of the 
inquiry and if, on such inquiry, it is satisfied that the person has failed to comply with the provisions 
specified in sub -sections (1) and ( 2), it may by order impose the mon etary penalty specified in those                
sub-sections to be deposited within thirty days of the order in the account referred to in sub -section ( 8). 
(5) While determining the quantum of monetary penalty, the authority shall take into account the 
category, size and type of the clinical establishment and local conditions of the area in which the 
establishment is situated.  
(6) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the authority may prefer an appeal to the State Council 
within a period of three months from the date of the said decision.  
(7) The manner of filing the appeal referred to in sub -section ( 6) shall be such as may be prescribed.  14 
 (8) The monetary penalty levied under sections 41 and 42 shall be credited to such account as the 
State Government may by order specify in this behalf.  
43. Penalty for minor deficiencies .—Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or any rule 
made thereunder resulting in deficiencies that do not pose any imminent danger to the health and safety of 
any patient and can be rectified within a reasonable time, shall be punishable with fine which may extend 
to ten thousand rupees.  
44. Contravention by companies .—(1) Where a person committing contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule made thereunde r is a company, every person who, at the time the 
contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to the company for the conduct of 
the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the contravention 
and shall be liable to fine:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the contravention was committed without his knowledge or that he had 
exercised all due diligence to preve nt the commission of such contravention.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where a contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule made thereunder has been committed by a company and it is proved 
that the contrave ntion has taken place with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect 
on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, 
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilt y of that contravention and shall be liable to fine.  
Explanation. —For the purpos e of this section, — 
(a) “company” means a body corporate and includes a firm or other association of 
individuals; and  
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
45. Offences by Government Departments .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by any Department of Government within a period of six months after the commencement of 
this Act, the Head of the Department shall be deemed to be guil ty of the offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render such Head of the Department liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without hi s knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a Department of Government and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any officer, other than the Head 
of the Department, such officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be  
proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
46. Recovery of fine .—Whoever fails to pay the fine, the State Council of clinical establishment may 
prepare a certificate signed by an officer authorised by it specifying the fine due from such person and 
send it to the Collector of the District in which such person owns any property or resides or carries on his 
business and the said Collector, on receipt of such certificate, shall proceed to recover from such person 
the amount specified thereunder, as if it wer e an arrear of land revenue.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
47. Protection of action t aken in good faith. —(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings 
shall lie against any authority or any member of the National Council or State Council or any officer 15 
 authorised in this behalf in respect of anything, which is in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of the provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against a State Government or the C entral Government 
in respect of any loss or damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder.  
48. Furnishing of returns, etc .—Every clinical establishment shall, within such time or within such 
extended time, as may be prescribed in that behalf, furnish to the authority or the State Council or the 
National Council such returns or the statistics and other information in such manner, as may be prescribed 
by the State Government, from time to time.  
49. Power to give directions .—Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the 
authority shall have the power to issue such directions, including furnishing returns, statistics and  other 
information for the proper functioning of clinical establishments and such directions shall be binding.  
50. Employees of the authori ty, etc., to be public servants. —Every employee of the authority, the 
National Council and the State Council shall be  deemed to, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance 
of any of the provisions of this Act, be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian 
Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
51. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giv ing effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removal of the diff iculty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliamen t. 
52. Power of Central Government to make rule s.—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make rules for carrying out all or any of the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) allowances for the members of the National Council under sub -section ( 5) of section 3;  
(b) appointment of such person to be the Secretary of the State Council by the Central 
Government  under sub -section ( 10) of section 3;  
(c) the determination of standards and for classification of clinical establishments under section 7;  
(d) the qualification and the terms and conditions for the members of the authority under clause 
(c) of sub -section (1) of section 10;  
(e) the procedure under which the powers of the authority may be exercised by the District Health 
Officer or Chief Medical Officer for the purpose of provisional registration of clinical establishment 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 10;  
(f) the minimum standards of facilities and services under clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of section 
12; 
(g) the minimum number of personnel under clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 1) of section 12;  
(h) the maintenance of records and reporting by the clinical es tablishment under clause (iii) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 12;  16 
 (i) other conditions for registration and continuation of clinical establishment under clause (iv) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 12;  
(j) classification of clinical establishment under sub-section ( 1) of section 13;  
(k) the different standards for classification of clinical establishments under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 13;  
(l) the minimum standards for permanent registration under section 28;  
(m) the form and particulars to be containe d in the register to be maintained under section 38.  
53. Laying of rules. —Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total perio d 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before 
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in th e rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the va lidity of 
anything previously done under that rule.  
54. Power of  State Government to make rules. —(1) The State Government may, by notification, 
make rules for carrying out in respect of matters which do not fall within the purview of section 52.  
(2) In par ticular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the proforma and the fee to be paid for registration under sub -section ( 1) of section 14;  
(b) the form and details of application under sub -section ( 3) of section 14;  
(c) the particulars and information contained in certificate of provisional registration under 
section 15;  
(d) the manner of publication of all particulars of the clinical establishments proposed to be 
registered under sub -section ( 2) of section 16;  
(e) the fees to be paid to issue a duplicate certificate under section 19;  
(f) the change of ownership or management to be informed by the clinical establishment to the 
authority under sub -section ( 2) of section 20;  
(g) the manner in which the authority shall publish the names of the clinical establishments whose 
registration expired under section 21;  
(h) the enhanced fees to be charged for renewal after expiry of the provisional registration under 
section 22;  
(i) the form of the application and fees to be charged by the State Government under section 24;  
(j) the manner of submitting evidence of the clinical establishments having complied with the 
minimum standards under section 25;  
(k) the manner of disp laying information of the clinical establishments having complied with the 
minimum standards for filing objection under section 26;  
(l) the expiry of period specified in section 29;  
(m) the form and particulars of the certificate of registration under sect ion 30;  
(n) the period within which an appeal shall be preferred under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3) of 
section 32;  17 
 (o) the manner of entry and search of clinical establishment under section 34;  
(p) the fees to be charged by the State Government for differ ent categories of clinical 
establishments under section 35;  
(q) the manner and the period within which an appeal may be preferred to the State Council under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 36;  
(r) the form and the fee to be paid for an appeal under sub -section (2) of section 36;  
(s) the form and the manner in which the register to be maintained under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 37;  
(t) the manner of supply to the State Council in digital format the entry made in the register of 
clinical establishment under sub -section ( 2) of section 37;  
(u) the manner of holding an inquiry by the authority under sub -section ( 3) of sections 41 and 42;  
(v) the manner of filing the appeal under sub -section ( 7) of sections 41 and 42;  
(w) the manner and the time within which the inform ation is to be furnished to the authority or the 
State Council or the National Council as the case may be, under section 48;  
(x) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed by the State Government.  
55. Laying  of rules.—Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two 
Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House.  
56. Savings .—(1) The provisions of this Act shall not apply to the States in which the enactments 
specified in the Schedule are applicable:  
Provided that the States in which the enactments referred to in sub -section ( 1) are applicable, and 
such States subsequent to the commencement of this Act, adopts this Act under clause ( 1) of article 252 
of the Constitution, the provisions of this Act shall, subsequent to such adoption, apply in that State.  
(2) The Central Government may, as and when consider necessary, by notificati on amend the 
Schedule.  
  18 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 56]  
1. The Andhra Pradesh Private Medical Care Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2002.  
2. The Bombay Nursing Homes Registration Act, 1949.  
3. The Delhi Nursing Homes Registration Act, 1953.  
4. The Madhya Pradesh Upcharya Griha Tatha Rujopchar Sanbabdu Sthapamaue (Ragistrikaran 
Tatha Anugyapan) Adhiniyam, 1973.  
5. The Manipur Homes and Clinics Registration Act, 1992.  
6. The Nagaland Health Care Establishments Act, 1997.  
7. The Orissa Clinical  Establishments (Control and Regulation) Act, 1990.  
8. The Punjab State Nursing Home Registration Act, 1991.  
9. The West Bengal Clinical Establishments Act, 1950.  
--------------------------The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010--------------------------
1 
 THE FOREIGN CONTRIBUTION (REGULATION) ACT, 2010  
____________  
ARR ANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTION S 
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
REGULATION OF FOREIGN CONTRIBUTION AND FOREIGN HOSPITALITY  
3. Prohibition to accept foreign contribution.  
4. Persons to whom section 3 shall not apply.  
5. Procedure to notify an organisation of a political nature.  
6. Restriction on acceptance of foreign hospitality . 
7. Prohibition to transfer foreign contribution to other person.  
8. Restriction to utilis e foreign contribution for administrative purpose.  
9. Power of Central Government to prohibit receipt of foreign contribution, etc., in certain cases.  
10. Power to prohibit payment of currency received in contravention of the Act. 
 
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION  
11. Registration of certain persons with Central Government.  
12. Grant of certificate of registration.  
13. Suspension of certificate.  
14. Cancellation of certificate.  
15. Management of foreign contribution  of person whose certificate has been cancelled.  
16. Renewal of certificate.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
ACCOUNTS, INTIMATION, AUDIT AND DISPOSAL OF ASSETS, ETC . 
17. Foreign contribution through scheduled bank.  
18. Intimation.  
  2 
 SECTIONS  
19. Maintenance of accounts.  
20. Audit of accounts.  
21. Intimation by candidate for election.  
22. Disposal of assets created out of foreign contribution.  
 
CHAPTER  V 
INSPECTION, SEARCH AND SEIZURE  
23. Inspection of accounts or records.  
24. Seizure of accounts or records.  
25. Seizure of article or currency or security received in contravention of the Act.  
26. Disposal of seized article or currency or security.  
27. Seizure to be made in accordance with Act 2 of 1974 . 
 
CHAPTER VI  
ADJUDICATION  
28. Confiscation of article or currency or security obtained in contravention of the Act.  
29. Adjudication of confiscation.  
30. Procedure for confiscation.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
APPEAL AND REVISION  
31. Appeal.  
32. Revision of orders by Central Government.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
33. Making of false statement, declaration or delivering false accounts . 
34. Penalty for article or currency or security obtained in contravention of section 10.  
35. Punishment for contravention of any provision of the Act.  
36. Power to impose additional fine where article or currency or security is not available for 
confiscation.  
37. Penalty for offences where no separate punishment has been pr ovided.  
38. Prohibition of acceptance of foreign contribution.  
39. Offences by companies.  
40. Bar on prosecution of offences under the Act.  3 
 SECTIONS  
41. Composition of certain offences.  
 
CHAPTER IX  
MISCELLANEOUS  
42. Power to call for information or document.  
43. Investigation into cases under the Act.  
44. Returns by prescribed authority to Central Government.  
45. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
46. Power of Central Government to give directions.  
47. Delegation of powers.  
48. Power to make rules.  
49. Orders and rules to be laid before Parliam ent. 
50. Power to exempt in certain cases.  
51. Act not to apply to certain Government transactions.  
52. Application of other laws not barred.  
53. Power to remove difficulties.  
54. Repeal and saving.   
  4 
 THE FOREIGN CONTRIBUTION (REGULATION) ACT, 2010  
ACT NO. 42 OF 2010  
[26th September , 2010 .] 
An Act to consolidate the law to regulate the acceptance and utilisation of foreign contribution or 
foreign hospitality by certain individuals or associations or companies and to prohibit 
acceptance and utilisation of foreign contribution  or foreign hospitality for any activities 
detrimental to the national interest and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -first Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I   
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Foreign 
Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010.  
(2) It extends to the whole of In dia, and it shall also apply to — 
(a) citizens of India outside India; and  
(b) associate  branches or subsidiaries, outside India, of companies or bodies corporate, regi stered 
or incorporated in India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that diffe rent dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the comin g 
into force of that provision.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “association ” means an association of individuals, whether incorporated or not, having an 
office in India and includes a society, whether registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860  
(21 of 1860) , or not, and a ny other organisation, by whatever name called;  
(b) “authorised person in foreign exchange ” means an authorised person referred to in clause ( c) 
of section 2 of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999  (42 of 1999) ; 
(c) “bank ” means a banking company as r eferred to in clause ( c) of section 5 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949  (10 of 1949) ; 
(d) “candidate for election ” means a person who has been duly nominated as a candidate for 
election to any Legislature;  
(e) “certificate ” means certificate of registrat ion granted under sub -section ( 3) of section 12;  
(f) “company ” shall have the meaning assigned to it under clause ( 17) of section 2 of the  
Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) ; 
  
                                                           
1. 1st May, 2011 , vide notification No. S.O. 909(E), dated 29 th April, 2011 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 5 
 (g) “foreign company ” means any company or association or body of individuals incorpor ated 
outside India and includes — 
(i) a foreign company within the meaning of section 591 of the Companies Act, 1956   
(1 of 1956) ; 
(ii) a company which is a subsidiary of a foreign company;  
(iii) the registered office or principal place of business of a foreign company referred to in 
sub-clause ( i) or company referred to in sub -clause ( ii); 
(iv) a multi -national corporation.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -clause, a corporation incorporated in a foreign 
country or territory shall be deemed to be a multi -national c orporation if such corporation, — 
(a) has a subsidiary or a branch or a place of business in two or more countries or terr itories; 
or 
(b) carries on business, or otherwise operates, in two or more countries or territories;  
(h) “foreign contribution ” means the donation, delivery or trans fer made by any foreign source, —  
(i) of any article, not being an article given to a person as a gift for his personal use, if the 
market value, in India, of such article, on the date of such gift, is not more than such sum as may 
be specified from time to time, by the Central Government by the rules made by it in this behalf;  
(ii) of any currency, whether Indian or foreign;  
(iii) of any security as defined in clause ( h) of section 2 of the Securities Contracts 
(Regulation) Act, 1956  (42 of 1956)  and includes any foreign security as defined in clause ( o) of 
section 2 of` the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999  (42 of 1999) . 
Explanation 1.—A donation, delivery or transfer of any article, currency or foreign security 
referred to in this clause by any person who has received it from any foreign source, either directly or 
through one or  more persons, shall also be deemed to be foreign contribution within the meaning of 
this clause.  
Explanation 2.—The interest accrued on the foreign contribution deposited in any bank referred 
to in sub -section ( 1) of section 17 or any other income derived  from the foreign contribution or 
interest thereon shall also be deemed to be foreign contribution within the meaning of this clause.  
Explanation 3.—Any amount received, by any person from any foreign source in India, by way 
of fee (including fees charged by an educational institution in India from foreign student) or towards 
cost in lieu of goods or services rendered by such person in the ordinary course of his business, trade 
or commerce whether within India or outside India or any contribution received f rom an agent of a 
foreign source towards such fee or cost shall be excluded from the definition of foreign contribution 
within the meaning of this clause;  
(i) “foreign hospitality ” means any offer, not being a purely casual one, made in cash or kind by a 
foreign source for providing a person with the costs of travel to any foreign country or territory or 
with free boarding, lodging, transport or medical treatment;  
(j) “foreign sourc e” includes, — 
(i) the Government of any foreign country or territory and any agency of such Government;  
(ii) any international agency, not being the United Nations or any of its specialised agencies, 
the World Bank, International Monetary Fund or such othe r agency as the Central Government 
may, by notification, specify in this behalf;  6 
 (iii) a foreign company;  
(iv) a corporation, not being a foreign company, incorporated in a foreign country or territory;  
(v) a multi -national corporation referred to in sub -clause ( iv) of clause ( g); 
(vi) a company within the meaning of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , and more than 
one-half of the nominal value of its share capital is held, either singly or in the aggregate, by one 
or more of the following, n amely: — 
(A) the Government of a foreign country or territory;  
(B) the citizens of a foreign country or territory;  
(C) corporations incorporated in a foreign country or territory;  
(D) trusts, societies or other associations of individuals (whether incorporated or not),  
formed or registered in a foreign country or territory;  
(E) foreign company:  
1[Provided that where the nominal value of share capital is within the limits specified for 
foreign investment under the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999  (42 of 1999) , or th e 
rules or regulations made thereunder, then, notwithstanding the nominal value of share capital 
of a company being more than one -half of such value at the time of making the contribution, 
such company shall not be a foreign source;]  
(vii) a trade union in  any foreign country or territory, whether or not registered in such 
foreign country or territory;  
(viii) a foreign trust or a foreign foundation, by whatever name called, or such trust or 
foundation mainly financed by a foreign country or territory;  
(ix) a society, club or other association of individuals formed or registered outside India;  
(x) a citizen of a foreign country;  
(k) “Legislature ” means — 
(A) either House of Parliament;  
(B) the Legislative Assembly of a State, or in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, 
either House of the Legislature of that State;  
(C) Legislative Assembly of a Union territory constituted under the Government of Union 
Territories Act, 1963  (20 of 19 63); 
(D) Legislative Assembly for the National Capital Territory of Delhi referred to in the 
Government of National Capi tal Territory of Delhi Act, 1991 (1 of 1992) ; 
(E) Municipality as defined in clause ( e) of article 243P of the Constitution;  
(F) Distric t Councils and Regional Councils in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and 
Mizoram as provided in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution;  
(G) Panchayat means notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression “notify ” 
shall be construed  accordingly; as defined in clause ( d) of article 243 of the Constitution; or  
(m) “person ” includes — 
(H) any other elective body as may be notified by the Central Government;  
(l) “notification ”  
(i) an individual;   
(ii) a Hindu undivided family;  
(iii) an association;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 28 of 2016, s. 236 (w.e.f. 26 -9-2010).  7 
 (iv) a company registered under section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) ; 
(n) “political party ” means — 
(i) an association or body of individual citizens of India — 
(A) to be registered with the Election Commission of India as a political party under 
section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951  (43 of 1951) ; or 
(B) which  has set up candidates for election to any Legislature, but is not so registered or 
deemed to be registered under the Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order, 
1968;  
(ii) a political party mentioned in column 2 of Table 1 and Table 2 to the notif ication of the 
Election Commission of India No.  56/J&K/02, dated the  8th August, 2002, as in force for the 
time being;  
(o) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(p) “prescribed authority ” means an authority specified as such by rules made by the Central 
Government under this Act;  
(q) “registered newspaper ” means a newspaper registered under the Press and Registration of 
Books Act, 1867  (25 of 1867) ; 
(r) “relative ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( 41) of section 2 of the Companies  
Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) ; 
(s) “scheduled bank ” shall have the meaning assigned to it under clause ( e) of section 2 of the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) ; 
(t) “subsidiary ” and “associate ” shall have the meanings, r espectively assigned to them in the 
Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) ; 
(u) “trade union ” means a trade union registered under the Trade Unions Act, 1926  (16 of 1926) ; 
(2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined in this Act but defined in the Repres entation 
of the People Act, 1950  (43 of 1950)  or the Repres entation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951) or the 
Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999  (42 of 1999)  shall have the meanings respectively assigned to 
them in those Acts.  
CHAPTER II  
REGULATION OF FOREIGN CONTRIBUTION AND FOREIGN HOSPITALITY  
3. Prohibition to accept foreign contribution .—(1) No foreign contribution shall be accepted by 
any— 
(a) candidate for election;  
(b) correspondent, columnist, cartoonist, editor, owner, printer or publisher of a registered 
newspaper;  
(c) Judge, Government servant or employee of any corporation or any other body controlled or 
owned by the Government;  
(d) member of any Legislature;  
(e) political party or office -bearer thereof;  8 
 (f) organisation  of a political nature as may be specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 5 by the 
Central Government;  
(g) association or company engaged in the production or broadcast of audio news or audio visual 
news or current affairs programmes through any electron ic mode, or any other electronic form as 
defined in clause ( r) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000   
(21 of 2000)  or any other mode of mass communication;  
(h) correspondent or columnist, cartoonist, editor, owner of the a ssociation or company referred 
to in clause ( g). 
Explanation .—In clause ( c) and section 6, the expression “corporation ” means a corporation 
owned or controlled by the Government and includes a Government company as defined in section 
617 of the Companies A ct, 1956  (1 of 1956) . 
(2) (a) No person, resident in India, and no citizen of India resident outside India, shall accept any 
foreign contribution, or acquire or agree to acquire any currency from a foreign source, on behalf of any 
political party, or any p erson referred to in sub -section ( 1), or both.  
(b) No person, resident in India, shall deliver any currency, whether Indian or foreign, which has been 
accepted from any foreign source, to any person if he knows or has reasonable cause to believe that such 
other person intends, or is likely, to deliver such currency to any political party or any person referred to 
in sub -section ( 1), or both.  
(c) No citizen of India resident outside India shall deliver any currency, whether Indian or foreign, 
which has been accep ted from any foreign source, to — 
(i) any political party or any person referred to in sub -section ( 1), or both; or  
(ii) any other person, if he knows or has reasonable cause to believe that such other person 
intends, or is likely, to deliver such curr ency to a political party or to any person referred to in  
sub-section ( 1), or both.  
(3) No person receiving any currency, whether Indian or foreign, from a foreign source on behalf of 
any person or class of persons, referred to in section  9, shall deliver  such currency — 
(a) to any person other than a person for which it was received, or  
(b) to any other person, if he knows or has reasonable cause to believe that such other person 
intends, or is likely, to deliver such currency to a person other than the pe rson for which such 
currency was received.  
4. Persons to who m section 3 shall not apply .—Nothing contained in section 3 shall apply to the 
acceptance, by any person specified in that section, of any foreign contribution where such contribution is 
accepted by him, subject t o the provisions of section 10, — 
(a) by way of salary, wages or other remuneration due to him or to any group of persons working 
under him, from any foreign source or by way of payment in the ordinary course of business 
transacted in India  by such foreign source; or  
(b) by way of payment, in the course of international trade or commerce, or in the ordinary course 
of business transacted by him outside India; or  
(c) as an agent of a foreign source in relation to any transaction made by such f oreign source with 
the Central Government or State Government; or  9 
 (d) by way of a gift or presentation made to him as a member of any Indian delegation, provided 
that such gift or present was accepted in accordance with the rules made by the Central Govern ment 
with regard to the acceptance or retention of such gift or presentation; or  
(e) from his relative; or  
(f) by way of remittance received, in the ordinary course of business through any official channel, 
post office, or any authorised person in foreign exchange under the Foreign Exchange Management 
Act, 1999  (42 of 1999) ; or 
(g) by way of any scholarship, stipend or any payment of like nature:  
Provided that in case any foreign contribution received by any person specified under section 3, 
for any of the purposes other than those specified under this section, such contribution shall be 
deemed to have been accepted in contravention of the provisions of section 3.  
5. Procedure to notify an organi sation of a political nature .—(1) The Central Government may, 
having regard to the activities of the organisation or the ideology propagated by the organisation or the 
programme of the organisation or the association of the organisations with the activities of any political 
party, by an order published in the Official Gazette, specify such organisation as an organisation of a 
political nature not being a political party, referred to in clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3:  
Provided that the Central Government may, by rules made by i t, frame the guidelines specifying the 
ground or grounds on which an organisation shall be specified as an organisation of a political nature.  
(2) Before making an order under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall give the organisation 
in respect o f whom the order is proposed to be made, a notice in writing informing it of the ground or 
grounds, on which it is proposed to be specified as an organisation of political nature under that  
sub-section.  
(3) The organisation to whom a notice has been serve d under sub -section ( 2), may, within a period of 
thirty days from the date of the notice, make a representation to the Central Government giving reasons 
for not specifying such organisation as an organisation under sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that the Centra l Government may entertain the representation after the expiry of the said 
period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the organisation was prevented by sufficient cause from making 
the representation within thirty days.  
(4) The Central Government may, if it considers it appropriate, forward the representation referred to 
in sub -section ( 3) to any authority to report on such representation.  
(5) The Central Government may, after considering the representation and the report of the authority 
referred to in  sub-section ( 4), specify such organisation as an organisation of a political nature not being a 
political party and make an order under sub -section ( 1) accordingly.  
(6) Every order under sub -section ( 1) shall be made within a period of one hundred and twe nty days 
from the date of issue of notice under sub -section ( 2): 
Provided that in case no order is made within the said period of one hundred and twenty days, the 
Central Government shall, after recording the reasons therefor, make an order under sub -section (1) 
within a period of sixty days from the expiry of the said period of one hundred and twenty days.  
6. Restriction on accep tance of foreign hospitality .—No member of a Legislature or office -bearer 
of a political party or Judge or Government servant or employee of any corporation or any other body 
owned or controlled by the Government shall, while visiting any country or territory outside India, accept, 
except with the prior permission of the Central Government, any foreign hospitality:  10 
 Provided that it shall not be necessary to obtain any such permission for an emergent medical aid 
needed on account of sudden illness contracted during a visit outside India, but, where such foreign 
hospitality has been received, the person receiving such hospitality shall  give, within one month from the 
date of receipt of such hospitality an intimation to the Central Government as to the receipt of such 
hospitality, and the source from which, and the manner in which, such hospitality was received by him.  
7. Prohibition to transfer foreign contribution to other pers on.—No person who — 
(a) is registered and granted a certificate or has obtained prior permission under this Act; and  
(b) receives any foreign contribution,  
shall  transfer such foreign contribution to any other person unless such other person is also registered and 
had been granted the certificate or obtained the prior permission under this Act:  
Provided that such person may transfer, with the prior approval of the  Central Government, a part of 
such foreign contribution to any other person who has not been granted a certificate or obtained 
permission under this Act in accordance with the rules made by the Central Government.  
8. Restriction to utilise foreign contrib ution for administrative purpose .—(1) Every person, who 
is registered and granted a certificate or given prior permission under this Act and rec eives any foreign 
contribution, — 
(a) shall utilise  such contribution for the purposes for which the contribution has been received:  
Provided that any foreign contribution or any income arising out of it shall not be used for 
speculative business:  
Provided further that the Central Government shall, by rule s, specify the activities or business 
which shall be construed as speculative business for the purpose of this section;  
(b) shall not defray as far as possible such sum, not exceeding fifty per cent. of such contribution, 
received in a financial year, to m eet administrative expenses:  
Provided that administrative expenses exceeding fifty per cent. of such contribution may be 
defrayed with prior approval of the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Government may prescribe the elements which shall be included i n the administrative 
expenses and the manner in which the administrative expenses referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be 
calculated.  
9. Power of Central Government to prohibit receipt of foreign con tribu tion, etc., in certain 
cases .—The Central Government  may— 
(a) prohibit any person or organisation not specified in section 3, from accepting any foreign 
contribution;  
(b) require any person or class of persons, not specified in section 6, to obtain prior permission of 
the Central Government before accepting  any foreign hospitality;  
(c) require any person or class of persons not specified in section 11, to furnish intimation within 
such time and in such manner as may be prescribed as to the amount of any foreign contribution 
received by such person or class o f persons as the case may be, and the source from which and the 
manner in which such contribution was received and the purpose for which and the manner in which 
such foreign contribution was utilised;  11 
 (d) without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section (1) of section 11, require any person or 
class of persons specified in that sub -section to obtain prior permission of the Central Government 
before accepting any foreign contribution;  
(e) require any person or class of persons, not specified in section 6, to furnish intimation, within 
such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, as to the receipt of any foreign hospitality, the 
source from which and the manner in which such hospitality was received:  
Provided that no such prohibition or requirement shall be made unless the Central Government is 
satisfied that the acceptance of foreign contribution by such person or class of persons, as the case 
may be, or the acceptance of foreign hospitality by such person, is likely to affect prejudicially — 
(i) the sovereignty and integrity of India; or  
(ii) public interest; or  
(iii) freedom or fairness of election to any Legislature; or  
(iv) friendly relations with any foreign State; or  
(v) harmony between religious, racial, social, linguistic or regional groups, c astes or 
communities.  
10. Power to prohibit payment of currency received  in contravention of the Act .—Where the 
Central Government is satisfied, after making such inquiry as it may deem fit, that any person has in his 
custody or control any article or curr ency or security, whether Indian or foreign, which has been accepted 
by such person in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act, it may, by order in writing, prohibit 
such person from paying, delivering, transferring or otherwise dealing with, in  any manner whatsoever, 
such article or currency or security save in accordance with the written orders of the Central Government 
and a copy of such order shall be served upon the person so prohibited in the prescribed manner, and 
thereupon the provisions of sub -sections ( 2), (3), (4) and ( 5) of section 7 of the Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 1967  (37 of 1967) shall, so far as may be, apply to, or in relation to, such article or 
currency or security and references in the said sub -sections to moneys, securities or credits shall be 
construed as references to such article or currency or security.  
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION  
11. Registration of certain per sons with Central Government .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in 
this Act, no person having a definite cu ltural, economic, educational, religious or social programme shall 
accept foreign contribution unless such person obtains a certificate of registration from the Central 
Government:  
Provided that any association registered with the Central Government under section 6 or granted prior 
permission under that section of the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976  (49 of 1976) , as it stood 
immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have been registered or granted 
prior permission, as t he case may be, under this Act and such registration shall be valid for a period of 
five years from the date on which this section comes into force.  
(2) Every person referred to in sub -section ( 1) may, if it is not registered with the Central Government 
under that sub -section, accept any foreign contribution only after  obtaining the prior permission of the 
Central Government and such prior permission shall be valid for the specific purpose for which it is 
obtained and from the specific source:  12 
 Provided th at if the person referred to in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) has been found guilty of violation of 
any of the provisions of this Act or the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976  (49 of 1976) , the 
unutilised or unreceived amount of foreign contribution sh all not be utilised or received, as the case may 
be, without the prior approval of the Central Government.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government may, by notification i n 
the Official Gazette, specify — 
(i) the person or c lass of persons who shall obtain its prior permission before accepting the 
foreign contribution; or  
(ii) the area or areas in which the foreign contribution shall be accepted and utilised with the prior 
permission of the Central Government; or  
(iii) the  purpose or purposes for which the foreign contribution shall be utilised with the prior 
permission of the Central Government; or  
(iv) the source or sources from which the foreign contribution shall be accepted with the prior 
permission of the Central Gove rnment.  
12. Grant of  certificate of registration .—(1) An application by a person, referred to in section 11 
for grant of certificate or giving prior permission, shall be made to the Central Government in such form 
and manner and along with such fee, as may  be prescribed.  
(2) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall, by an order, if 
the application is not in the prescribed form or does not contain any of the particulars specified in that 
form, reject the application.  
(3) If on receipt of an application for grant of certificate or giving prior permission and after making 
such inquiry as the Central Government deems fit, it is of the opinion that the conditions specified in  
sub-section ( 4) are satisfied, it may, ordinari ly within ninety days from the date of receipt of application 
under sub -section ( 1), register such person and grant him a certificate or give him prior permission, as the 
case may be, subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed:  
Provided that  in case the Central Government does not grant, within the said period of ninety days, a 
certificate or give prior permission, it shall communicate the reasons therefor to the applicant:  
Provided further that a person shall not be eligible for grant of cer tificate or giving prior permission, 
if his certificate has been suspended and such suspension of certificate continues on the date of making 
application.  
(4) The following shall be the conditions for the purpo ses of sub -section ( 3), namely: — 
(a) the perso n making an application for registration or grant of prior permission under  
sub-section (1),— 
(i) is not fictitious  or benami;  
(ii) has not been prosecuted or convicted for indulging in activities aimed at conversion 
through inducement or force, either directly or indirectly, from one religious faith to another;  
(iii) has not been prosecuted or convicted for creating communal tension or disharmony in 
any specified district or any other part of the country;  
(iv) has not been found guilty of diversion or m is-utilisation of its funds;  
(v) is not engaged or likely to engage in propagation of sedition or advocate violent methods 
to achieve its ends;  13 
 (vi) is not likely to use the foreign contribution for personal gains or divert it for undesirable 
purposes;  
(vii) has not contravened any of the provisions of this Act;  
(viii) has not been prohibited from accepting foreign contribution;  
(b) the person making an application for registration under sub -section ( 1) has undertaken 
reason able activity in its chosen fiel d for the benefit of the society for which the foreign contribution 
is proposed to be utilised;  
(c) the person making an application for giving prior permission under  sub-section ( 1) has 
prepared a reasonable project for the benefit of the society for whic h the foreign contribution is 
proposed to be utilised;  
(d) in case the person being an individual, such individual has neither been convicted under any 
law for the time being in force nor any prosecution for any offence pending against him;  
(e) in case the  person being other than an individual, any of its directors or office bearers has 
neither been convicted under any law for the time being in force nor any prosecution for any offence 
is pending against him;  
(f) the acceptance of foreign contribution by th e person referred to in sub -section ( 1) is not  likely 
to affect prejudicially — 
(i) the sovereignty and integrity of India; or  
(ii) the security, strategic, scientific or economic interest of the State; or  
(iii) the public interest; or  
(iv) freedom  or fairness of election to any Legislature; or  
(v) friendly relation with any foreign State; or  
(vi) harmony between religious, racial, social, linguistic, regional groups, castes or 
communities;  
(g) the acceptance of foreign contribution referred to in s ub-section ( 1),— 
(i) shall not lead to incitement of an offence;  
(ii) shall not endanger the life or physical safety of any person.  
(5) Where the Central Government refuses the grant of certificate or does not give prior permission, it 
shall record in its order the reasons therefor and furnish a copy thereof to the applicant:  
Provided that the Central Government may not communicate the reasons for refusal for grant of 
certificate or for not giving prior permission to the applicant under this section in case s where  there is no 
obligation to give any information or documents or record s or papers under the Right to Information   
Act, 2005  (22 of 2005) . 
(6) The certificate granted under sub -section ( 3) shall be valid for a period of five years and the prior 
permission shall be valid for the specific purpose or specific amount of foreign contribution proposed to 
be received, as the case may be.  
13. Suspension of certificate .—(1) Where the Central Government, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, is satisfied that pending consideration of the question of cancelling the certificate on any of the 
grounds mentioned in sub -section ( 1) of section 14, it is necessary so to do, it may, by order in writing, 14 
 suspend the certificate for such period not exceeding one hund red and eighty days as may be specified in 
the order.  
(2) Every person whose certi ficate has been suspended shall — 
(a) not receive any foreign contribution during the period of suspension of certificate:  
Provided that the Central Government, on an application made by such person, if it considers 
appropriate, allow receipt of any foreign contribution by such person on such terms and conditions as 
it may specify;  
(b) utilise, in the prescribed manner, the foreign contribution in his custody with the p rior 
appro val of the Central Government.  
14. Cancellation of certificate .—(1) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied after making 
such inquiry as it may deem fit, by an o rder, cancel the certificate if — 
(a) the holder of the certificate has made a statement in, or in relation to, the application for the 
grant of registration or renewal thereof, which is incorrect or false; or  
(b) the holder of the certificate has violated any of the terms and conditions of the certificate or 
renewal thereof; or  
(c) in the opinion of the Central Government, it is necessary in the public interest to cancel the 
certificate; or  
(d) the holder of certificate has violated any of the provisions of this Act or rules or order made 
thereunder; or  
(e) if the holder of the certi ficate has not been engaged in any reasonable activity in its chosen 
field for the benefit of the society for two consecutive years or has become defunct.  
(2) No order of cancellation of certificate under this section shall be made unless the person 
concer ned has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
(3) Any person whose certificate has been cancelled under this section shall not be eligible for 
registration or grant of prior permission for a period of three years from the date of cancellation  of such 
certificate.  
15. Management of foreign contribution of person whose ce rtificate has been cancelled .—(1) 
The foreign contribution and assets created out of the foreign contribution in the custody of every person 
whose certificate has been cancelled under section 14 shall vest in such authority as may be prescribed.  
(2) The authority referred to in sub -section ( 1) may, if it considers necessary and in public interest, 
manage the activities of the person referred to in that sub -section for such period and in such manner, as 
the Central Government may direct and such authority may utilise the foreign contribution or  dispose of 
the assets created out of it in case adequate funds are not available for running such activity.  
(3) The authority referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall return the foreign contribution and the assets 
vested upon it under that sub -section to the person referred to in the said sub -section if such person is 
subsequently registered under this Act.  
16. Renewal of certificate .—(1) Every person who has been granted a certificate under section 12 
shall have such certificate renewed within six months befo re the expiry of the period of the certificate.  
(2) The application for renewal of the certificate shall be made to the Central Government in such 
form and manner and accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed.  15 
 (3) The Central Government shall renew the certificate, ordinarily within ninety days from the date of 
receipt of application for renewal of certificate subject to such terms and conditions as it may deem fit and 
grant a certificate of renewal for a period of five years:  
Provided that in case the C entral Government does not renew the certificate within the said period of 
ninety days, it shall communicate the reasons therefor to the applicant:  
Provided further that the Central Government may refuse to renew the certificate in case where a 
person has violated any of the provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder.  
CHAPTER IV  
ACCOUNTS, INTIMATION, AUDIT AND DISPOSAL OF ASSETS, ETC.  
17. Foreign contrib ution through scheduled bank .—(1) Every person who has been granted a 
certificate or given prior permission under section 12 shall receive foreign contribution in a single account 
only through such one of the branches of a bank as he may specify in his application for grant of 
certificate:  
Provided that such person may open one or more accounts in one  or more banks for utilising the 
foreign contribution received by him:  
Provided further that no funds other than foreign contribution shall be received or deposited in such 
account or accounts.  
(2) Every bank or authorised person in foreign exchange shall report to suc h authority as may be 
specified — 
(a) prescribed amount of foreign remittance;  
(b) the source and manner in which the foreign remittance was received; and  
(c) other particulars,  
in such form and manner as may be prescribed.  
18. Intimation .—(1) Every person who has been granted a certificate or given prior approval under 
this Act shall give, within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the 
Central Government, and such other authority as may be specified by the Centra l Government, as to the 
amount of each foreign contribution received by it, the source from which and the manner in which such 
foreign contribution was received, and the purposes for which, and the manner in which such foreign 
contribution was utilised by him. 
(2) Every person receiving foreign contribution shall submit a copy of a statement indicating therein 
the particulars of foreign contribution received duly certified by officer of the bank or authorised person 
in foreign exchange and furnish the same to the Central Government along with the intimation under  
sub-section ( 1). 
19. Maintenance of accounts .—Every person who has been granted a certificate or given prior 
approval under this Act shall maintain, in such form a nd manner as may be prescribed, — 
(a) an account of any foreign contribution received by him; and  
(b) a record as to the manner in which such contribution has been utilised by him.  
20. Audit of accounts .—Where any person who has been granted a certificate or given prior 
permission, fails to  furnish any intimation under this Act within the time specified therefor or the 
intimation so furnished is not in accordance with law or if, after inspection of such intimation, the Central 16 
 Government has any reasonable cause to believe that any provision  of this Act has been, or is being, 
contravened, the Central Government may, by general or special order, authorise such gazetted officer, 
holding a Group A post under the Central Government or any other officer or authority or organisation, as 
it may thin k fit, to audit any books of account kept or maintained by such person and thereupon every 
such officer shall have the right to enter in or upon any premises at any reasonable hour, before sunset and 
after sunrise, for the purpose of auditing the said book s of account:  
Provided that any information obtained from such audit shall be kept confidential and shall not be 
disclosed except for the purposes of this Act.  
21. Intimati on by candidate for election .—Every candidate for election, who had received any 
foreign contribution, at any time within one hundred and eighty days immediately preceding the date on 
which he is duly nominated as such candidate, shall give, within such time and in such manner as may b e 
prescribed, an intimation to the Central Government or prescribed authority or both as to the amount of 
foreign contribution received by him, the source from which, and the manner in which, such foreign 
contribution was received and the purposes for whic h and the manner in which such foreign contribution 
was utilised by him . 
22. Disposal of assets created out of f oreign contribution .—Where any person who was permitted 
to accept foreign contribution under this Act, ceases to exist or has become defunct, al l the assets of such 
person shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions contained in any law for the time being in 
force under which the person was registered or incorporated, and in the absence of any such law, the 
Central Government may, havin g regard to the nature of assets created out of foreign contribution 
received under this Act, by notification, specify that all such assets shall be disposed off by such 
authority, as it may specify, in such manner and procedure as may be prescribed.  
CHAPT ER V  
INSPECTION, SEARCH AND SEIZURE  
23. Inspe ction of accounts or records .—If the Central Government has, for any reason, to be 
recorded in writing, any ground to suspect that any provision of this Act has b een or is being, contravened 
by— 
(a) any  political party; or  
(b) any person; or  
(c) any organisation; or  
(d) any association,  
it may, by general or special order, authorise such gazetted officer, holding a Group A post under the 
Central Government or such other officer or authority or organisati on, as it may think fit (hereinafter 
referred to as the inspecting officer), to inspect any account or record maintained by such political party, 
person, organisation or association, as the case may be, and thereupon every such inspecting officer shall 
have the right to enter in or upon any premises at any reasonable hour, before sunset and after sunrise, for 
the purpose of inspecting the said account or record.  
24. Se izure of accounts or records .—If, after inspection of an account or record referred to in 
section 23, the inspecting officer has any reasonable cause to believe that any provision of this Act or of 
any other law relating to foreign exchange has been, or is being, contravened, he may seize such account 
or record and produce the same before the c ourt, authority or tribunal in which any proceeding is brought 
for such contravention:  17 
 Provided that the authorised officer shall return such account or record to the person from whom it 
was seized if no proceeding is brought within six months from the dat e of such seizure for the 
contravention disclosed by such account or record.  
25. Seizure of article or currency or security received  in contravention of the Act .—If any 
gazetted officer, authorised in this behalf by the Central Government by general or spe cial order, has any 
reason to believe that any person has in his possession or control any article exceeding the value specified 
in sub -clause ( i) of clause ( h) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 or currency or security whether Indian or 
foreign, in relation to which any provision of this Act has been or is being, contravened, he may seize 
such article or currency or security.  
26. Disposal of seized art icle or currency or security .—(1) The Central Government, may, having 
regard to the value of article or currency or security, their vulnerability to theft or any relevant 
consideration, by notification, specify such article or currency or security which shall, as soon as may be 
after their seizure, be disposed of by such officer and in such manner, as the Ce ntral Government may, 
from time to time, determine after following the procedure hereinafter specified.  
(2) The article or currency or security seized shall be forwarded without unnecessary delay to such 
officer as may be specified.  
(3) Where any article o r currency or security has been seized and forwarded to such officer, the 
officer referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall prepare an inventory of such article or currency or security 
containing such details relating to their description, value or such other identifying particulars as the 
officer referred to in that sub -section may consider relevant to the identity of the article or the currency or 
security and make an application to any Magistrate for the purposes of certifying the correctness of the 
inventor y so prepared.  
(4) Where an application is made under sub -section ( 2), the Magistrate shall, as soon as may be, allow 
the application.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872  (1 of 1872) or the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 19 73 (2 of 1974) , every court trying an offence under this Act, shall treat the 
inventory, as certified by the Magistrate, as primary evidence in respect of such offence.  
(6) Every officer acting under sub -section ( 3) shall forthwith report the seizure to th e Court of Session 
or Assistant Sessions Judge having jurisdiction for adjudging the confiscation under section 29.  
27. Seizure to be made in accordance  with Act 2 of 1974 .—The provisions of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 shall apply in so far as the y are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act to all 
seizures made under this Act.  
CHAPTER VI  
ADJUDICATION  
28. Confiscation of article or currency or security obtained  in contravention of the Act .—Any 
article or currency or security which is seized under section 25 shall be liable to confiscation if such 
article or currency or security has been adjudged under section 29 to have been received or obtained in 
contravention of this Act.  
29. Adjudication of  confiscation .—(1) Any confiscation referred t o in section 28 may be 
adjudged — 
(a) without limit, by the Court of Session within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the seizure 
was made; and  18 
 (b) subject to such limits as may be prescribed, by such offic er, not below the rank of an Assistant 
Sessions Judge, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this 
behalf.  
(2) When an adjudication under sub -section ( 1) is concluded by the Court of Session or Assistant 
Sessions  Judge, as the case may be, the Sessions Judge or Assistant Sessions Judge may make such order 
as he thinks fit for the disposal by confiscation or delivery of seized article or currency or security, as the 
case may be, to any person claiming to be entitle d to possession thereof or otherwise, or which has been 
used for the commission of any offence under this Act.  
30. Procedure for confiscation .—No order of adjudication of confiscation shall be made unless a 
reasonable opportunity of making a representation  against such confiscation has been given to the person 
from whom any article or currency or security has been seized.  
CHAPTER VII  
APPEAL AND REVISION  
31. Appeal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by any order made under s ection 29 may prefer an appeal, — 
(a) where the order has been made by the Court of Session, to the High Court to which such 
Court is subordinate; or  
(b) where the order has been made by any officer specified under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 29, to the Court of Session within the local  limits of whose jurisdiction such order of 
adjudication of confiscation was made,  
within one month from the date of communication to such person of the order:  
Provided that the appellate court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by su fficient 
cause from preferring the appeal within the said period of one month, allow such appeal to be preferred 
within a further period of one month, but not thereafter.  
(2) Any organisation referred to in clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3, or an y person or 
association referred to in section 6 or section 9, aggrieved by an order made in pursuance of section 5 or 
by an order of the Central Government refusing to give permission under this Act, or by any order made 
by the Central Government under su b-section ( 2) or sub -section ( 4) of section 12, or sub -section ( 1) of 
section 14, as the case may be, may, within sixty days from the date of such order, prefer an appeal 
against such order to the High Court  within the local limits of whose jurisdiction th e appellant ordinarily 
resides or carries on business or personally works for gain, or, where the appellant is an organisation or 
association, the principal office of such organisation or association is located.  
(3) Every appeal preferred under this sectio n shall be deemed to be an appeal from an original decree 
and the provisions of Order XLI of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , 
shall, as far as may be, apply thereto as they apply to an appeal from an original decree.  
32. Revision of orders by Central Government .—(1) The Central Government may, either of its 
own motion or on an application for revision by the person registered under this Act, call for and examine 
the record of any proceeding under this Act in which any such order has been passed by it and may make 
such inquiry or cause such inquiry to be made and, subject to the provisions of this Act, may pass such 
order thereon as it thinks fit.  
(2) The Central Government shall not of its own motion revise any order un der this section if the 
order has been made more than one year previously.  19 
 (3) In the case of an application for revision under this section by the person referred to in  
sub-section ( 1), the application must be made within one year from the date on which the order in 
question was communicated to him or the date on which he otherwise came to know of it, whichever is 
earlier:  
Provided that the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that such person was prevented by 
sufficient cause from making the applic ation within that period, admit an application made after the 
expiry of that period.  
(4) The Central Government shall not revise any order where an appeal against the order lies but has 
not been made and the time within which such appeal may be made has no t expired or such person has 
not waived his right of appeal or an appeal  has been filed under this Act.  
(5) Every application by such person for revision under this section shall be accompanied by such fee, 
as may be prescribed.  
Explanation .—An order by th e Central Government declining to interfere shall, for the purposes of 
this section, be deemed not to be an order prejudicial to such person.  
CHAPTER VIII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
33. Making of false statement, declaration or delivering false accounts .—Any person, subje ct to 
this Act, who knowingly, — 
(a) gives false intimation under clause (c) of section 9 or section 18; or  
(b) seeks prior permission or registration by means of fraud, false representation or concealment 
of material fact,  
shall, on convictio n by a court, be liable to imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or 
with fine or with both.  
34. Penalty for article or currency or security obtained in  contravention of section 10 .—If any 
person, on whom any prohibitory order has been served under section 10, pays, delivers, transfers or 
otherwise deals with, in any manner whatsoever, any article or currency or security, whether Indian or 
foreign, in contravention of such prohibitory order, he shall be punished with imprisonment for a t erm 
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both; and notwithstanding anything contained in 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , the court trying such contravention may also impose 
on the person convicted an additional fine equi valent to the market value of the article or the amount of 
the currency or security in respect of which the prohibitory order has been contravened by him or such 
part thereof as the court may deem fit.  
35. Punishment for contravention of any provi sion of t he Act .—Whoever accepts, or assists any 
person, political party or organisation in accepting, any foreign contribution or any currency or security 
from a foreign source, in contravention of any provision of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder, 
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with 
both.  
36. Power to impose addi tional fine where article or currency or security is no t available for 
confiscation .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , 
the court trying a person, who, in relation to any article or currency or security, whether Indian or foreign, 
does or omits to do any act which act or omission would render such article or currency or security  liable 
to confiscation under this Act, may, in the event of the conviction of such person for the act or omission 20 
 aforesaid, impose on such person a fine not exceeding five times the value of the article or currency or 
security or one thousand rupees, whi chever is more, if such article or currency or security is not available 
for confiscation, and the fine so imposed shall be in addition to any other fine which may be imposed on 
such person under this Act.  
37. Penalty for offences where no separate punishm ent has been provided .—Whoever fails to 
comply with any provision of this Act for which no separate penalty has been provided in this Act shall 
be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine or with both.  
38. Prohibitio n of accept ance of foreign contribution .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, whoever, having been convicted of any offence under section 35 or section 37, in so far as such 
offence relates to the acceptance or utilisation  of foreign contribution, is again convicted of such offence 
shall not accept any foreign contribution for a period of five years from the date of the subsequent 
conviction.  
39. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act or any rule or orde r made 
thereunder has been committed by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, 
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as 
well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render such person liable to any punishment 
if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowle dge or that he had exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act or any 
rule or order made thereunder has been committed by a company and it  is proved that the offence has 
been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any 
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other 
officer shall a lso be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body  corporate and includes a firm, society, trade union or other 
association of individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, society, trade union or other association of individuals, means 
a partner in the firm or a member of the governing body of such society, trade union or other 
association of individuals.  
40. Bar on prosecuti on of offences under the Act .—No court shall take cognizance of any offence 
under this Act, except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or any officer author ised by 
that Government in this behalf.  
41. Composition of cert ain offences .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , any offence punishable under this Act (whether committed by an 
individual or association or any officer or employee thereof), not being an offence punishable with 
imprisonment only, may, before the institution of any prosecution, be compounded by such officers or 
authorities and for such sums as the Central Government may, by notif ication in the Official Gazette, 
specify in this behalf.  21 
 (2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to an offence committed by an individual or association or 
its officer or other employee within a period of three years from the date on which a similar off ence 
committed by it or him was compounded under this section.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, any second or subsequent offence committed after the 
expiry of a period of three years from the date on which the offence was previously compounde d, shall be 
deemed to be a first offence.  
(3) Every officer or authority referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall exercise the powers to compound an 
offence, subject to the direction, control and supervision of the Central Government.  
(4) Every application for  the compounding of an offence shall be made to the officer or authority 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) in such form and manner along with such fee as may be prescribed.  
(5) Where any offence is compounded before the institution of any prosecution, no pros ecution shall 
be instituted in relation to such offence, against the offender in relation to whom the offence is so 
compounded.  
(6) Every officer or authority referred to in sub -section ( 1), while dealing with a proposal for the 
compounding of an offence f or a default in compliance with any provision of this Act which requires by 
an individual or association or its officer or other employee to obtain permission or file or register with, or 
deliver or send to, the Central Government or any prescribed authori ty any return, account or other 
document, may, direct, by order, if he or it thinks fit to do so, any individual or association or its officer 
or other employee to file or register with, such return, account or other document within such time as may 
be spe cified in the order.  
CHAPTER IX  
MISCELLANEOUS  
42. Power to call for information or docume nt.—Any inspecting officer referred to in section 23 
who is authorised in this behalf by the Central Government may, during the course of any inspection of 
any account  or record maintained by any political party, person, organisation or association in connection 
with the contraventio n of any provision of this Act, — 
(a) call for information from any person for the purpose of satisfying himself whether there has 
been any contravention of the provisions of this Act or rule or order made thereunder;  
(b) require any person to produce or deliver any document or thing useful or relevant to such 
inspection;  
(c) examine  any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case related to the 
inspection.  
43. Investigat ion into cases under the Act .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , any offence punishable under this Act may also be investigated 
into by such authority as the Central Government may specify in this behalf and the authority so specified 
shall have all the powers which an officer -in-charge of a police station has while making an investigation 
into a c ognizable offence.  
44. Returns by prescribed au thority to Central Government .—The prescribed authority shall 
furnish to the Central Government at such time and in such form and manner such returns and statements 
as may be prescribed.  
45. Protection o f acti on taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
the Central Government or the authority referred to in section 44 or any of its officers in respect of any 22 
 loss or damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in goo d faith done or intended to be 
done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or, any rule or order made thereunder.  
46. Power of Central Government to give  directions .—The Central Government may give such 
directions as it may deem necessary to any other authority or any person or class of persons regarding the 
carrying into execution of the provisions of this Act.  
47. Delegation of powers .—The Central Government may, by notification, direct that any of its 
powers or functions under this Act, except power to make rule s under section 48, shall, in relation to such 
matters and subject to such conditions, if any, may be specified in the notification, be exercised or 
discharged also by such authority as may be specified.  
48. Power to make rules .— (1) The Centra l Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the value of the article which may be specified under sub -clause ( i) of clause ( h) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 2;  
(b) the authority which may be specified under clause ( p) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2;  
(c) acceptance or retention of gift or presentation under clause ( d) of section 4;  
(d) guidelines specifying the ground or grounds on which an organisation may be specified as an 
organisation of political nature under sub -section ( 1) of section 5;  
(e) the activities or business which shall be construed as s peculative business under the proviso to 
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 8;  
(f) the elements and the manner in which the administrative expenses shall be calculated under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 8;  
(g) the time within which and the manner in wh ich any person or class of persons or an 
association may be required to furnish intimation regarding the amount of foreign contribution 
received under clause ( c) of section 9;  
(h) the time within which and the manner in which any person or class of persons  may be 
required to furnish intimation regarding foreign hospitality under clause ( e) of section 9;  
(i) the manner in which the copy of the order of the Central Government shall be served upon any 
person under section 10;  
(j) the form and manner in which t he application for grant of certificate of registration or giving 
of prior permission under sub -section ( 1) of section 12;  
(k) the fee to be accompanied by the application under sub -section ( 1) of section 12;  
(l) the terms and conditions for granting a certificate or giving prior permission under clause ( g) 
of sub -section ( 4) of section 12;  
(m) the manner of utilising the foreign contribution under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of  
section 13;  
(n) the authority with w hom the foreign contribution to be vested under sub -section ( 1) of  
section 15;  23 
 (o) the period within which and the manner in which the foreign contribution shall be managed 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 15;  
(p) the form and manner in which the applicat ion for a renewal of certificate of registration shall 
be made under sub -section ( 2) of section 16;  
(q) the fee to be accompanied by the application for renewal of certificate under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 16;  
(r) the prescribed amount of foreign remitt ance, the form and manner in which the foreign 
remittance received by every bank or authorised person in foreign exchange shall be reported under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 17;  
(s) the time within which and the manner in which the person who has been grant ed certificate of 
registration or given prior permission under this Act shall give intimation under section 18;  
(t) the form and manner in which account of any foreign contribution and the manner in which 
such contribution has been utilised shall be mainta ined under section 19;  
(u) the time within which and the manner in which a candidate for election shall give intimation 
under section 21;  
(v) the manner and procedure to be followed in disposing of the assets under section 22;  
(w) the  limits subject to which any confiscation may be adjudged under clause ( b) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 29;  
(x) the fee to be accompanied along with every application for revision under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 32;  
(y) the form and manner for making of  an application for compounding of an offence and the fee 
therefor under sub -section ( 4) of section 41;  
(z) the form and manner in which and the time within which returns and statements to be 
furnished by the prescribed authority under section 44;  
(za) any  other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
49. Orders and rules to be laid before Parliament .—Every order made under section 5 and every 
rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made , 
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the succes sive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the order or rule or both Houses agree that the order or rule should not be made, the order 
or rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that order or rule.  
50. Powe r to exempt in certain cases .—If the Central Government is of opinion that it is nece ssary 
or expedient in the interests of the general public so to do, it may, by order and subject to such conditions 
as may be specified in the order, exempt any person or association or organisation (not being a political 
party), or any individual (not bei ng a candidate for election) from the operation of all or any of the 
provisions of this Act and may, as often as may be necessary, revoke or modify such order.  24 
 51. Act not to apply to cer tain Government transactions .—Nothing  contained in this Act shall 
apply to any transaction between the Government of India and the Government of any foreign country or 
territory.  
52. Applicat ion of other laws not barred .—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not in derogatio n of, the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.  
53. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every o rder made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
54. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976  (49 of 1976)  
(hereafter referred to as the repealed Act) is hereby r epealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, — 
(a) anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or taken under the repealed 
Act shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been 
done or taken  under the corresponding provisions of this Act;  
(b) any organisation of a political nature, not being a political party, to whom the prior permission 
was granted under section 5 of the repealed Act, shall continue to be the organisation of a political 
nature, not being a political party, under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of this Act, till such 
permission is withdrawn by the Central Government;  
(c) permission to accept foreign hospitality granted under section 9 of the repealed Act shall be 
deemed to be the permission granted under section 6 of this Act until such permission is withdrawn 
by the Central Government;  
(d) any association prohibited from accepting any foreign contribution under clause ( a) of  
section 10 of the repealed Act, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, shall 
be deemed to be an association prohibited from accepting any foreign contribution under section 9 of 
this Act;  
(e) permission obtained under clause ( b) of section 10 of the repealed Act s hall, in so far as it is 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to be the permission until such permission 
is withdrawn by the Central Government;  
(f) any order issued under section 12 of the repealed Act shall be deemed to be an order  issued 
under section 10 of this Act;  
(g) any order issued under section 31 of the repealed Act exempting any association or any 
individual shall be deemed to be an order under section 50 of this Act till such order is varied or 
revoked.  
(3) Save as provid ed in sub -section ( 2), mention of particular matters in that sub -section shall not be 
held to prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897   
(10 of 1897) , with regard to the effect of repeal.  
 
--------------------------The Land Ports Authority of India Act, 2010--------------------------
1 
 THE LAND PORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA ACT, 2010  
_____________ _ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
THE LAND PORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA  
 
3. Constitution of Authority.  
4. Disqualification for office of member.  
5. Term of office and conditions of service of members.  
6. Vacation of office of members.  
7. Eligibility of member for re-appointment . 
8. Meetings.  
9. Vacancies, etc., not to  invalidate proceedings of Authority.  
10. Officers and other employees of Authority.  
 
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS OF AUTHORITY  
11.  Functions of Authority.  
12. Responsibilities and powers of other agencies.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
PROPERTY AND CONTRACT  
 
13.  Assets and liabilities to vest in Authority.  
14. General effect of vesting of undertakings in Authority.  
15. Guarantee to be operative.  
16. Compulsory acquisition of land for Authority.  
17. Contracts by Authority.  
18. Mode of executing contracts on behalf of Authority.  
 
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDI T 
 
19. Power of Authority to charge fees, rent, etc.  
20. Additional capital and grant to Authority by Central Government.  
21. Fund of Authority and its investment.  
22. Allocation of surplus funds.  
23. Submission of programme of activities and financial estimates.  
24. Borrowing powers of Authority.  2 
 SECTIONS  
25. Accounts and audit.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
26. Submission of annual report.  
27. Delegation.  
28. Authentication of orders and other instruments of Authority.  
29. Officers and employees of Authority to be public servants.  
30. Protection of action  taken in good faith.  
31. Custody and disposal of lost property.  
32. Power of Central Government  to supersede Authority.  
33. Power of Central Government  to issue directions.  
34. Power to make rules.  
35. Power to make regulations.  
36. Rules, regulations and notifications to be lai d before Parliament.  
37. Power to remove difficulties.  
 
 
  3 
 THE LAND PORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA ACT, 2010  
ACT NO. 31 OF 2010  
[31st August , 2010.]  
An Act to provide for the establishment of the Land Ports Authority of India to put in place 
systems which address security imperatives and for the development and management of 
facilities for cross border movement of passengers and goods at designated points along the 
international borders of India and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enact ed by Parliament in the Sixty -first Year of the Republic of India as  follows:— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short titl e and commence ment.—(1) This Act may be called the Land Ports Authority of India 
Act, 2010.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act, and 
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a ref erence to 
the coming into force of that provision.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Authority ” means the Land Ports Authority of India constituted under section 3;  
(b) “Chairperson ” means the Chairperson of the Authority appointed under clause ( a) of                   
sub-section ( 3) of section 3;  
(c) “immigration check post ” means any port or place of departure on the land as notified under 
the Foreigners' Act, 1946  (31 of 1946) ; 
(d) “integrated check post ” means any land port, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, specify;  
(e) “land customs station ” means any place notified as such by the Central Government under 
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 7 of the Customs Act, 1962  (52 of 19 62) for the clearance of 
goods imported or to be exported by land or inland water;  
(f) “land port” means an area on the international borders of India including portions of national 
highways, State highways and o ther roads, notified as land customs station or immigration check post 
under the Customs Act, 1962  (52 of 1962)  or the Foreigners' Act, 1946  (31 of 1946) , and includes 
railways, with facilities for clearance and transport of passengers and goods across the  borders of 
India;  
(g) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(h) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and  
(i) “regulations ” means regulations made by the Authority under this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
THE LAND PORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA  
3. Constitution of Authority. —(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be constituted an Authority to be known as the 
Land Ports Authority of India.  
 
                                                           
1.1st March, 2012, vide notification No. S.O. 328(E), dated 24th February, 2012, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, s ec. 3(ii).  4 
  
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property 
both movable and immovable, and to contract and  shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) The Authority shall consist of — 
(a) a Chairperson;  
(b) two Members, out of whom one shall be Member (Planning and Development) and other shall 
be Member (Finance);  
(c) not more than nine members, ex officio , to be appointed by the Central Government from 
amongst the officers, not below the rank of the Joint Secretary to the Government of India, 
representing the ministries or departments of the  Government of India dealing with Home Affairs, 
External Affairs, Reven ue, Commerce, Road Transport and Highways, Railways, Defence, 
Agriculture and Cooperation, Law and Justice;  
(d) the Chief Secretary or his nominee not below the rank of the Secretary to the Government of 
the respective State where the integrated check post s are located;  
(e) two representatives, one of whom shall be from recognised bodies of workers and the other 
shall be from traders, to be appointed by the Central Government; and  
(f) such other representatives as the Central Government may co -opt for funct ional purposes.  
(4) The Chairperson and the members referred to in clause ( b) shall be appointed by the Central 
Government and shall be whole -time members.  
(5) The Chairperson shall be chosen from among persons who have special knowledge and 
experience in the field of security, transport, industry, commerce, law, finance or public administration.  
4. Disqua lification for office of member. —A person shall be disqualified for bei ng appointed as a 
member if, he — 
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence, which, in the opinion of the 
Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or  
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or  
(d) has been removed or dismissed from th e service of the Government or a body corporate 
owned or controlled by the Government; or  
(e) has in the opinion of the Central Government such financial or other interest in the Authority 
as is likely to affect prejudicially the discharge by him of his f unctions as a member.  
5. Term of office and conditions of service of members .—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 6, 
every whole -time member shall hold office for a period of five years from the date on which he assumes 
office or till he attains the a ge of sixty years, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that the Central Government may — 
(a) terminate the appointment of any whole -time member, after giving him notice of a period of 
not less than three months or, in lieu thereof, on payment of an amount equal to his salary and 
allowances, if any, for a period of three months;  
(b) terminate at any time the appointment of any member who is a servant of the Government.  
(2) The other conditions of service of the members shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) Any m ember may resign his office by giving notice in writing for such period as may be 
prescribed, to the Central Government and, on such resignation being notified in the Official Gazette by 
that Government, such member shall be deemed to have vacated his offi ce. 5 
 6. Vacation of office of members. —The Central Governme nt shall remove a member if, he — 
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 4:  
Provided that no member shall be removed on the ground that he has become subject to the  
disqualification mentioned in clause ( e) of that section, unless he has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in the matter; or  
(b) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting; or  
(c) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Authorit y, absent from three consecutive 
meetings of the Authority; or  
(d) in the opinion of the Central Government, has so abused his position as to render his 
continuance in office detrimental to the public interest:  
Provided that no member shall be removed unde r this clause unless he has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
7. Eligibility of member for re -appointment .—Any person ceasing to be a member shall, unless 
disqualified under section 4, be eligible for re -appointment.  
8. Meetings .—(1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places, and shall observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at such meetings) 
as may be provided by regulations.  
(2) The Chairpers on, or, if for any reason, he is unable to attend any meeting of the Authority, any 
other member chosen by the members present at the meeting shall preside at the meeting.  
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided  by a majority 
of the votes of the members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson, 
or in his absence the person presiding, shall have and exercise a second or casting vote.  
9. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate procee dings of Author ity.—No act or proceeding of the 
Authority shall  be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Authority; or  
 (b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Authority; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of the case.  
10. Officers and other employees of Authority .—(1) For the purpose of enabling it to efficiently 
discharge its functions under this Act, the Authority shall appoint such number of officers and other 
employees as it may consider necessary:  
Provided that the appointment of such category of officers, as may be specified, shall be subject to the 
approval of the Central Government.  
(2) Every officer or other employ ee appointed by the Authority shall be subject to such conditions of 
service and shall be entitled to such remuneration as may be determined by regulations.  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS OF AUTHORITY  
11. Functions of Authority .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Authority shall have 
powers to develop, sanitize and manage the facilities for cross border movement of passengers and goods 
at designated points along the international borders of India.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisi ons contained in sub -section ( 1), the Authority 
may— 
(a) put in place systems, which address security imperatives at the integrated check posts on the 
border;  6 
 (b) plan, construct and maintain roads, terminals and ancillary buildings other than national 
highways, State highways and railways, at an integrated check post;  
(c) plan, procure, install and maintain communication, security, goods handling and scanning 
equipment at an integrated check post;  
(d) provide appropriate space and facilities for immigra tion, customs, security, taxation 
authorities, animal and plant quarantine, warehouses, cargo and baggage examination yards, parking 
zones, banks, post offices, communication facilities, tourist information centres, waiting halls, 
canteen, refreshment stal ls, public conveniences, health services and such other services, as may be 
deemed necessary;  
(e) construct residential buildings for its employees as well as residential accommodation for staff 
deployed at integrated check posts;  
(f) establish and maintai n hotels, restaurants and restrooms;  
(g) establish and maintain warehouses, container depots and cargo complexes for the storage or 
processing of goods;  
(h) arrange for postal, money exchange, insurance and telephone facilities for the use of 
passengers an d other persons at integrated check posts;  
(i) make appropriate arrangements for the security of integrated check posts and provide for 
regulation and control of movement of vehicles, entry and exit of passengers and goods in accordance 
with the respective  law concerning them;  
(j) ensure prevention and control of fire and other hazards and other facilities as deemed 
necessary;  
(k) regulate and control the movement of vehicles, and the entry and exit of passengers, 
transportation workers, handling agents, cl earing and forwarding agents and goods at the integrated 
check post with due regard to the law, security and protocol of the Government of India;  
(l) co-ordinate and facilitate the working of agencies who have been engaged to undertake various 
activities a t the integrated check posts, in accordance with the respective law, for the time being in 
force;  
(m) develop and provide consultancy, construction or management services, and undertake 
operations in India and abroad in relation to an integrated check post ; 
(n) form one or more companies under the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956)  or under any other 
law relating to companies for efficient discharge of the functions imposed on it by this Act;  
(o) take all such steps as may be necessary or expedient for, or may  be incidental to, the exercise 
of any power or the discharge of any function conferred or imposed on it by this Act:  
Provided that sovereign functions of the Authority shall not be assigned to any private entity;  
(p) set up joint ventures for the discharg e of any of the functions assigned to the Authority; and  
(q) undertake any other activity at the integrated check post in the best commercial interests of the 
Authority.  
(3) In the discharge of its functions under this section, the Authority may consult su ch ministry or 
department of the Government of India or of the State Government as it deems necessary, and shall have 
due regard to the development of land port services and to the efficiency, economy and safety of such 
service.  
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as — 
(a) authorising the disregard by the Authority of any law for the time being in force; or  
(b) authorising any person to institute any proceeding in respect of duty or liability to which the 
Authority or its officers or o ther employees would not otherwise be subject to.  7 
 12. Responsibiliti es and powers of other agencies. —(1) The respective border guarding forces 
deployed at the borders of India shall be responsible for security around an integrated check post.  
(2) The Authority may, whenever considered necessary so to do for ensuring the peace and security at 
an integrated check post, seek the assistance of armed force, Central para military force or State police as 
per the provisions of the law for the time being in fo rce. 
(3) The Customs, immigration, quarantine and other officials shall co -ordinate with the Authority for 
the effective discharge of its functions.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any provisions of this Act, the Customs, immigration, 
quarantine officials, the border guarding forces and the police shall discharge their functions in 
accordance with the law for the time being in force.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROPERTY AND CONTRACT  
13. Assets and liabilities to vest in Authority .—(1) On the date of notification i ssued under                
clause ( d) of section 2, all such assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and such property 
movable and immovable, real or personal, corporeal or incorporeal, present or contingent, of whatever 
nature, including lands,  buildings, machinery, equipments, works, workshops, cash balances, capital, 
reserves, reserve funds, investments, tenancies, losses and book debts and all other rights and interests 
arising out of such property, as immediately before the issue of that not ification, were in the ownership or 
possession of the Government of India in any of the land port, as the Central Government may, in such 
notification, specify, shall vest in the Authority and such vesting shall also be deemed to include all 
borrowings, li abilities and obligations of whatever kind then subsisting.  
(2) The notification under sub -section ( 1) shall be issued only after the concurrence of the concerned 
ministries or departments of the Government of India, in case where such properties are owned  or 
controlled by such ministries or departments.  
14. General effect of vesting of  undertakings in Authority .—All contracts, agreements and 
working arrangements subsisting immediately before the date of notification issued under clause ( d) of 
section 2, and affecting the land ports shall be of full force and effect as regards the Authority.  
15. Guarantee to be operative. —Any guarantee given for or in favour of land customs stations or 
immigration check posts with respect to a loan, lease or finance shall continue to be operative in relation 
to such stations or check posts which have been vested in the Authority by virtue of this Act.  
16. Compulsory acqu isition of land for Authority. —Any land required by the Authority for the 
discharge of its functions unde r this Act shall be deemed to be needed for a public purpose and such land 
may be acquired for the Authority under the provisions of the National Highways Act, 1956 (48 of 1956) 
or any other law for the time being in force.  
17. Contracts by Authority. —Subject to the provisions of section 18, the Authority shall be 
competent to enter into and perform any contract necessary for the discharge of its functions under this 
Act. 
18. Mode of executing contracts on behalf of Authority .—(1) Every contract on behalf o f the 
Authority, shall be made by the Chairperson or such officer of the Authority as may be generally or 
specially empowered in this behalf by the Authority and such contracts as may be specified, in the 
regulations, shall be sealed with the common seal o f the Authority:  
Provided that no contract exceeding such value or amount as the Central Government may, by order 
fix in this behalf, shall be made unless it has been previously approved by the Central Government:  
Provided further that no contract for the acquisition or sale of immovable property or for the lease of 
any such property for a term exceeding thirty years and no other contract exceeding such value or amount 
as the Central Government may, by order fix in this behalf, shall be made unless it has b een previously 
approved by the Central Government.  8 
 (2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the form and manner in which any contract shall be 
made under this Act shall be such as may be provided by regulations.  
(3) Any contract which is not in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules and 
regulations made thereunder shall not be binding on the Authority.  
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
19. Power of Author ity to charge fees, rent, etc. —The Authority may, determine and charge such 
fees or rent, not being a statutory levy under any other Act, as may be provided by regulations, separately 
for each integrated check post, — 
(a) for the cargo handling, warehousing, parking of trucks or for any other service or facility 
offered in connection with transport operations;  
(b) for the parking of passenger vehicles and other amenities given to the passengers and visitors; 
and; 
(c) for the availing of facilities and other services provided by the Authority.  
20. Additional capital and grant  to Authority by Central Government .—The Central 
Government may, after the appropriation made by Pa rliament by law in this behalf, — 
(a) provide any capital that may be required by the Authority for the discharge of its functions 
under this Act or for any p urpose connected therewith on such terms and conditions as that 
Government may determine;  
(b) pay to the Authority, on such terms and conditions as the Central Government may determine, 
by way of loans or grants such sums of money as that Government may co nsider necessary for the 
efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.  
21. Fund of Authority  and its investment. —(1) The Authority shall establish its own fund and all 
receipts of the Authority shall be credited thereto and all payments by the Autho rity shall be made there  
from.  
(2) The Authority shall have the power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to spend such sums as it 
thinks fit to cover all administrative expenses of the Authority or for purposes authorised by this Act and 
such sums sha ll be treated as expenditure out of the fund of the Authority.  
(3) All moneys standing at the credit of the Authority which cannot immediately be applied as 
provided in sub -section ( 2), shall be — 
(a) deposited in the State Bank of India or any such scheduled bank or banks or other public 
financial institutions subject to such conditions as may, from time to time, be specified by the Central 
Government;  
(b) invested in the securities of the Central Government or in such manner as may be prescribed.  
Explanation .— In this sub -section, “scheduled bank ” has the same meaning as in clause ( e) of          
section 2 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) . 
22. Allocation of surplus funds. —(1) The Authority may, from time to time, set apart such amounts 
as it thinks fit, as a reserve fund or funds for the purpose of expanding existing facilities or services or 
creating new facilities or services at any integrated check post or increase of expenditure from transient 
causes or for purposes of replac ement or meeting expenditure arising from loss or damage due to any 
natural calamity or accident or meeting any liability arising out of any act of omission or commission in 
the discharge of its functions under this Act:  
Provided that the Authority shall a lso have the power to establish specific reserves for specific 
purposes:  
Provided further that the sums set apart annually in respect of each or any of the specific and general 
reserves and the aggregate at any time of such sums shall not exceed such limit s as may, from time to 
time, be fixed in that behalf by the Central Government.  9 
 (2) After making provision for such reserve fund or funds and for bad and doubtful debts, 
depreciation in assets and all other matters which are usually provided for by compani es registered and 
incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , the Authority shall pay the balance of its annual 
net profits to the Central Government.  
23. Submission of programme of activ ities and financial estimates. —The Authority shall, before 
the commencement of each financial year prepare a statement of the programme of its activities during 
the forthcoming financial year as well as financial estimate in respect thereof and submit it for the 
approval of the Central Government.  
24. Borro wing powers of Authority .—(1) The Authority may, with the consent of the Central 
Government or in accordance with the terms of any general or special authority given to it by the Central 
Government, bor row money from any source by the issue of bonds, deben tures or such other instruments as it may 
deem fit for discharging all or any of its functions under this Act.  
(2) The Central Government may guarantee in such manner as it thinks fit, the repayment of the 
principal and the payment of interest thereon with  respect to the loans taken by the Authority under sub -
section ( 1). 
(3) Subject to such limits as the Central Government may, from time to time, lay down, the Authority 
may borrow temporarily by way of overdraft or otherwise, such amount as it may require for discharging 
its functions under this Act.  
25. Accounts and audit. —(1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the profit and loss account and the balance 
sheet in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation wi th the Comptroller 
and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited annually by the Comptroller and Auditor -General 
of India and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be reimbursed to him by 
the Authority.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Authority shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptro ller and Auditor -General has in connection with the audit of 
Government accounts and, in particular shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, 
connected vouchers, documents and papers and inspect any of the offices of the Authority.  
(4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Governm ent shall cause the same to be laid before both 
Houses of Parliament.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
26.  Submission of annual report. —(1) The Authority shall, as soon as may be, after the end of each 
financial year, prepare and submit to the Central Government in such form as may be prescribed, a report 
giving an account of its activities during that financial year and the report shall also give an account of the 
activities which are likely to be undertaken by the Authority during the next financial year.  
(2) The Central Government shall cause such report to be laid before both Houses of Parliament, as 
soon as may be, after it is submitted.  
27. Delegation. —The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to the 
Chairperson or any other member or to any officer of the Authority, subject to such conditions and 
limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act 
(except the powers under section 35), as it may deem necessary.  
28. Authentication of orders and other instruments of Authority .—All orders and decisions of the 
Authority shall be authenticated by the signature of the Chairperson or any other member authorised by 10 
 the Authority in this behalf and all other instruments executed by the Authori ty shall be authenticated by 
the signature of an officer of the Authority authorised by it in this behalf.  
29. Officers and employees of Authority to be public servants .—All officers and employees of 
Authority shall, while acting or purporting to act in pu rsuance of the provisions of this Act or of any rule 
or regulation made thereunder, be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the 
Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
30. Protection o f action taken in good faith. —No suit, prosecution o r other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Authority or any member or any officer or other employee of the Authority for anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rule or regulation 
made thereunder.  
31. Custod y and disposal of lost property. —Subject to such regulations as the Authority may make 
in this behalf, the Authority shall provide for securing the safe custody and restoration of any property 
which, while not in proper custody, is found on any p remises belonging to the Authority or under its 
overall control.  
32. Power of Central Government to supersede Authority .—(1) If, at any time, the C entral 
Government is of opinion — 
(a) that on account of a grave emergency, the Authority is unable to discharge the functions and 
duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or  
(b) that the Authority has persistently defaulted in complying with any direction issued by the 
Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functio ns and duties imposed on it by or 
under the provisions of this Act and as a result of default the financial position of the Authority or the 
administration of an integrated check post has deteriorated; or  
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necess ary in the public interest so to do,  
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, supersede the Authority for such 
period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification:  
Provided that before issuing a notificati on under this sub -section for the reasons mentioned in clause 
(b), the Central Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Authority to show cause why it 
should not be superseded and shall consider the explanations and obje ctions, if any, of the Authority . 
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section ( 1) superseding the Authority ,— 
(a) all the members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or und er the provisions of this Act, be 
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Authority, shall until the Authority is reconstituted 
under sub -section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by such person or persons as the Central 
Government may direct; and ; 
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until the Authority is reconstituted 
under sub -section ( 3), vest in the Central Government.  
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under                   
sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may ,— 
(a) extend the period of supersession for such further term not exceeding six months, as it may 
consider necessary, or  
(b) reconstitute the Authority by fresh appointment and in such case the members w ho vacated 
their offices under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) shall not be deemed disqualified for appointment:  
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time before the expiration of the period of 
supersession, whether as originally specified under  sub-section ( 1) or as extended under this sub -section, 
take action under clause ( b) of this sub -section.  
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub -section ( 1) and a full report of 
any action taken under this section and the ci rcumstances leading to such action to be laid before both 
Houses of Parliament in the immediate subsequent session of Parliament.  11 
 33. Power of Central Government to issue directions .—(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing 
provisions of this Act, the Author ity shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, be 
bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from 
time to time:  
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given opportunity to express its views 
before any direction is given under this sub -section.  
(2) The decision o f the Central Government whether  a question is one of policy or not shall be final.  
(3) The Centr al Government may , from time to time, issue dire ctions to the Authority regarding the 
discharge of any functions by it under the clauses of sub -section ( 2) of section 11 and the Authority shall 
be bound to comply with such directions.  
34. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rul es may 
provide for — 
(a) the other conditions of service of members of th e Authority under sub -section ( 2) of section 5;  
(b) the period of notice as may be given by any member to resign his office under sub -section ( 3) 
of section 5;  
(c) the manner in which the Authority may invest the funds under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of 
section 21;  
(d) the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be prepared by the Authority under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 25;  
(e) the form in which a report giving an account of its activities shall be prepared and submitted 
by the Authority  to the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 26; and  
(f) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.  
35. Power t o make regulations. —(1) The Authority may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, make regulations not  inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder for the 
purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may provide for — 
(a) the time and places of meetings of the Authority and the procedure to be followed for 
transaction of business including the quorum at such meetings under sub -section ( 1) of section 8;  
(b) the conditions of service and the remuneration of officers and other employees to be 
appointed by th e Authority under sub -section ( 2) of section 10;  
(c) the contracts which are to be sealed with the common seal of the Authority under sub -section 
(1), and the form and manner in which a contract may be made by the Authority under sub -section ( 2) 
of section  18; 
(d) the fees and rent to be charged by the Authority under sub -section ( 1) of section 19;  
(e) the custody and restoration of lost property and the terms and conditions under which lost 
property may be restored to the persons e ntitled thereto under sec tion 31. 
36. Rules, regulations and notifications to be laid before Parliament. —Every rule and every 
regulation made or notification issued under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in ma king any 
modification in the rule, regulation or notification, as the case may be, or both Houses agree that the rule, 
regulation or notification, as the case may be, should not be made or issued, the rule, regulation or 
notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 12 
 so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule, regulation or notification.  
37. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this A ct as appear to it to be necessary or 
expedient for the removal of the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of 
the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section sh all as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament . 
--------------------------The Legal Metrology Act, 2009--------------------------
1 
 THE LEGAL METROLOGY ACT, 2009  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTI ONS  
___________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Provisions of this Act to  override provisions of any other law.  
 
CHAPTER II  
STANDARD WEIGHTS AND MEASURES  
4. Units of weights and measures to be based on metric system.  
5. Base unit of weights and measures.  
6. Base unit of numeration.  
7. Standard units of weights and measures.  
8. Standard weight, measures or numeral.  
9. Reference, secondary and working standard.  
10. Use of weight or measure for particular purposes.  
11. Prohibition of quotation, etc., otherwise than in terms of standard units of weight, measure or 
numeration.  
12. Any custom, usage, etc., c ontrary to standard weight, measure or numeration to be void.  
 
CHAPTER III  
APPOINTMENT AND POWERS OF DIRECTOR, CONTROLLER AND LEGAL METROLOGY OFFICERS  
13. Appointment of Director, legal metrology officers and other employees.  
14. Appointment of Controller, legal m etrology officers and other employees.  
15. Power of inspection, seizure, etc.  
16. Forfeiture.  
17. Manufacturers, etc., to maintain records and registers.  
18. Declarations on prepackaged commodities.  
19. Registration for importer of weight or measure.  
20. Non-standard weights and measures not to be imported.  
21. Training in Legal Metrology.  
22. Approval of model.  
23. Prohibition on manufacture, repair or sale of weight or measure without licence.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
 VERIFICATION AND STAMPING OF WEIGHT OR MEASURE  
24. Verification and stamping of weight or  measure.  
 
  2 
 CHAPTER V  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
SECTIONS  
25. Penalty for use of non -standard weight or measure.  
26. Penalty for alteration of weight and measure.  
27. Penalty for manufacture or sale of non -standard weight or measure.  
28. Penalty for making any transaction, d eal or contract in contravention of the prescribed standards.  
29. Penalty for quoting or publishing, etc., of non -standard units.  
30. Penalty for transaction s in contravention of standard weight or measure.  
31. Penalty for non -production of documents, etc.  
32. Penalty for  failure to get model approved.  
33. Penalty for use of unverified weight or measure.  
34. Penalty for sale or delivery of commodities. etc., by non -standard weight or measure.  
35. Penalty for rendering services by non -standard weight, measure or number.  
36. Penalty for selling, etc., of non -standard packages.  
37. Penalty for contravention by Government approved Test Centre.  
38. Penalty for non -registration by importer of weight or measure.  
39. Penalty for import of non -standard weight or measure.  
40. Penalty for obstructing Director, Co ntroller or legal metrology officer.  
41. Penalty for giving false information or false return.  
42. Vexatious search.  
43. Penalty for verification in contravention of Act and rules.  
44. Penalty for counterfeiting of seals, etc.  
45. Penalty for manufacture of weight and measure  without licence.  
46. Penalty for repair, sale, etc., of weight and measure without licence.  
47. Penalty for tampering with licence.  
48. Compounding of offences.  
49. Offences by companies and power of court to publish name, place of business, etc., for 
companies convicted . 
50. Appeals.  
51. Provisions of Indian Penal Code and Code of Criminal Procedure not to apply.  
52. Power of the Central Government to make rules.  
53. Power of State Government to make rules.  
54. Delegation of Powers.  
55. Act not to apply in certain cases.  
56. Existing Director, Cont roller and legal metrology officer not to be affected by the new 
qualification to be prescribed.  
57. Repeal of the Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1976 and Standards of Weights and 
Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1985.   3 
 THE LEGAL METROLOGY ACT, 2009  
ACT NO. 1 OF 2010  
[13th January, 2010 .] 
An Act to establish and enforce standards of weights and measures, regulate trade and commerce 
in weights, measures and other goods which are sold or distributed by weight, measure or 
number and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Legal Metrology Act, 
2009.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless  the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Controller ” means the Controller of Legal Metrology appointed under  section 14;  
(b) “dealer”, in relation to any weight or measure, means a person who, carries on, directly or 
otherwise, the business of buying, selling, supplying or distributing  any such weight or measure, 
whether for cash or for deferred payment or for commission, remuneration or other valuable 
consideration, and includes a commission agent, an importer, a manufacturer, who sells, supplies, 
distributes or otherwise delivers any weight or measure manufactured by him to any person other than 
a dealer;  
(c) “Director” means the Director of Legal Metrology appointed under  section 13;  
(d) “export” with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions , means taking out of India to 
a place outside India;  
(e) “import” with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means bringing into In dia 
from a place outside India;  
(f) “label” means any written, marked, stamped, printed or graphic matter affi xed to, or appearing 
upon any pre -packaged commodity;  
(g) “Legal Metrology ” means that part of metrology which treats units of weighment and 
measurement, methods of weighment and measurement and weighing and measuring instruments, in 
relation to the mandat ory technical and legal requirements which have the object of ensuring public 
guarantee from the point of view of security and accuracy of the weighments and measurements;  
(h) “legal metrology officer ” means Additional Director, Additional Controller, Join t Director, 
Joint Controller, Deputy Director, Deputy Controller, Assistant Director, Assistant Controller and 
Inspector appointed under sections 13 and 14;  
(i) “manufacturer ” in relation to any weight  or measure, means a person who — 
(i) manufactures weight or measure,  
(ii) manufactures one or more parts, and acquires other parts, of such weight or measure and, 
after assembling those parts, claims the end product to be a weight or measure manufactured by 
himself or itself, as the case may be,  
                                                           
1. 1st March, 2011, vide notification No. S.O. 1(E), dated 31st December, 2010, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, Sec. 3 (ii). 4 
 (iii) doe s not manufacture any part of such weight or measure but assembles parts thereof 
manufactured by others and claims the end product to be a weight or measure manufactured by 
himself or itself, as the case may be,  
(iv) puts, or causes to be put, his own mark  on any complete weight or measure made or 
manufactured by any other person and claims such product to be a weight or measure made or 
manufactured by himself or itself, as the case may be;  
(j) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official G azette;  
(k) “protection ” means the utilisation of reading obtained from any weight or measure, for the 
purpose of determining any step which is required to be taken to safeguard the well -being of any 
human being or animal, or to protect any commodity, vege tation or thing, whether individually or 
collectively;  
(l) “pre-packaged commodity ” means a commodity which without the purchaser being present is 
placed in a package of whatever nature, whether sealed or not, so that the product contained therein 
has a pr e-determined quantity;  
(m) “person” includes,— 
(i) a Hindu undivided family,  
(ii) every department or office,  
(iii) every organisation established or constituted by Government,  
(iv) every local authority within the territory of India,  
(v) a company, firm and association of individuals,  
(vi) trust constituted under an Act,  
(vii) every co -operative society, constituted under an Act,  
(viii) every other society registered under the Societies Registration  Act, 1860  (21 of 1860) ; 
(n) “premises” includes— 
(i) a place where any business, industry, production or transaction is carried on by a person, 
whether by himself or through an agent, by whatever name called, including the person who 
carries on the business in such premises,  
(ii) a warehouse, godown or other place where any weight or measure or other goods are 
stored or exhibited,  
(iii) a place where any books of account or other documents pertaining to any trade or 
transaction are kept,  
(iv) a dwelling house, if any part thereof is used for th e purpose of carrying on any business, 
industry, production or trade,  
(v) a vehicle or vessel or any other mobile device, with the help of which any transaction or 
business is carried on;  
(o) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(p) “repairer'' means a person who repairs a weight or measure and includes a person who adjusts, 
cleans, lubricates or paints any weight or measure or renders any other service to such weight or 
measure to ensure that such weight or measure conforms to the st andards established by or under this 
Act; 
(q) “State Government ”, in relation to a Union territory, means the Administrator thereof;  
(r) “sale”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means transfer of property in 
any weight, measure or other goods by one person to another for cash or for deferred payment or for 
any other valuable consideration and includes a transfer of any wei ght, measure or other goods on the 5 
 hire-purchase system or any other system of payment by instalments, but does not include a mortgage 
or hypothecation of, or a charge or pledge on, such weight, measure or other goods;  
(s) “seal” means a device or process by which a stamp is made, and includes any wire or other 
accessory which is used for ensuring the integrity of any stamp;  
(t) “stamp” means a mark, made by impressing, casting, engraving, etching, branding, affixing 
pre-stressed paper seal or any other pro cess in relation to, any weight or measure with a view to — 
(i) certifying that such weight or measure conforms to the standard specified by or under this 
Act, or  
(ii) indicating that any mark which was previously made thereon certifying that such weight 
or measure conforms to the standards specified by or under this Act, has been obliterated;  
(u) “transaction ” means,— 
(i) any contract, whether for sale, purchase, ex change or any other purpose, or  
(ii) any assessment of royalty, toll, duty or other dues, or  
(iii) the assessment of any work done, wages due or services rendered;  
(v) “verification ”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, includes, in relation to 
any weight or measure, the process of comparing, checking, testing or adjusting suc h weight or 
measure with a view to ensuring that such weight or measure conforms to the standards established 
by or under this Act and also includes re -verification and calibration;  
(w) “weight or measure ” means a weight or measure specified by or under th is Act and includes a 
weighing or measuring instrument.  
3. Provisions of this Act to override provisions of any other law .—The provisions of this Act shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than this 
Act or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
STANDARD WEIGHTS AND MEASURES  
4. Units of weights and measures to be based on metric system .—Every unit of weight or measure 
shall be in accordance with the metric system based on the international system of units.  
5. Base unit of weights and measures. —(1) The base unit of — 
(i) length shall be the metre;  
(ii) mass shall be the kilogram;  
(iii) time shall be the second;  
(iv) electric current shall be the amp ere; 
(v) thermodynamic temperature shall be the kelvin;  
(vi) luminous intensity shall be the candela; and  
(vii) amount of substance shall be the mole.  
(2) The specifications of the base units mentioned in sub -section ( 1), derived units and other units 
shall be such as may be prescribed.  
6. Base  unit of numeration. —(1) The base unit of numeration shall be the unit of the international 
form of Indian numerals.  
(2) Every numeration shall be made in acco rdance with the decimal system.  
(3) The decimal multiples and sub -multiples of the numerals shall be of such denominations and be 
written in such manner as may be prescribed.  6 
 7. Standard units of weights and measures. —(1) The base units of weights and measures specified 
in section 5 shall be the standar d units of weights and measures.  
(2) The base unit of numeration specified in section 6 shall be the standard unit of numeration.  
(3) For the purpose of deriving the value of base, derived and other units mentioned in section 5, the 
Central Government shal l prepare or cause to be prepared objects or equipments in such manner as may 
be prescri bed. 
(4) The physical characteristics, configuration, constructional details, materials, equipments, 
performance, tolerances, period of re -verification, methods or proc edures of tests shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
8. Standard weight, measure or numeral. —(1) Any weight or measure which conforms to the 
standard unit of such weight or measure and also conforms to such of the provisions of section 7 as are 
applicable t o it shall be the standard weight or measure.  
(2) Any numeral which conforms to the provisions of section 6 shall be the standard numeral.  
(3) No weight, measure or numeral, other than the standard weight, measure or numeral, shall be used 
as a standard weight, measure or numeral.  
(4) No weight or measure, shall be manufactured or imported unless it conforms to the standards of 
weight or measure specified under section 8:  
Provided that provisions of this section shall not apply for manufacture done exclus ively for export or 
for the purpose of any scientific investigation or research.  
9. Reference, secondary and working standard. —(1) The reference standards, secondary standards 
and working standards of weights and measures shall be such as may be prescribed . 
(2) Every reference standard, secondary standard and working standard shall be verified and stamped 
in such manner and after payment of such fee as may be prescribed.  
(3) Every reference standard, secondary standard and working standard which is not veri fied and 
stamped in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall not be deemed to be a valid standard.  
10. Use of weight or measure for particular purposes .—Any transaction, dealing or contract in 
respect of any goods, class of goods or undertak ings shall be made by such weight, measure or number as 
may be prescribed.  
11. Prohibition of quotation, etc., otherwise than in terms of standard units of weight, measure 
or numeration .—(1) No person shall, in relation to any goods, things or service, — 
(a) quote, or make announcement of, whether by word of mouth or otherwise, any price or 
charge, or  
(b) issue or exhibit any price list, invoice, cash memo or other document, or  
(c) prepare or publish any advertisement, poster or other document, or  
(d) indicate the net quantity of a pre -packaged commodity, or  
(e) express in relation to any transaction or protection, any quantity or dimension, otherwise than 
in accordance with the standard unit of weight, measure or numeration.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall not be applicable for export of any goods, things or service.  
12. Any custom, usage, etc., contrary to standard weight, measure or numeration to be void .—
Any custom, usage, practice or method of whatever nature which permits a person to de mand, receive or 
cause to be demanded or received, any quantity of article, thing or service in excess of or less than, the 
quantity specified by weight, measure or number in the contract or other agreement in relation to the said 
article, thing or service , shall be void.  
  7 
 CHAPTER III  
APPOINTMENT AND POWERS OF DIRECTOR, CONTROLLER AND LEGAL METROLOGY OFFICERS  
13. Appointment of Director, legal metrology officers and other employees. —(1) The Central 
Government may, by notification, appoint a Director of leg al metrology, Additional Director, Joint 
Director, Deputy Director, Assistant Director and other employees for exercising the powers and 
discharging the duties conferred or imposed on them by or under this Act in relation to inter -State trade 
and commerce.  
(2) The qualifications of the Director and legal metrology officers appointed under sub -section ( 1) 
shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Director and every legal metrology officer, appointed under sub -section ( 1), shall exercise 
such powers and discharge such functions in respect of such local limits as the Central Government may, 
by notific ation, specify.  
(4) Every legal metrology officer appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall exercise powers and discharge 
duties under the general superintendence , direction and control of the Director.  
(5) The Director, the Controller and every legal metrology officer authorised to perform any duty by 
or under this Act shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian 
Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
(6) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Director, the Controller and 
legal metrology officer authorised to perform any duty by or under this Act in respect of anything which 
is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.  
(7) The Central Government may, with the consent of the State Government and subject to such 
conditions, limitations and restrictions as it may specify in this behalf, delegate such of the pow ers of the 
Director under this Act as it may think fit to the Controller of legal metrology in the State, and such 
Controller may, if he is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient in the public interest so to do, delegate 
such of the powers delegated to him as he may think fit to any legal metrology officer and where any such 
delegation of powers is made by such Controller, the person to whom such powers are delegated shall 
exercise those powers in the same manner and with the same effect as if they ha d been conferred on him 
directly by this Ac t and not by way of delegation.  
(8) Where any delegation of powers is made under sub -section ( 7), the powers so delegated shall be 
exercised under the general superintendence, direction and guidance of the Directo r. 
14. Appointment of Controller, legal metrology officers and other employees. —(1) The State 
Government may, by notification, appoint a Controller of legal metrology, Additional Controller, Joint 
Controller, Deputy Controller, Assistant Controller, Inspec tor and other employees for the State for 
exercising the powers and discharging the duties conferred or imposed on them by or under this Act in 
relation to intra State trade and commerce.  
(2) The qualifications of the Controller and legal metrology officer s appointed under sub -section ( 1) 
shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Controller and every legal metrology officer, appointed under sub -section ( 1), shall exercise 
such powers and discharge such functions in respect of such local limits as the Stat e Government  may, by 
notification, specify.  
(4) Every legal metrology officer appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall exercise and discharge the 
duties under the general superintendence, direction and control of the Controller.  
15. Power of inspection, seizu re, etc.—(1) The Director, Controller or any legal metrology officer 
may, if he has any reason to believe, whether from any information given to him by any person and taken 
down in writing or from personal knowledge or otherwise, that any weight or measure or other g oods in 
relation  to which any trade  and  commerce   has taken place or is intended to take place and in respect of   8 
 which  an offence punishable under this Act appears to have been, or is likely to be, committed are either 
kept or concealed in any premises or are in  the course of transportation, — 
(a) enter at any reasonable time into any such premises and search for and inspe ct any weight, 
measure or other goods in relation to which trade and commerce has taken place, or is intended to 
take place and any record, register or o ther document relating thereto;  
(b) seize any weight, measure or other goods and any record, register o r other document or article 
which he has reason to believe may furnish evidence indicating that an offence punishable under this 
Act has been, or is likely to be, committed in the course of, or in relat ion to, any trade and commerce.  
(2) The Director, Cont roller or any legal metrology officer may also require the production of every 
document or other record relating to the weight or measure referred to in sub -section ( 1) and the person 
having the custody of such weight or measure shall comply with such requ isition.  
(3) Where any goods seized under sub -section ( 1) are subject to speedy or natural decay, the Director, 
Controller or legal metrology officer may dispose of such goods in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(4) Every search or seizure made under this  section shall be carried out in accordance with the 
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , relating to searches and seizures.  
16. Forfeiture. —(1) Every non -standard or unverified weight or measure, and every package made in 
contravention of section 18, used in the course of, or in relation to, any trade and commerce and seized 
under section 15, shall be liable to be forfeited to the State Government:  
 Provided that such unverified weight or measure shall not be forfeited to t he State Government if the 
person from whom such weight or measure was seized gets the same verified and stamped within such 
time as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every weight, measure or other goods seized under section 15 but not forfeited under               
sub-section ( 1), shall be disposed of by such authority and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
17. Manufac turers, etc., to maintain records and registers .—(1) Every manufacturer, repairer or 
dealer of weight or measure shall maintain such records and regi sters as may be prescribed.  
(2) The records and registers maintained under sub -section ( 1) shall be produced at the time of 
inspection to the persons authorised for the said purpose under sub -section ( 1) of section 15.  
18. Declarations on pre -packaged comm odities .—(1) No person shall manufacture, pack, sell, 
import, distribute, deliver, offer, expose or possess for sale any pre -packaged commodity unless such 
package is in such standard quantities or number and bears thereon such declarations and particulars  in 
such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) Any advertisement mentioning the retail sale price of a pre -packaged commodity shall contain a 
declaration as to the net quantity or number of the commodity contained in the package in such form and 
manner as may b e prescribed.  
19. Registration for importer of weight or measure. —No person shall import any weight or 
measure unless he is registered with the Director in such manner and on payment of such fees, as may be 
prescribed.  
20. Non -standard weights and measures  not to be imported .—No weight or measure, whether 
singly or as a part or component of any machine shall be imported unless it conforms to the standards of 
weight or measure established by or under this Act.  
21. Training in Legal Metrology. —(1) For imparting training in Legal Metrology and other allied 
branches of knowledge the “Indian Institute of Legal Metrology ” (hereinafter referred to as the 
“Institute”) established under the provisions of the Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1976                     
(60 of 1976) , shall be deemed to have been established under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
(2) The management and control of the Institute, the teaching staff and other employees, the courses 
and curricula for training thereat,  the qualifications, which a person shall possess in order to be eligible 
for admission thereto shall be such as may be prescribed.  9 
 22. Approval of model. —Every person, before manufacturing or importing any weight or measure 
shall seek the approval of mode l of such weight or measure in such manner, on payment of such fee and 
from such authority as may be prescribed:  
Provided that such approval of model may not be required in respect of any cast iron, brass, bullion, 
or carat weight or any beam scale, length  measures (not being measuring tapes) which are ordinarily used 
in retail trade for measuring textiles or timber, capacity measures, not exceeding twenty litre in capacity, 
which are ordinarily used in retail trade for measuring kerosene, milk or potable l iquors:  
Provided further that the prescribed authority may, if he is satisfied that the model of any weight or 
measure which has been approved in a country outside India conforms to the standards established by or 
under this Act, approve such model without  any test or after such test as he may deem fit.  
23. Prohibition on manufacture, repair or sale of weight or measure without licence. —(1) No 
person shall manufacture, repair or sell, or offer, expose or possess for repair or sale, any weight or 
measure unl ess he holds a licence issued by the Controller under sub -section ( 2): 
Provided that no licence to repair shall be required by a manufacturer for repair of his own weight or 
measure in a State other than the State of manufacture of the same.  
(2) For the purpose of sub -section ( 1), the Controller shall issue a licence in such form and manner, 
on such conditions, for such period and such area of jurisdiction and on payment of such fee as may be 
prescribed.  
CHAPTER IV  
 VERIFICATION AND STAMPING OF WEIGHT OR MEASURE  
24. Verification and stamping of weight or measure .—(1) Every person having any weight or 
measure in his possession, custody or control in circumstances indicating that such weight or measure is 
being, or is intended or is likely to be, used by him  in any transaction or for protection, shall, before 
putting such weight or measure into such use, have such weight or measure verified at such place and 
during such hours as the Controller may, by general or special order, specify in this behalf, on payme nt of 
such fees as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Central Government may prescribe the kinds of weights and measures for which the 
verification is to be done through the Government approved Test Centre.  
(3) The Government approved Test Centre shall be notified  by the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be, in such manner, on such terms and conditions and on payment of such 
fee as may be prescribed.  
(4) The Government approved Test Centre shall appoint or engage persons having such qualif ications 
and experience and collect such fee on such terms and conditions for the verification of weights and 
measures specified under sub -section ( 2) as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER V  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
25. Penalty for use of non -standard weight or measure .—Whoever uses or keeps for use any 
weight or measure or makes use of any numeration otherwise than in accordance with the standards of 
weight or measure or the standard of numeration, as the case may be, specified by or under this Act, shall 
be pun ished with fine which may extend to twenty -five thousand rupees and for the second or subsequent 
offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and also with fine.  
26. Penalty for alteration of weight and measure .—Whoever tampers with , or alters in any way, 
any reference standard, secondary standard or working standard or increases or decreases or alters any 
weight or measure with a view to deceiving any person or knowing or having reason to believe that any 
person is likely to be dece ived thereby, except where such alteration is made for the correction of any 
error noticed therein on verification, shall be punished with fine which may extend to fifty thousand 
rupees and for the second and subsequent offence with imprisonment for a term  which shall not be less 
than six months but which may extend to one year or with fine or with both.  10 
 27. Penalty for manufacture or sale of non -standard weight or measure .—Every person who 
manufactures or causes to be manufactured or sells or offers, expos es or possesses for sal e, any weight or 
measure which, — 
(a) does not conform to the standards of weight or measure specified by or under this Act; or  
(b) which bears thereon any inscription of weight, measure or number which does not conform to 
the standards of weight, measure or numeration specified by or under this Act, except where he is 
permitted to do so under this Act, shall be punished with a fine which may extend to twenty thousand 
rupees and for the second or subsequent offence with imprison ment for a term which may extend to 
three years or with fine or with both.  
28. Penalty for making any transaction, deal or contract in contravention of the prescribed 
standards .—Whoever makes any transaction, deal or contract in contravention of the standa rds of 
weights and measures specified under section 10 shall be punished with fine which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees and for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.  
29. Penalty for quoting or publishing, etc., of non -standard units .—Whoever violates section 11 
shall be punished with fine which may extend to  ten thousand rupees and, for the second or subsequent 
offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.  
30. Penalty for transactions in contravention of standard weight or measure .—Whoever— 
(a) in selling any article or thing by weight, measure or number, delivers or causes to be delivered 
to the purchaser any quantity or nu mber of that article or thing less than the quantity or number 
contracted for or paid for; or  
(b) in rendering any service by weight, measure or number, renders that service less than the 
service contracted for or paid for; or  
(c) in buying any article or thing by weight, measure or number, fraudulently receives, or causes 
to be received any quantity or number of that article or thing in excess of the quantity or number 
contracted for or paid for; or  
(d) in obtaining any service by weight, measure or number , obtains that service in excess of the 
service contracted for or paid for,  
shall  be punished with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, and, for the second or subsequent 
offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.  
31. Penalty for non -production of documents, etc .—Whoever, being required by or under this Act 
or the rules made thereunder to submit returns, maintain any record or register, or being required by the 
Director or the Controller or any legal metrology officer to produce before him for inspection any weight 
or measu re or any document, register or other record relating thereto, omits or fails without any 
reasonable excuse, so to do, shall be punished with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and for 
the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a te rm which may extend to one year and also 
with fine.  
32. Penalty for failure to get model approved .—Whoever fails or omits to submit model of any 
weight or measure for approval, shall be punished with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees 
and for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year 
and also with fine.  
33. Penalty for use of unverified weight or measure .—Whoever, sells, distributes, delivers or 
otherwise transfers or uses any unverified weight or measure shall be punished with fine which shall not 
be less than two thousand rupees but which may extend to ten thousand rupees and, for the second or 
subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and also with fine.  
34. Penalty for sale or delivery of commodities, etc., by non -standard weight or measure .—
Whoever sells, or causes to be sold, delivers, or causes to be delivered, any commodity, article or thing by 
any means other than the standard weight or measure or numbe r, shall be punished with fine which shall 11 
 not be less than two thousand rupees but which may extend to  five thousand rupees and, for the second or 
subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three months but which 
may ext end to one year, or with fine, or  with both.  
35. Penalty for rendering services by non -standard weight, measure or number .—Whoever 
renders or causes to be rendered, any service through means other than the weight or measure or 
numeration or in terms of any  weight, measure or number other than the standard weight or measure, shall 
be punished with fine which shall not be less than  two thousand rupees but which may extend to five 
thousand rupees and for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which shall not 
be less than three months but which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.  
36. Penalty for selling, etc., of non -standard packages .—(1) Whoever manufactures, packs, 
imports, sells, distributes, delivers or otherwise tran sfers, offers, exposes or possesses for sale, or causes 
to be sold, distributed, delivered or otherwise transferred, offered, exposed for sale any pre -packaged 
commodity which does not conform to the declarations on the package as provided in this Act, sha ll be 
punished with fine which may extend to twenty -five thousand rupees, for the second offence, with fine 
which may extend to fifty thousand rupees and for the subsequent offence, with fine which shall not be 
less than fifty thousand rupees but which may  extend to one lakh rupees or with imprisonment for a term 
which may e xtend to one year or with both.  
(2) Whoever manufactures or packs or imports or causes to be manufactured or packed or imported, 
any pre -packaged commodity, with error in net quantity as  may be prescribed shall be punished with fine 
which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to fifty thousand rupees and for 
the second and subsequent offence, with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to one year or with both.  
37. Penalty for contravention by Government approved Test Centre .—(1) Where  any 
Government approved Test Centre contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made 
thereunder, or the conditions of the licence, it shall be punished with fine which  may extend to one lakh 
rupees.  
(2) Where any owner or employee of a Gove rnment Approved Test Centre performing duties in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, wilfully verifies or stamps any 
weight or measure in contravention of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, he shal l, for 
every such contravention, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or 
with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both.  
38. Penalty for non -registration by importer of weight or measure .—Whoever imports a ny 
weight or measure without being registered under this Act shall be punished with fine which may extend 
to twenty -five thousand rupees and for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months, or with fine, or  with both.  
39. Penalty for import of non -standard weight or measure .—Whoever imports any non -standard 
weight or measure shall be punished with fine, which may extend to fifty thousand rupees and for the 
second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and also with 
fine. 
40. Penalty for obstructing Director, Controller or legal metrology officer .—Whoever obstructs 
the Director, the Controller or any legal metrology officer with intent to prevent or deter the Director or 
the Controller or any legal metrology officer from exercising his powers or discharging his functions, or 
in consequence of anything done or attempted to be done by the Director or the Controller or any legal 
metrology officer in the lawful exercise of his powers or discharge of his functions as such, or whoever 
obstructs the entry of the Director or the Controller or any legal metrology officer into any premises for 
inspection and verification of any weight or measure or any document or record relating thereto or the net 
contents of any packaged commodity or for any other purpose shall be punished with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to two years and for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to five year s. 12 
 41. Penalty for giving false information or false return .—(1) Whoever gives any information to 
the Director, the Controller or any legal metrology officer, which he may require or ask for in the course 
of his duty, and which such person either knows or has reason to believe to be false, shall be punished 
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and for the second or subsequent offence with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to  six months and also with fine.  
(2) Whoever, being required by or under this Act so to do, submits a return or maintains any record or 
register which is false in material particulars, shall be punished with fine which may extend to five 
thousand rupees and for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year and also with fine.  
42. Vexatious search .—The Director, the Controller or any legal metrology officer, exercising 
powers under this Act or any rule made thereunder, who knows that there are no reasonable grounds for 
so doing, and yet — 
(a) searches, or causes to be searched, any house, conveyance or place; or  
(b) searches any person; or  
(c) seizes any weight, measure or other movable property;  
shall, for every such offence, be punished with imprisonment for a term which m ay extend to one year, or 
with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both.  
43. Penalty for verification in contravention of Act and rules .—Where the Controller or any legal 
metrology officer exercising powers under this Act or any rule made thereunder, wilfully verifies or 
stamps any weight or measure, in contravention of the provisions of this Act or of any rule made 
thereunder, he shall, for every such offence, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to one year, or with f ine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both.  
44. Penalty for counterfeiting of seals, etc .—(1) Whoever — 
(i) counterfeits any seal specified by or under this Act o r the rules made thereunder, or  
(ii) sells  or otherwise disposes of any counterfeit seal, or  
(iii) possesses any counterfeit seal, or  
(iv) counterfeits or removes or tampers with any stamp, specified by or under this A ct or rules 
made thereunder, or  
(v) affixes  the stamp so removed on, or inserts the same int o, any other weight or measure,  
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may 
extend to one year and for the second or subsequent offence, with imprison ment for a term which shall 
not be less than six months but which may extend to five years.  
Explanation .—In this sub -section, “counterfeit ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 28 of 
the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
(2) Whoever obtains, by u nlawful means, any seal specified by or under this Act or the rules made 
thereunder and uses, or causes to be used, any such seal for making any stamp on any weight or measure 
with a view to representing that the stamp made by such seal is authorised by or  under this Act or the 
rules made thereunder shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six 
months but which may extend to one year and for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment 
for a term which shall not be l ess than six months but which may extend to five years.  
(3) Whoever, being in lawful possession of a seal specified by or under this Act or the rules made 
thereunder, uses, or causes to be used, such seal without any lawful authority for such use, shall be  
punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to 
one year and for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less 
than six months but which may extend to five year s. 13 
 (4) Whoever sells or offers or exposes for sale or otherwise disposes of any weight or measure which, 
he knows or has reason to believe, bears thereon a counterfeit stamp, shall be punished with imprisonment 
for a term which shall not be less than six m onths but which may extend to one year and for the second or 
subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may 
extend to five years.  
45. Penalty for manufacture of weight and measure without licence .—Who ever, being required to 
obtain a licence under this Act or the rules made thereunder, manufactures, without being in possession of 
a valid licence, any weight or measure, shall be punished with fine which may extend to twenty thousand 
rupees and for the se cond or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one 
year, or with fine, or with both.  
46. Penalty for repair, sale, etc., of weight and measure without licence .—Whoever, being 
required to obtain a licence under this Act or the rules made thereunder repairs or sells or offers, exposes 
or possesses for repair or sale, any weight or measure, without being in possession of a valid licence, shall 
be punished with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and for the second or sub sequent 
offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.  
47. Penalty for tampering with licence .—Whoever alters or otherwise tampers, with any licence 
issued or renewed under this Act or rules made thereunder,  otherwise than in accordance with any 
authorisation made by the Controller in this behalf, shall be punished with fine which may extend to 
twenty thousand rupees, or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with both.  
48. Compounding o f offences .—(1) Any offence punishable under section 25, sections 27 to 39, 
sections 45 to 47, or any rule made under sub -section ( 3) of section 52 may, either before or after the 
institution of the prosecution, be compounded, on payment for credit to the Government of  such sum as 
may be prescribed.  
(2) The Director or legal metrology officer as may be specially authorised by him in this behalf, may 
compound offences punishable under section 25, sections 27 to 39, or any rule made under sub -section ( 3) 
of section 52.  
(3) The Controller or legal metrology officer specially authorised by him, may compound offences 
punishable under section 25, sections 27 to 31, sections 33 to 37, sections 45 to 47, and any rule made 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 5 2: 
Provide d that such sum shall not, in any case, exceed the maximum amount of the fine, which may be 
imposed under this Act for the offence so compounded.  
(4) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to person who commits the same or similar offence, within 
a period of three years from the date on which the first offence, committed by him, was compounded.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, any second or subsequent offence committed 
after the expiry of a period of three years from the date on which the offence was previously 
compounded, shall be deemed to be a first offence.  
(5) Where an offence has been com pounded under sub -section ( 1), no proceeding or further 
proceeding, as the case may be, shall be taken against the offender in respect of the offence so 
compounded.  
(6) No offence under this Act shall be compounded except as provided by this section.  
49. O ffences by companies and power of court to publish name, place of business , etc., for 
companies convicted. —(1) Where an offence under this Act has been comm itted by a company, — 
(a) (i) the person, if any, who has been nominated under sub -section ( 2) to be in charge of, and 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company (hereinafter in this section 
referred to as a person responsible); or  
(ii) where no person has been nominated, every person who at the time the offence was 
committ ed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of t he business of 
the company; and  14 
 (b) the company,  
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that no thing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge and 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offen ce. 
(2) Any company may, by order in writing, authorise any of its directors to exercise all such powers 
and take all such steps as may be necessary or expedient to prevent the commission by the company of 
any offence under this Act and may give notice to the Director or the concerned Controller or any legal 
metrology officer authorised in this behalf by such Controller (hereinafter in this section referred to as the 
authorised officer) in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed, that it has nomin ated such 
director as the person responsible, along  with the written consent of such director for being so nominated.  
Explanation .—Where a company has different establishments or branches or different units in any 
establishment or branch, different persons  may be nominated under this sub -section in relation to different 
establishments or branches or units and the person nominated in relation to any establishment, branch or 
unit shall be deemed to be the person responsible in respect of such establishment, b ranch or unit.  
(3) The person nominated und er sub -section ( 2) shall, until — 
(i) further notice cancelling such nomination is received from the company by the Director or the 
concerned Controller or the authorised officer; or  
(ii) he ceases to be a director  of the company; or  
(iii) he makes a request in writing to the Director or the concerned Controller or the legal 
metrology officer under intimation to the company, to cancel the nomination, which request shall be 
complied with by the Director or the concer ned Controller or the legal metrology officer,  
whichever is the earliest, continu e to be the person responsible:  
Provided that where such person ceases to be a director of the company, he shall intimate the fact of 
such cessation to the Director or the con cerned Contro ller or the authorised officer:  
Provided further that where such person makes a request under clause ( iii) the Director or the 
concerned Controller or the authorised officer shall not cancel such nomination with effect from a date 
earlier than  the date on which the request is made.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, where an offence under this 
Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the 
consent or connivanc e of, or is attributable to the neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary 
or other officer, not being a person nominated under sub -section ( 2), such director, manager, secretary or 
other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offe nce and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly.  
(5) Where any company is convicted under this Act for contravention of any of the provisions thereof, 
it shall be competent for the court convicting the company to cause the name and  place of business of the 
company, nature of the contravention, the fact that the company has been so convicted and such other 
particulars as the court may consider to be appropriate in the circumstances of the case, to be published at 
the expense of the c ompany in such newspaper or in such other manner as the court may direct.  
(6) No publication under sub -section ( 5) shall be made until the period for preferring an appeal 
against the orders of the court has expired without any appeal having been preferred,  or such an appeal, 
having been preferred, has been disposed of.  
(7) The expenses of any publication under sub -section ( 5) shall be recoverable from the company as if 
it were a fine imposed by the court.  
 
 15 
 Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm but excludes nominated directors, 
honorary directors, Government nominated directors.  
50. A ppeals .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), an appeal shall lie, — 
(a) from every decision or order under sections 15 to 20, section 22, section 25, sections 27 to 39, 
section 41 or any rule made under sub -section ( 3) of section 5 2 by the legal metrology officer 
appointed under section 13, to the Director;  
(b) from every decision or order made by the Director of Legal Metrology under sections 15 to 
20, section 22, section 25, sections 27 to 39, section 41 or any rule made under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 52, to the Central Government or any officer specially authorised in this behalf by that 
Government;  
(c) from every decision given by the Controller of Legal Metrology under delegated powers of 
Director Legal Metrology to the Central  Government;  
(d) from every decision given or order made under sections 15 to 18, sections 23 to 25, sections 
27 to 37, sections 45 to 47 or any rule made under sub -section ( 3) of section 5 3 by any legal 
metrology officer appointed under section 14, to the  Controller; and  
(e) from every decision given or order made by the Controller under sections 15 to 18, sections 23 
to 25, sections 27 to 37, sections 45 to 47 or any rule made under sub -section ( 3) of section 5 3 not 
being an order made in appeal under cla use ( d), to the State Government or any officer specially 
authorised in this behalf by that Government.  
(2) Every such appeal shall be preferred within sixty days from the date on which the impugned order 
was made:  
Provided that the appellate authority may , if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by 
sufficient cause from preferring the appeal within the said period of sixty days, permit the appellant to 
prefer the appeal within a further period of sixty days.  
(3) On receipt of any such appeal, t he appellate authority shall, after giving the parties to the appeal, a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard and after making such inquiry as it deems proper, make such order, 
as it may think fit, confirming, modifying or reversing the decision or order a ppealed against or may send 
back the case with such direction as it may think fit for a fresh decision or order after taking additional 
evidence, if necessary.  
(4) Every appeal shall be preferred on payment of such fees, as may be prescribed . 
(5) The Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, may on its own motion or 
otherwise, call for and examine the record of any proceeding including a proceeding in appeal in which 
any decision or order has been made, for the purpose of satisfyi ng itself as to the correctness, legality or 
propriety of such decision or order and may pass such orders thereon as it may think fit:  
Provided that no decision or order shall be varied under this sub -section so as to prejudicially affect 
any person unless  such person has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the 
proposed action.  
51. Provisions of Indian Penal Code and Code of Criminal Procedure not to apply .—The 
provisions of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860)  and section 153 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973  (2 of 1974)  in so far as such provisions relate to offences with regard to weight or measure, shall not 
apply to any offence which is punishable under this Act.  
52. Power of the Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Cen tral Government may, by 
notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  16 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the specification of the base units of measures and base unit of mass under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 5;  
(b) the manner of preparation of objects and equipments under sub -section ( 3) of section 7;  
(c) physical characteristics, configuration, constructiona l details, materials, equipment, 
performance, tolerances, period of re -verification, methods or procedures of tests under                        
sub-section ( 4) of section 7;  
(d) reference standards, secondary standards and working standards of weights and  measures 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 9;  
(e) reference standards, secondary standards and working standards shall be verified and stamped 
and the fee under sub -section ( 2) of section 9;  
(f) the weight or measure or number in which any transaction, dea ling, or contract in respect of 
any goods, class of goods or undertakings shall be made under section 10;  
(g) the qualifications of the Director and legal metrology officers under sub -section ( 2) of             
section 13;  
(h) the  qualification of the Controller and legal metrology officers under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 14;  
(i) the manner of disposal of goods under sub -section ( 3) of section 15;  
(j) the standard quantities or number and the manner in which the packages shall bea r the 
declarations and the particulars under sub -section ( 1) of section 18;  
(k) the manner and registration and the fee under section 19;  
(l) the management and control of the Institute, the teaching staff and other employees, the 
courses and curricula for  training thereat, the qualifications, which a person shall possess in order to 
be eligible for admission thereto under sub -section ( 2) of section 21;  
(m) the manner, fee and authority for approval of models under section 22;  
(n) the kinds of weights or measures under sub -section ( 2) of section 24;  
(o) the manner in which, terms and conditions on which and fee on payment which the Central 
Government shall notify the Government approved Test Centre under sub -section ( 3) of section 24;  
(p) the qualifications and experience of persons appointed or engaged and the fee and terms and 
conditions on which Government approved Test Centre shall verify the weight or measure under              
sub-section ( 4) of section 24;  
(q) the error in net qu antity under sub -section ( 2) of section 36;  
(r) fee for compounding of offence under sub -section ( 1) of section 48;  
(s) form and manner in which notice to the Director or the Controller or any other officer 
authorised by him shall be given under sub -sectio n (2) of section 49.  
(3) In making any rule under this section, the Central Government may provide that a breach thereof 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.  
(4) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act sh all be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
sessio n immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be  of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 17 
 any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
53. Power of State Government to make rules. —(1) The State Government may, by no tification, 
and after consultation with the Central Government, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the time within which the weight or measure may be got verified under provi so to                           
sub-section ( 1) of section 16;  
(b) registers and records to be maintained by persons referred to under sub -section (1) of                   
section 17;  
(c) the form, manner, conditions, period, area of jurisdiction and fees for issuance of licence 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 23;  
(d) fee for verification and stamping of any weight or measure under  sub-section ( 1) of                 
section 24;  
(e) manner of notifying Government approved Test Centre, terms and conditions and fee to be 
paid under sub -section ( 3) of section 24;  
(f) fee for compounding of offences under sub -section ( 1) of section 48.  
(3) In making an y rule under this section, the State Government may provide that a breach thereof 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.  
(4) The power to make rules under this section shall be subject to the condition of the rules being 
made after previous publication in Official Gazette.  
(5) Every rule made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of State Legislature, where there are two Houses and where there is one House of State 
Legislature, before that House.  
54. Delegation of Powers .—(1) The Central Government may, in consultation with the State 
Government and by notification, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act or any rule made 
thereunder, not being a power c onferred by section 50 relating to appeal or section 52 relating to power to 
make rules, in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions as may be specified, may be 
exercised also by such officer subordinate to it as may be  specified in the noti fication.  
(2) Subject to any general or special direction or condition imposed by the State Government, any 
person authorised by the Central Government to exercise any powers may exercise those powers in the 
same manner and to the same extent as if they ha d been conferred on that person directly by this Act and 
not by way of delegation.  
55. Ac t not to apply in certain cases. —The provisions of this Act, in so far as they relate to 
verification and stamping of weights and measures, shall not apply to any weig ht or measure, — 
(a) used in any factory exclusively engaged in the manufacture of any arms, ammunition or both, 
for the use of the Armed Forces of the Union;  
(b) used for scientific investigation or for research;  
(c) manufactured exclusively for export.  
56. Existing Director, Controller and legal metrology officer not to be affected by the new 
qualification to be prescribed .—(1) Every Director, Controller and legal metrology officer appointed 
immediately before the commencement of the rules made under this Act, shall be deemed to have been 
appointed under sub -section ( 1) of sections 13 and 14, notwithstanding any rule prescribing different 
qualifications.  18 
 (2) The rules made by a State Government under the Standards of Weights and Measures 
(Enforcement) Act, 1985 (54 of 1985) which are in force immediately before the commencement of this 
Act shall remain in force until the State Government, makes rules in that behalf.  
57. Repeal of the Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1976 and Standards of Weights and 
Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1985 .—(1) The Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1976                               
(60 of 1976) and the Standards of Weights and Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1985  (54 of 1985) , is hereby 
repealed.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in the General Clauses Act, 1897  (10 of 1897) , with 
respect to repeals, any notification, rule or order made under the Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 
1976 (60 of 1976) and the Standards of Weights and Measures (Enforcement)  Act, 1985  (54 of 1985) , 
shall, if in force, at the commencement of this Act, continue to be in force and have effect as if it was 
made under the corresponding provision of this Act.  
(3) Notwithstanding such repeal, any appointment, notification, rule, order, registration, licence, 
certificate, notice, decision, approval, authorisation or consent made, issued or given under such law shall, 
if in force at the commencement of this Act, continue to be in force and have effect as if it were made, 
issued or given un der the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
__________  
--------------------------The Nalanda University Act, 2010--------------------------
1 
 THE NALANDA UNIVERSITY ACT, 2010  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____________  
 
SECTIONS   
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration of Nalanda University as an institution of national importance.  
3. Definitions.  
4. Establishment and incorporation of Nalanda University.  
5. Effect of establishment of University.  
6. Jurisdiction.  
7. Governing Board.  
8. Powers and functions of Governing Board.  
9. Objectives of University.  
10. Powers of University.  
11. University open to all persons.  
12. Visitor.  
13. Officers of University.  
14. The Chancell or. 
15. The Vice -Chancellor.  
16. The Registrar.  
17. The Finance Officer.  
18. The Controller of Examinations.  
19. The Librarian . 
20. Other o fficers.  
21. Privileges and immunities of academic staff, etc.  
22. Authorities of the University.  
23. The Academic Council.  
24. The School of Studies.  
25. The Finance Committee.  
26. Other authorities.  
27. Statutes.  
28. Statutes how made.  
29. Ordinances.  
30. Regulations.  
31. Annual report.  
32. Annual accounts, etc.  
33. Conditions of service of employees.  
34. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students.  
35. Right to appeal . 
36. Provident and pension funds.  
37. Disputes as to the constitution of authorities and bodies.  
38. Filling of casual vacancies.  
39. Proceedings of authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.  
40. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
41. Power to remove difficulties . 
42. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before 
Parliament.  
43. Transitional provisions.  
44. Repeal of University of Nalanda Act.  
  2 
 THE NALANDA UNIVERSITY ACT, 2010  
ACT NO. 39 OF 2010  
[21st September,  2010.]  
An Act to implement the decisions arrived at the Second East Asia Summit held on the 15th 
January, 2007, at Philippines and subsequently at the Fourth East Asia Summit held on the 
25th October, 2009, at Thailand for the establishment of the Nalanda University  in the State 
of Bihar as an international institution for pursuit of intellectual, philosophical, historical and 
spiritual studies and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS , the Second East Asia Summit held on the15th January, 200 7 in the city of Cebu, Republic 
of Philippines, agreed to strengthen regional educational co -operation by tapping the East Asia Region ’s 
centres of excellence in education and for the revival of the Nalanda University located in the State of 
Bihar to impro ve regional understanding and the appreciation of one another ’s heritage and history;  
AND WHEREAS , the Fourth East Asia Summit held on the 25th October, 2009 in Hua Hin, Thailand, 
supported the establishment of the Nalanda University and encouraged the net working and collaboration 
between the proposed Nalanda University and existing centres of excellence in the East Asia Summit so 
as to participating countries to build a community of learning where students, scholars, researchers and 
academicians can work t ogether symbolising the spirituality that unites all mankind;  
AND WHEREAS , it is considered expedient to make provision for implementing the decisions arrived 
at in the aforesaid East Asia Summits for establishment of the Nalanda University in the State of  Bihar 
and declare it to be an institution of national importance.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -first Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Nalanda University Act, 2010.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.  
2. Declaration of Nalanda University as an institution of nati onal importance .—Whereas the 
objects of the institution known as the Nalanda University are such as to make the institution one of 
national importance, it is hereby declared that the institution known as the Nalanda University is an 
institution of national  importance.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Academic Council ” means the Academic Council of the University;  
(b) “academic staff ” means such categories of staff as are designated as academic staff by the 
Statutes;  
(c) “Centre ” means a centre established or maintained by the University in any place in India or 
in East Asia region for the purposes of coordinating and supervising the work of centres in such place 
or region and for performing such functions as may be co nferred on such centre by the Governing 
Board;  
(d) “East Asia region ” means the region comprising the territories of the Member States of the  
East Asia Summit;  
(e) “employee”  means any person appointed by the University and includes teachers and other 
staff of the University;  
(f) “Faculty ” means a Faculty of the University;  
(g) “Finance Officer ” means the Finance Officer of the University appointed under section 17;  
                                                           
1. 25th November , 201 0, vide notification No. S.O. 2809 (E), dated 18th Novem ber, 2010, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 3 
 (h) “Gover ning Board”  means the Governing Board of the University constituted under section 7;  
(i) “Hall” means a unit of residence, by whatever name called, for students of the University 
provided, maintained or recognised by it;  
(j) “Member States ” means the Membe r States of the East Asia Summit;  
(k) “Nalanda Mentor Group ” means the group of persons constituted by the communication dated 
the 28th June, 2007 of the Government of India in the Ministry of External Affairs, inter alia , to 
examine the framework and structure of International  co-operation and partnership which would 
govern the establishment of the University;  
(l) “Ordinances ” means the Ordinances of the University;  
(m) “prescribed ” means prescribed by Statutes, Ordinances or by Regulations;  
(n) “recog nised institution ” means an institution of higher learning maintained or recognised by, 
or associated with, the University;  
(o) “Registrar”  means the Registrar of the University appointed under section 16;  
(p) “Regulations ” means the Regulations of the Uni versity;  
(q) “School”  means a school of studies of the University;  
(r) “Statutes”  means the Statutes of the University;  
(s) “teacher”  means professor, associate professor, assistant professor and research staff of the 
University appointed or recognised by the University for imparting instructions or conducting 
research in the University or for giving guidance to students for pursuing any course of study of the 
University and are designated  as teachers by the Statutes;  
(t) “University ” means the Nalanda Univ ersity established and incorporated under section 4.  
4. Establishment and incorporation of Nalanda University .—(1) The University of Nalanda in the 
State of Bihar, established under the University of Nalanda Act, 2007  (Bihar Act 18 of 2007) , shall be 
established as a body corporate under this Act by the name of “Nalanda University ”. 
(2) The first Visitor, the first Chancellor, the first Vice -Chancellor, the first members of the 
Governing Board and the Academic Council, and all persons who ma y hereafter become such officers or 
members, so long as they continue to hold such office or membership, shall constitute the University.  
(3) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall sue and be sued by 
the said name.  
(4) The Headquarters of the University shall be in the district of Nalanda in the State of Bihar.  
(5) The University may establish or maintain centres at such other places in India as it may deem fit:  
Provided that the University may, with the approval of the G overning Board, establish study centres 
outside India.  
5. Effect of establishment of University .—On and from the date of commencement of this Act, — 
(a) any  reference to the University of Nalanda in any contract or other instrument shall be deemed 
as a reference to the University;  
(b) all property, movable and immovable, of or belonging to the University of Nalanda shall vest 
in the University;  
(c) all rights  and liabilities of the University of Nalanda shall be transferred to, and be the rights 
and liabilities of, the University;  
(d) every person employed by the University of Nalanda immediately before the commencement 
of this Act shall hold his office or ser vice in the University by the same tenure, at the same 
remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to 
pension, leave, gratuity, provident fund and other matters as he would have held the same if this Act 4 
 had not been enacted, and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment is terminated or 
until such tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions are duly altered by the Statutes:  
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee, his employment may 
be terminated by the University in accordance with the term of the contract with the employee or, if 
no provision is made therein in this behalf, on payment to him by the University of compensation 
equivalent to three months ’ remuneration in case of permanent employees and one month ’s 
remuneration in the case of other employees:  
Provided further that every person employed before the commencement of this Act, pending the 
execution of a contract under section 33, shall be deemed t o have been appointed in accordance with 
the provisions of a contract consistent with the provisions of this Act and the Statutes:  
Provided also that any reference, by whatever form of words, to the Visitor, Chancellor or           
Vice -Chancellor of the U niversity of Nalanda in any law for the time being in force, or in any 
instrument or other document, shall be construed as a reference respectively to the Visitor, Chancellor 
or Vic e-Chancellor of the University;  
(e) the Visitor of the University of Naland a, appointed under the provisions of the University of 
Nalanda Act, 2007  (Bihar Act 18 of 2007)  shall be deemed to have been appointed to be the nominee 
of the Visitor and such nominee be also the first Visitor under this Act for a period of five years fro m 
the date of commencement of this Act;  
(f) the Chancellor of the University of Nalanda, appointed under the provisions of the University 
of Nalanda Act, 2007  (Bihar Act 18 of 2007)  shall be deemed to have been appointed as the 
Chancellor under section 14 of this Act, and shall hold office for a period of three years from the date 
of commencement of this Act;  
(g) the Vice -Chancellor of the University of Nalanda, appointed under the provisions of the 
University of Nalanda Act, 2007 (Bihar Act 18 of 2007) shall be deemed to have been appointed as 
the first Vice -Chancellor under this Act, and shall hold office for a period of five years from the date 
of commencement of this Act; and  
(h) all Colleges, Institutions, Faculties and Departments affiliated to, or adm itted to the privileges 
of, or maintained by, the University of Nalanda shall stand affiliated to, or admitted to the privilege 
of, or maintained by, the University.  
6. Jurisdiction .—The jurisdiction of the University shall extend to whole of India and to centres 
established within or outside India.  
7. Governing Board .—(1) There shall be a Governing Board of the University consisting of the 
following persons as its members, namely:  — 
(a) the Chancellor;  
(b) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(c) five  members from amongst the Member States which provide maximum financial assistance 
during a period of three years to be nominated by the Member States;  
(d) one member, not below the rank of Secretary in the Ministry of External Affairs, to be 
nomin ated by the Central Government;  
(e) two members, representing the State Government of Bihar, to be nominated by the State 
Government;  
(f) one member not below the rank of Additional Secretary in the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development, to be nominated by the Ce ntral Government;  
(g) three members from amongst the persons being renowned academician or educationist, to be 
nominated by the Central Government.  
(2) Each member of the Governing Board referred to in clauses ( c) to ( g) of sub -section ( 1), shall hold 
office for a fixed term of three years.  5 
 (3) The Chancellor shall be the Chairperson of the Governing Board.  
(4) The member, being the Secretary in the Ministry of External Affairs, nominated under clause ( d) 
of sub -section ( 1), shall be the Member -Secretary of the Governing Board.  
(5) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances made thereunder, the 
Governing Board may regulate its own procedure (including quorum) for the conduct of its meetings.  
8. Powers and functi ons of Governing Board. —(1) The Governing Board shall be responsible for 
all the policies and directions of the University and management of its affairs.  
(2) The Governing Board shall exercise such powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that  the Nalanda Mentor Group shall exercise the powers and discharge the functions of the 
Governing Board for a period of one year or till such time the members referred to in clauses ( c) to ( g) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 7 are nominated, whichever is earl ier. 
9. Objectives of University. —(1) The objectives of the University shall be — 
(a) to impart education and to enable research towards capacity building of the Member States in 
the domain of ancient science (in particular, practised in the Nalanda several  centuries ago), 
philosophy, language, history and other areas of higher learning vital for improving the quality of life;  
(b) to contribute to the promotion of regional peace and vision by bringing together the future 
leaders of the East Asia, who by rela ting to their past history can enhance their understanding of each  
others ’ perspectives and to share that understanding globally;  
(c) to harmonise the academic standards and accreditation norms in teaching, research and 
curriculum that are acceptable to al l Member States;  
(d) to create a unique partnership between the scholars and interested persons from the Member 
States;  
(e) to understand Buddha ’s teachings in the contemporary context without excluding any other 
thoughts and practices from any other parts  of the world;  
(f) to enhance research for greater interaction between Asian countries, particularly between East 
Asia, bound by strong historical commonalities in areas like trade, science, mathematics, astronomy, 
religion, philosophy and cross -cultural c urrent;  
(g) to foster in the students and scholars the spirit of accommodation, understanding and thus to 
train them to become exemplary citizens of democratic societies;  
(h) to contribute to the improvement of the educational system of the Member States i n view of 
the teaching in Nalanda several centuries ago;  
(i) to provide education and training in various arts, crafts and skills of the Member States, raising 
their quality and improving their availability to the people.  
(2) The University shall be non -profit public -private partnership, which shall seek support from each 
of the Member States and from other sources but shall be autonomous and accountable to the Governing 
Board.  
10. Powers of University. —The University shall have the following powers, namely :— 
(i) to make provision for providing, upgrading and promoting holistic and inclusive education and 
training and research in such education as set out in the objects, and to create an enabling and 
conducive environment for the pursuit of such education in  close co -operation with other experts, 
scholars and interested persons in India, Asian countries and other countries;  
(ii) to set up a consortium of international partners and friendly countries in furtherance of the 
objects of the University;  
(iii) to generate and maintain resources through consultancy services, continuing education 
programmes, national and international collaborations and intellectual property rights;  6 
 (iv) to provide for instruction in such branches of learning as the University may, from time to 
time, determine and to make provisions for research and for the advancement and dissemination of 
knowledge;  
(v) to establish such special centres and specialised laboratories and such other units for research 
and instruction as are necessary f or the furtherance of its objects;  
(vi) to plan and prescribe courses of study for degrees, diplomas, certificates or for any other 
purpose;  
(vii) to hold examinations and grant diplomas or certificates to, and confer degrees and other 
academic distinctions on, persons who have pursued a course of study or conducted research, in the 
manner laid down by the Statutes and Ordinances;  
(viii) to confer honorary degrees or other academic distinctions in the manner prescribed by the 
Statutes;  
(ix) to in stitute Professorships, Readerships and Lecturerships and other teaching and academic 
positions, required by the University and to appoint persons to such Chairs, Professorships, 
Readerships and Lecturerships and other teaching and academic positions;  
(x) to appoint visiting professors, Emeritus professors, consultants, scholars and such other 
persons who may contribute to the advancement of the objects of the University;  
(xi) to recognise persons as professors, associate professors, or assistant professors  or otherwise 
as teachers of the University;  
(xii) to create administrative and other posts as the University may deem necessary from time to 
time and to make appointments thereto;  
(xiii) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, in cluding their code of 
conduct;  
(xiv) to establish and maintain centres in India or outside India, as may be determined from time 
to time;  
(xv) to admit to its privileges institutions situated within its jurisdiction as the University 
institutions and to wi thdraw all or any of those privileges in accordance with such conditions as may 
be prescribed by the Statutes;  
(xvi) to co -operate or collaborate or associate with any other University or authority or institution 
of higher learning or any other public or p rivate body, having in view the promotion of purposes and 
objects similar to those of the University, in such manner as may be prescribed and for such purposes 
as may be determined or agreed upon by the University;  
(xvii) to determine standards of admissio ns, including examination, evaluation or any other 
method of testing, to the University, and the institutions maintained by or admitted to the privileges of 
the University;  
(xviii) to demand and receive payment of fees and other charges as may be prescribe d; 
(xix) to establish Halls and to recognise, guide, supervise and control Halls not maintained by the 
University and other accommodation for students, and to withdraw any such recognition;  
(xx) to make arrangements for promoting health and general welfare  of students and employees of 
the University;  
(xxi) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the employees, and to take such 
disciplinary measures in this regard as may be deemed by the University to be necessary;  
(xxii) to institute and a ward Fellowships, Scholarships and Prizes;  
(xxiii) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts in accordance with the Ordinances and to 
acquire, hold, manage and dispose of any property, movable or immovable, including trust and 7 
 endowment properties, for the purposes or objects of the University and to invest funds in such 
manner as it deems fit;  
(xxiv) to borrow, with the approval of the Governing Board;  
(xxv) to recognise for any purpose, either in whole or in part, any institution or members or 
students  thereof on such terms and conditions as may, from time to time, be prescribed and to 
withdraw such recognition;  
(xxvi) to make provision for research and advisory services and for that purpose to enter into such 
arrangements with other institutions or bod ies as it may deem necessary;  
(xxvii ) to provide for the printing, reproduction and publication or research and other work which 
may be required by the University;  
(xxviii ) to exercise such other powers accorded to it and to do all such other acts as may b e 
necessary, incidental or conducive to the promotion of all or any of the objects of the University.  
11. University open to all persons. —The University shall be open to all persons irrespective of 
gender, caste, creed, disability, ethnicity or socio -econo mic background.  
12. Visitor. —(1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University:  
Provided that the President may, by order, nominate any person to be the Visitor and such person so 
nominated shall hold office for such term, not exceeding five years as may be specified in the order and 
the person so nominated shall exercise the powers and discharge duties of the Visitor.  
(2) The Visitor may, from time to time, appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress 
of the University and  to submit a report thereon; and upon receipt of that report, the Visitor may, after 
obtaining the views of the Governing Board thereon through the Vice -Chancellor, take such action and 
issue such directions as he considers necessary in respect of any of t he matters dealt with in the report and 
the University shall be bound to comply with such directions.  
(3) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made, by such person or persons as he 
may direct, of the University, its buildings, libr aries, laboratories and equipments, and of any institution 
or centre maintained by the University or admitted to its privileges, and also of the examinations, teaching 
and other work conducted or done by the University and to cause an inquiry to be made in  respect of any 
matter  connected with the University.  
(4) The Visitor shall, in every case give notice to the University of his intention to cause an inspection 
or inquiry to be made, and the University shall be entitled to appoint a representative within thirty days or 
such other period as the Visitor may determine who shall have the right to be present and be heard at such 
inspection or inquiry.  
(5) The Visitor may address the Vice -Chancellor with reference to the result of inspection and 
inquiry, and the  Vice -Chancellor shall communicate to the Governing Board the views of the Visitor with 
such advice as the Visitor may offer upon the action to be taken thereon.  
(6) The Governing Board shall communicate through the Vice -Chancellor to the Visitor, such act ion, 
if any, as it proposes to take or has been taken upon the result of such inspection or inquiry.  
(7) Where the Governing Board does not, within a reasonable time, take action to the satisfaction of 
the Visitor, he may, after considering any explanation  furnished or representation made by the Governing 
Board, issue such directions as he may think fit and the Governing Board shall be bound to comply with 
such directions.  
(8) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Visitor may, b y order in writing, 
annul any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with this Act, the Statutes, the 
Ordinances or the Regulations.  
(9) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
  8 
 13. Officers of University. —The following shall be the officers of the University: — 
(1) the Chancellor;  
(2) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(3) the Registrars;  
(4) the Finance Officer; and  
(5) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be the officers of the Universit y. 
14. The Chancellor. —(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor for such term and in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the head of the University and shall, if present, 
presi de at the Convocations of the University held for conferring degrees and meetings of the Governing 
Board.  
15. The Vice -Chancellor. —(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such 
manner, for such term and on such emoluments and other cond itions of service as may be prescribed by 
the Statutes.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the principal academic and executive officer of the University, and 
shall exercise supervision and control over the affairs of the University and give effect to the de cisions of 
all the authorities of the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may, if he is of the opinion that immediate action is necessary on any matter, 
exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under this Act and shall report to 
such authority the action taken by him on such matter:  
Provided that if the authority concerned is of the opinion that such action ought not to have been 
taken, it may refer the matter to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final:  
Provided furth er that any person in the service of the University who is aggrieved by any action taken 
by the Vice -Chancellor under this sub -section shall have the right to represent against such action to the 
Governing Board within ninety days from the date on which su ch action is communicated to him and 
thereupon the Governing Board may confirm, modify or reverse the action taken by the Vice -Chancellor.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that a decision of any authority is beyond the powers 
of the authori ty conferred by the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances or that any decision 
taken is not in the interest of the University, may ask the authority concerned to review its decision within 
sixty days of such decision and if the authority r efuses to review its decision either in whole or in part or 
no decision is taken by it within the said period of sixty days, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor 
whose decision thereon shall be final:  
Provided that the decision of the authority conc erned shall remain suspended during the period of 
review of such decision by the authority or the Visitor, as the case may be, under this sub -section.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes and the Ordinances.  
16. The Registrar. —(1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and 
conditions of service as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into, an d sign agreements and authenticate records on 
behalf of the University.  
(3) The Registrar shall exercise such powers and perform such functions as may be prescribed by the 
Statutes.  
17. The Finance Officer. —The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such ma nner and on such terms 
and conditions of service and shall exercise such powers and perform such functions as may be prescribed 
by the Statutes.  9 
 18. The Controller of Examinations .—The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed in such 
manner and on suc h terms and conditions of service and shall exercise such powers and perform such 
duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
19. The Librarian. —The Librarian shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and 
conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by 
the Statutes.  
20. Other officers. —The manner of appointment, emoluments, powers and duties of the other 
officers of the University shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
21. Privileges and  immunities of academic staff, etc. —The members of the academic staff and, 
where applicable, their dependents or members of the family, shall enjoy such privileges and immunities 
as the Central Government may, after entering into an agreement with the Univ ersity, notify under     
section 3 of the United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947  (46 of 1947) . 
22. Authorities of the University. —The following shall be the authorities of the University: — 
(1) the Governing Board;  
(2) the Academic Council;  
(3) the Boards of Schools of Studies;  
(4) the Finance Committee; and  
(5) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the 
University.  
23. The Academic Council. —(1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body  of the 
University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, have the 
control and general regulation of, and be responsible for, the maintenance of standards of learning, 
education, instruction, evaluation and exami nation within the University and shall exercise such other 
powers and perform such other functions as may be conferred or imposed upon it by the Statutes.  
(2) The constitution of the Academic Council and the term of office of its members shall be 
prescribe d by the Statutes.  
24. The School of Studies. —(1) There shall be such number of Schools of Studies as the University 
may determine from time to time.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision contained in sub -section ( 1), the 
Unive rsity shall have the following Schools, namely: — 
(i) Buddhist Studies, Philosophy and Comparative Religions;  
(ii) Historical Studies;  
(iii) International Relations and Peace Studies;  
(iv) Business  Management in relation to Public Policy and Development Studies;  
(v) Languages and Literature;  
(vi) Ecology and Environment Studies;  
(vii) any other school as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(3) Every School of Studies shall have a Board comprising of such members as may be prescribed by 
the Statutes.  
(4) The powers and functions of the Boards of School of Studies shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
25. The Finance Committee. —The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee 
shall be pres cribed by the Statutes.  10 
 26. Other authorities. —The constitution, powers and functions of the other authorities which may 
be declared by the Statutes to be authorities of the University shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
27. Statutes. —Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of appointment of the Chancellor;  
(b) the manner of appointment of the Vice -Chancellor, the term of his appointment, the 
emoluments and other conditions of his service and the powers and functions that may be exercised 
and performed by him;  
(c) the manner of appointment of the Registrar, the Finance Officer, the Controller of 
Examinations and other officers and terms and conditions of their serv ice and the powers and 
functions that may be exercised and performed by such officers;  
(d) the other authorities of the University, the terms of office of the members of such authorities 
and the powers and functions that may be exercised and performed by s uch authorities;  
(e) the appointment of teachers and other employees of the University, their emoluments and 
other conditions of service:  
Provided that the terms and conditions of teachers and employees shall not be varied to their 
disadvantage;  
(f) the co nstitution of a pension or provident fund and the establishment of an insurance scheme 
for the benefit of the employees of the University;  
(g) the principles governing the seniority of service of the employees of the University;  
(h) the procedure for regul ating the work of the Tribunal of Arbitration;  
(i) the procedure for the settlement of disputes between the employees or students of the 
University, and the University;  
(j) the co -ordination and determination of standards in the University;  
(k) Schools of Studies, members of its Board and the power and functions of such Board;  
(l) all other matters which by this Act are to be, or may be, provided by the Statutes.  
28. Statutes how made. —(1) The first Statutes shall be made by the Governing Board, with the prior 
approval of the Visitor, within six months of the commencement of this Act, for operation of University.  
(2) The Governing Board may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend or 
repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that the Governing Board shall not make, amend or repeal any Statute affecting the status, 
powers or constitution of any authority of the University until such authority has been given a reasonable 
opportunity to express its opinion in writing on the proposed changes and any opinion so expressed has 
been considered by the Governing Board.  
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal thereof shall require the 
assent of the Visitor, who may assent thereto or withhol d assent or remit to the Governing Board for 
reconsideration in the light of the observations, if any, made by him.  
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall not be valid unless it 
has been assented to by the Visitor.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may direct the 
University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by him and if the 
Governing Board is unable to implement such a direction withi n sixty days of its receipt, the Visitor may, 
after considering the reasons, if any, communicated by the Governing Board for its inability to comply 
with such directions, make or amend the Statutes suitably.  11 
 29. Ordinances. —(1) Subject to the provisions of  this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of students, the courses of study and fees therefor, the qualifications pertaining 
to degrees, diplomas, certificates and other cours es, the conditions for the grant of fellowships, 
awards and the like;  
(b) the conduct of examinations, including the terms and conditions and manner of appointment 
of examiners;  
(c) any other matter which by this Act or the Statutes is to be, or may be, pr ovided for by the 
Ordinances.  
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice -Chancellor with the previous approval of the 
Governing Board and the Ordinances so made may be amended, repealed or added to at any time by the 
Governing Board, in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.  
30. Regulations. —The authorities of the University may make regulations consistent with this Act, 
the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business and that of the committees, if any, 
appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances, in the manner 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
31. Annual report. —(1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the directions of 
the Governing Board which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the University towar ds 
the fulfilment of its objectives.  
(2) The annual report so prepared shall be submitted to the Visitor on or before such date as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(3) A copy of the annual report so prepared shall also be submitted to the Member States a nd 
exhibited on the website of the University.  
32. Annual accounts, etc. —(1) The annual accounts and the balance sheet of the University shall be 
prepared under the directions of the Governing Board and shall, once at least every year, and at intervals 
of not more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) A copy of the accounts together with the audit report shall be submitted to the Visitor along with 
the observations, if any, of the Governing Board.  
(3) Any obser vations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall be brought to notice of the 
Governing Board and the views of the Governing Board, if any, on such observations shall be submitted 
to the Visitor.  
(4) A copy of the annual report and annual accounts t ogether with the audit report, as submitted to the 
Visitor, shall also be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the 
same to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament.  
(5) The audited annual accounts, after having bee n laid before both the Houses of Parliament, shall be 
published in the Gazette of India.  
(6) A copy of the audited annual accounts shall also be submitted to the Member States.  
33. Conditions of service of employees. —(1) Every employee of the University sh all be appointed 
under a written contract, which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be furnished 
to the employee concerned.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any employee shall, at the 
request  of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by 
the Governing Board, one member nominated by the employee concerned and an umpire appointed by the 
Visitor.  
(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final, an d no suit shall lie in any civil court in respect of the 
matters decided by the Tribunal.  12 
 (4) Every request made by an employee under sub -section ( 2), shall be deemed to be a submission to 
arbitration upon the terms of this section within the meaning of th e Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996  
(26 of 1996) . 
(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
34. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students. —(1) Any student 
or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed from the rolls of the University by the 
orders or resolution of the Vice -Chancellor, Disciplinary Committee or Examination Committee, as the 
case may be, and who has been debarred from appearing at t he examinations of the University for more 
than one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt of such orders or copy of such resolution by 
him, appeal to the Governing Board and the Governing Board may confirm, modify or reverse the 
decision of the  Vice -Chancellor or the  Committee, as the case may be.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against a student shall, 
at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of                      
sub-sections ( 2), (3), (4) and ( 5) of section 33 shall, as far as may be, apply to a reference made under this 
sub-section.  
35. Right to appeal. —Every employee or student of the University or of a School of Studies or 
Centre or Institu tion maintained by the University or admitted to its privileges shall, notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, have a right to appeal within such time as may be prescribed by the 
Statutes, to the Governing Board against the decision of any officer or authority of the University or of 
the Principal or the management of any School of Studies or Centre or an Institution, as the case may be, 
and thereupon the Governing Board may confirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed against.  
36. Provident and  pension funds. —The University shall constitute for the benefit of its employees 
such provident or pension fund or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit in such manner and 
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
37. Dis putes as to the constitution of authorities and bodies. —If any question arises as to whether 
any person has been duly nominated or appointed as, or is entitled to be a member of any authority or 
other body of the University, the matter shall be referred to  the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be 
final.  
38. Filling of casual vacancies. —All the casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio  
members) of any authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be convenient, 
by the person or body who appoints, nominates or co -opts the members whose place has become vacant 
and any person so appointed, elected or co -opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority 
or body for the residue of the term for which the pe rson whose place he fills would have been a member.  
39. Proceedings of authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies. —No act or proceedings of 
any authority or any other body of the University shall be invalid merely by reason of the existence of any 
vacancy or vacancies among its members.  
40. Protection of action taken in good faith. —No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
any officer or employee of the University for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
41. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Gazette of  India, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of three ye ars 
from the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
42. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be la id 
before Parliament. —(1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be published 
in the Gazette of India and the website of the University.  13 
 (2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid, both the Houses agree in 
making any modification in the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree that the Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation should not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall  thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that Statute, Ordinance or Regulati on. 
43. Transitional provisions. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the Statutes, — 
(a) the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Governing Board and 
each of the said officers shall hold office for a term of  three years;  
(b) the first Board of School of Studies shall consist of not more than eleven members, who shall 
be nominated by the Governing Board and they shall hold office for a term of three years;  
(c) the  first Academic Council shall consist of not more than nineteen members, who shall be 
nominated by the Governing Board and they shall hold of fice for a term of three years:  
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or authorities, the same s hall be filled by 
appointment or nomination, as the case may be, by the Governing Board, and the person so appointed 
or nominated shall hold office for so long as the officer or member in whose place he is appointed or 
nominated would have held office, if such vacancy had not occurred.  
44. Repeal of University of Nalanda Act. —(1) The University of Nalanda Act, 2007                                   
(Bihar Act 18 of 2007)  is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, — 
(a) all appointments made, orders issued, degrees and other academic distinctions conferred, 
diplomas and certificates awarded, privileges granted, or other things done under the University of 
Nalanda Act, 2007  (Bihar Act 18 of 2007) , shall be deemed to have been respectively made, issued,  
conferred, awarded, granted or done under the corresponding provisions of this Act and, except as 
otherwise provided by or under this Act or the Statutes, continue in force unless and until they are 
superseded by any order made under this Act or the Statu tes; and  
(b) all proceedings of Selection Committees for the appointment or promotion of teachers that 
took place before the commencement of this Act and all actions of the Governing Body in respect of 
the recommendations of such Selection Committees where  no orders of appointment on the basis 
thereof were passed before the commencement of this Act shall, notwithstanding that the procedure 
for selection has been modified by this Act, be deemed to have been valid but further proceeding in 
connection with suc h pending selections shall be taken in accordance with the provisions of this Act 
and be continued from the stage where they stood immediately before such commencement, except if 
the concerned authorities take, with the approval of the Visitor, a decision to the contrary.  
--------------------------The National Green Tribunal Act, 2010--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL GREEN TRIBUNAL ACT, 2010  
_________________  
  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE TRIBUNAL  
3. Establishment of Tribunal.  
4. Composition  of Tribunal.  
5. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson, Judicial Member and Expert Member.  
6. Appointment of Chairperson, Judicial Member and Expert Member.  
7. Term of office and other conditions of service of Chairperson, Judicial Member and Expert 
Member.  
8. Resignation.  
9. Salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service.  
10. Removal and suspension of Chairperson, Judicial Member and Expert Member.  
 10A. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Chairperson, Judicial Member and Expert 
Member.  
11. To act as Chairperson of Tribunal or to discharge his functions in certain circumstances.  
12. Staff of Tribunal.  
13. Financial and administrative powers of Chairperson.  
 
CHAPTER III  
JURISDICTION, POWER S AND PROCEEDINGS OF THE TRIBUNAL  
14. Tribunal to settle disputes.  
15. Relief, compensation and restitution.  
16. Tribunal to have appellate jurisdiction.  
17. Liability to pay relief or compensation in certain cases.  
18. Application or appeal to Tribunal.  
19. Procedure and powers of Tribunal.  
20. Tribunal to  apply certain principles.  
21. Decision to  be taken by majority.  
22. Appeal to Supreme Court.  
23. Cost.  
24. Deposit of amount payable for damage to environment.  
25. Execution of award or order or decision of Tribunal.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
PENAL TY 
26. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Tribunal.  
27. Offences by companies.  
28. Offences by Government Department.  2 
  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS  
29. Bar of jurisdiction.  
30. Cognizance of offences.  
31. Members and staff of Tribunal to be public servants.  
32. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
33. Act to have overriding effect.  
34. Power  to amend Schedule I.  
35. Power to make rules.  
36. Amendment of certain enactments.  
37. Power to remove difficulties.  
38. Repeal and savings.  
 
SCHEDULE I . 
SCHEDULE II . 
SCHEDULE III .  3 
 THE NATIONAL GREEN TRIBUNAL ACT, 2010  
ACT NO. 19 OF 2010  
[2nd June , 2010.]  
An Act to provide for the establishment of a National Green Tribunal for the effective and 
expeditious disposal of cases relating to environmental protection and conservation of forests 
and other natural resources including enforcement of any legal right relating to  environment 
and giving relief and compensation for damages to persons and property and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
AND WHEREAS  India is a party to the decisions taken at the United Nations Conference on the Human 
Environment hel d at Stockholm in June, 1972, in which India participated, calling upon the States to take 
appropriate steps for the protection and improvement of the human environment;  
AND WHEREAS  decisions were taken at the United Nations Conference on Environment and 
Development held at Rio de Janeiro  in June, 1992, in which India participated, calling upon the States to 
provide effective access to judicial and administrative proceedings, including redress and remedy and to 
develop national laws regarding liability and compensation for the victims of pollution and other 
environmental damage;  
AND WHEREAS  in the judicial pronouncement in India, the right to healthy environment has been 
construed as a part of the right to life under article 21 of the Constitution;  
AND WHERE AS it is considered expedient to implement the decisions taken at the aforesaid 
conferences and to have a National Green Tribunal in view of the involvement of multi -disciplinary 
issues relating to the environment.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -first Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the National Green Tribunal Act, 
2010.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
 (a) "accident" means an accident involving a fortuitous or sudden or unintended occurrence 
while han dling any hazardous substance or equipment, or plant, or vehicle resulting in continuous or 
intermittent or repeated exposure to death, of, or, injury to, any person or damage to any property or 
environment but does not include an accident by reason only o f war or civil disturbance;  
(b) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the National Green Tribunal;  
(c) "environment" includes water, air and land and the inter -relationship, which exists among and 
between water, air and land and human beings, other living  creatures, plants, micro -organism and 
property;  
(d) "Expert Member" means a member of the Tribunal who, is appointed as such, and holds 
qualifications specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 5, and, is not a Judicial Member;  
(e) "handling", in relation to  any hazardous substance, means the manufacture, processing, 
treatment, package, storage, transportation, use, collection, destruction, conversion, offering for sale, 
transfer or the like of such hazardous substance;  
                                                           
1. 18 th October, 2010, vide notification No. S.O 2569(E), dated 18 th October, 2010, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, s ec. 3( ii).  4 
 (f) "hazardous substance" means any sub stance or preparation which is defined as hazardous 
substance in the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986  (29 of 1986) , and exceeding such quantity as 
specified or may be specified by the Central Government under the Public Liability Insurance Act, 
1991  (6 of 1991) ; 
(g) "injury" includes permanent, partial or total disablement or sickness resulting out of an 
accident;  
(h) "Judicial Member" means a member of the Tribunal who is qualified to be appointed as such 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 5 and includes t he Chairperson;  
(i) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(j) "person" includes — 
(i) an individual,  
(ii) a Hindu undivided family,  
(iii) a company,  
(iv) a firm,  
(v) an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated or not,  
(vi) trustee of a trust,  
(vii) a local authority, and  
(viii) every artificial juridical person, not falling within any of the preceding sub -clauses;  
(k) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(l) "Schedule" means Schedules I, II and III appended to this Act;  
(m) "substantial question relating to environment" s hall include an instance where, — 
(i) there  is a direct violation of a specific statutory environmental o bligation by a person by 
which,— 
(A) the community at large other than an individual or group of individuals is affected or 
likely to be affected by the environmental consequences; or  
(B) the gr avity of damage to the environment or property is substantial; or  
(C) the damage to public health is broadly measurable;  
(ii) the environmental consequences relate to a specific activity or a point source of pollution;  
(n) "Tribunal" means the National Gre en Tribunal established under section 3;  
(o) "workman" has the meaning assigned to it in the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923              
(8 of 1923) .  
(2) The words and expressions used in this Act but not defined herein and defined in the Water 
(Preventi on and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 (6 of 1974) , the Water (Prevention and Contr ol of 
Pollution) Cess Act, 1977 (36 of 1977) , the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 (69 of 1980) , the Air 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 (14 of 1981) , the Env ironment (Protection) Act, 1986    
(29 of 1986) , the Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991  (6 of 1991)  and the  Biological Diversity Act, 2002  
(18 of 2003) and other Acts relating to environment shall have the meaning, respectively, assigned to 
them in those Acts.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE  TRIBUNAL  
3. Establishment of Tribunal .—The Central Government shall, by notification, establish, with effect 
from such date as may be specified therein, a Tribunal to be known as the National Green Tribunal to 
exercise  the jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on such Tribunal by or under this Act.  
4. Composition of Tribunal .—(1) The Tribunal shall consist of — 
(a) a full time Chairperson;  5 
 (b) not  less than ten but subject to maximum of twenty full time Judicial Members as the Central 
Government may, from time to time, notify;  
(c) not less than ten but subject to maximum of twenty full time Expert Members, as the Central 
Government may, from time t o time, notify.  
(2) The Chairperson of the Tribunal may, if considered necessary, invite any one or more person 
having specialised knowledge and experience in a particular case before the Tribunal to assist the 
Tribunal in that case.  
 (3) The Central Gover nment may, by notification, specify the ordinary place or places of sitting of 
the Tribunal, and the territorial jurisdiction falling under each such place of sitting.  
(4) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Chairperson of the Tribunal, ma ke rules 
regulating generally the practices and proc edure of the Tribunal including — 
(a) the rules as to the persons who shall be entitled to appear before the Tribunal;  
(b) the rules as to the procedure for hearing applications and appeals and other matte rs [including 
the circuit procedure for hearing at a place other than the ordinary place of its sitting falling within the 
jurisdiction referred to in sub -section ( 3)], pertaining to the applications and appeals;  
(c) the  minimum number of Members who shall hear the applications and appeals in respect of 
any class or classes of applications and appeals:  
Provided that the number of Expert Members shall, in hearing an application or appeal, be equal 
to the number of Judicial  Members hearing such application or appeal;  
(d) rules relating to transfer of cases by the Chairperson from one place of sitting (including the 
ordinary place of sitting) to other place of sitting.  
5. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson, Judi cial Member and Expert Member .—(1) 
A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairperson or Judicial Member of the Tribunal 
unless he is, or has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court of India or Chief Justice of a High Court:  
Provided that a person who is or has been a Judge of the High Court shall also be qualified to be 
appointed as a Judicial Member.  
 (2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as an Expert Member, unless he, — 
(a) has a degree in Master of Science (in physical sciences or life sciences) with a Doctorate 
degree or Master of Engineering or Master of Technology and has an experience of fifteen years in 
the relevant field including five years practical experience in the field of environment and forests 
(including pollution cont rol, hazardous substance management, environment impact assessment, 
climate change management, biological diversity management and forest conservation) in a reputed 
National level institution; or  
(b) has administrative experience of fifteen years including  experience of five years in dealing 
with environmental matters in the Central or a State Government or in a reputed National or State 
level institution.  
(3) The Chairperson, Judicial Member and Expert Member of the Tribunal shall not hold any other 
office  during their tenure as such.  
(4) The Chairperson and other Judicial and Expert Members shall not, for a period of two years from 
the date on which they cease to hold office, accept any employment in, or connected with the 
management or administration of, any person who has been a party to a proceeding before the Tribunal 
under this Act:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to any employment under the Central 
Government or a State Government or local authority or in any statutory auth ority or any corporation 
established by or under any Central, State or Provincial Act or a Government company as defined in 
section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) . 6 
 6. Appointment of Chairperson, Judi cial Member and Expert Member .—(1) Subject to  the 
provisions of section 5, the Chairperson, Judicial Members and Expert Members of the Tribunal shall be 
appointed by the Central Government.  
(2) The Chairperson shall be appointed by the Central Government in consultation with the Chief 
Justice of Indi a. 
(3) The Judicial Members and Expert Members of the Tribunal shall be appointed on the 
recommendations of such Selection Committee and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
7. Term of office and other conditions of service of Chairperson, Judic ial Member and Expert 
Member .—The Chairperson, Judicial Member and Expert Member of the Tribunal shall hold office as 
such for a term of five years from the date on which they enter upon their office, but shall not be eligible 
for re -appointment:  
Provided that in case a person, who is or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court, has been appointed 
as Chairperson or Judicial Member of the Tribunal, he shall not hold office after he has attained the age of 
seventy years:  
Provided further that in case a person, who is or  has been the Chief Justice of a High Court, has been 
appointed as Chairperson or Judicial Member of the Tribunal, he shall not hold office after he has attained 
the age of sixty -seven years:  
Provided also that in case a person, who is or has been a Judge of a High Court, has been appointed as 
Judicial Member of the Tribunal, he shall not hold office after he has attained the age of sixty -seven 
years:  
Provided also that no Expert Member shall hold office after he has attained the age of sixty -five 
years.  
8. Resignation .—The Chairperson, Judicial Member and Expert Member of the Tribunal may, by 
notice in writing under their hand addressed to the Central Government, resign their office.  
9. Salaries, allowances and other ter ms and conditions of service .—The sal aries and allowances 
payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement 
benefits) of, the Chairperson, Judicial Member and Expert Member of the Tribunal shall be such as may 
be prescribed:  
Provided t hat neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson, Judicial Member and Expert Member shall be varied to their disadvantage after their 
appointment.  
10. Removal and suspension of Chairperson, Judic ial Mem ber and Expert Member .—(1) The 
Central Government may, in consultation with the Chief Justice of India, remove from office of the 
Chairperson or Judicial Member of  the Tribunal, who, — 
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) has  been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude; or  
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his funct ions; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest.  
(2) The Chairperson or Judicial Member shall not be removed from his office except by an order 
made by the Central Government after an inquir y made by a Judge of the Supreme Court in which such 
Chairperson or Judicial Member has been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges.  
(3) The Central Government may suspend from offi ce the Chairperson or Judicial Member in respect 
of whom a reference of conducting an inquiry has been made to the Judge of the Supreme Court under 7 
 sub-section ( 2), until the Central Government passes an order on receipt of the report of inquiry made by 
the Judge of the Supreme Court on such reference.  
(4) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for inquiry referred to in  
sub-section ( 2). 
(5) The Expert Member may be removed from his office by an order of the Central Government on 
the grounds specified in sub -section ( 1) and in accordance with the procedure as may be notified by the 
Central Government:  
Provided that the Expert Member shall not be removed unless he has been given an opportunity of 
being heard in the matter.  
1[10A.  Qual ifications, terms and conditions of service of Chairperson, Judicial Member and 
Expert Member .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the qualifications,  appointment, term 
of office, salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and other  terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson, Judicial Member and Expert Member  of the Tribunal appointed after the commencement of 
Part XIV of Chapter VI of the  Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall be governed by the provisions of 
section 184 of that Act:  
Provided that the Chairperson, Judicial Member and Expert Member appointed  before the 
commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017, shall  continue to be governed by the 
provisions of this Act, and the rules made thereunder  as if the pro visions of section 184 of the Finance 
Act, 2017 had not come into force.]  
11. To act as Chairperson of Tribunal or to discharge his funct ions in certain             
circumstances .— In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairper son of the 
Tribunal, by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, such Judicial Member of the Tribunal as the 
Central Government may, by notification, authorise in this behalf, shall act as the Chairperson until the 
date on which a new Chairperson is appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
12. Staff of Tribunal .—(1) The Central Government shall determine the nature and categories of the 
officers and other employees required to assist the Tribunal in the discharge of its functions.  
(2) The recruitment of the officers and other employees of the Tribunal shall be made by the 
Chairperson in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) The officers and other employees of the Tribunal shall discharge their functions under the general 
superintendence  of the Chairperson.  
(4) The salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other employees of the 
Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed.  
13. Financial and administ rative powers of Chairperson .—The Chairperson of the Tribunal shall 
exercise such financial and administrative powers as may be vested in him under the rules made by the 
Central Government:  
Provided that the Chairperson may delegate such of his financial and administrative powers, as he 
may think fit, to any Judicial  Member or Expert Member or officer of the Tribunal subject to the 
condition that the Member or such officer, while exercising such delegated power, continues to act under 
the direction, control and supervision of the Chairperson.  
CHAPTER III  
JURISDICTION,  POWERS AND PROCEEDINGS OF THE TRIBUNAL  
14. Tribunal to settle disputes .—(1) The Tribunal shall have the jurisdiction over all civil cases 
where a substantial question relating to environment (including enforcement of any legal right relating to 
environment), is involved and such question arises out of the implementation of the enactments specified 
in Schedule I.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 182 (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).  8 
 (2) The Tribunal shall hear the disputes arising from the questions referred to in sub -section ( 1) and 
settle such disputes and pass ord er thereon.  
(3) No application for adjudication of dispute under this section shall be entertained by the Tribunal 
unless it is made within a period of six months from the date on which the cause of action for such dispute 
first arose:  
Provided that the Tr ibunal may, if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from filing the application within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further period not exceeding 
sixty days.  
15. Relief, compensation and restitution .—(1) The  Tribunal may, by an order, provide, —  
(a) relief and compensation to the victims of pollution and other environmental damage arising 
under the enactments specified in the Schedule I (including accident occurring while handling any 
hazardous substance);  
(b) for restitution of property damaged;  
(c) for restitution of the environment for such area or areas,  
as the Tribunal may think fit.  
(2) The relief and compensation and restitution of property and environment referred to in clauses ( a), 
(b) and ( c) of sub-section ( 1) shall be in addition to the relief paid or payable under the Public Liability 
Insurance Act, 1991  (6 of 1991) . 
(3) No application for grant of any compensation or relief or restitution of property or environment 
under this section shall be entertained by the Tribunal unless it is made within a period of five years from 
the date on which the cause for such compensation or relief first arose:  
Provided that the Tribunal may, if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient caus e 
from filing the application within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further period not exceeding 
sixty days.  
(4) The Tribunal may, having regard to the damage to public health, property and environment, divide 
the compensation or relief pay able under separate heads specified in Schedule II so as to provide 
compensation or relief to the claimants and for restitution of the damaged property or environment, as it 
may think fit.  
(5) Every claimant of the compensation or relief under this Act sha ll intimate to the Tribunal about 
the application filed to, or, as the case may be, compensation or relief received from, any other court or 
authority.  
16. Tribunal to  have appellate jurisdiction .—Any person aggrieved by, — 
(a) an order or decision, made, on or after the commencement of the National Green Tribunal 
Act, 2010, by the appellate authority under section 28 of the Water (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act, 1974  (6 of 1974) ; 
(b) an order passed, on or after the commencement of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010, by 
the State Government under section 29 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974  
(6 of 1974) ; 
(c) directions issued, on or after the commencement of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010, by 
a Board, under sec tion 33A of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974  (6 of 1974) ; 
(d) an order or decision made, on or after the commencement of the National Green Tribunal Act, 
2010, by the appellate authority under section 13 of the Water (Prevention an d Control of Pollution) 
Cess Act, 1977  (36 of 1977) ; 
(e) an order or decision made, on or after the commencement of the National Green Tribunal Act, 
2010, by the State Government or other authority under section 2 of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 
1980  (69 of 1980) ; 9 
 (f) an order or decision, made, on or after the commencement of the National Green Tribunal Act, 
2010, by the Appellate Authority under section 31 of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) 
Act, 1981  (14 of 1981) ; 
(g) any direction issued,  on or after the commencement of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010, 
under section 5 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986  (29 of 1986) ; 
(h) an order made, on or after the commencement of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010, 
granting environmental  clearance in the area in which any industries, operations or processes or class 
of industries, operations and processes shall not be carried out or shall be carried out subject to certain 
safeguards under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986  (29 of 1986 ); 
(i) an order made, on or after the commencement of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010, 
refusing to grant environmental clearance for carrying out any activity or operation or process under 
the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986  (29 of 1986) ; 
(j) any determination of benefit sharing or order made, on or after the commencement of the 
National Green Tribunal Act, 2010, by the National Biodiversity Authority or a State Biodiversity 
Board under the provisions of the Biological Diversity Act, 2002  (18 of 20 03), 
may, within a period of thirty days from the date on which the order or decision or direction or 
determination is communicated to him, prefer an appeal to the Tribunal:  
Provided that the Tribunal may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevente d by sufficient cause 
from filing the appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed under this section within a further period 
not exceeding sixty days.  
17. Liability to pay relief or compensation in certain cases .—-(1) Where death of, or injury to, any 
person (other than a workman) or damage to any property or environment has resulted from an accident 
or the adverse impact of an activity or operation or process, under any enactment specified in Schedule I, 
the person responsible shall be liable to pa y such relief or compensation for such death, injury or damage, 
under all or any of the heads specified in Schedule II, as may be determined by the Tribunal.  
(2) If the death, injury or damage caused by an accident or the adverse impact of an activity or 
operation or process under any enactment specified in Schedule I cannot be  attributed to any single 
activity or operation or process but is the combined or resultant effect of several such activities, 
operations and processes, the Tribunal may, apportion the liability for relief or compensation amongst 
those responsible for such activities, operations and processes on an equitable basis.  
(3) The Tribunal shall, in case of an accident, apply the principle of no fault.  
18. Application or appeal to Tribunal .—-(1) Each application under sections 14 and 15 or an 
appeal under section 16 shall, be made to the Tribunal in such form, contain such particulars, and, be 
accompanied by such documents and such fees as may be prescribed.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provi sions contained in section 16, an application for grant of relief or 
compensation or settlement of dispute may be made to the Tribunal by — 
 (a) the person, who has sustained the injury; or  
(b) the owner of the property to which the damage has been caused; or 
(c) where death has resulted from the environmental damage, by all or any of the legal 
representatives of the deceased; or  
(d) any agent duly authorised  by such person or owner of such property or all or any of the legal 
representatives of the deceased, as the case may be; or  
(e) any person aggrieved, including any representative body or organisation; or  
(f) the Central Government or a State Government or  a Union territory Administration or the 
Central Pollution Control Board or a State Pollution Control Board or a Pollution Control Committee 
or a local authority, or any environmental authority constituted or established under the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986  (29 of 1986)  or any other law for the time being in force:  10 
 Provided that where all the legal representatives of the deceased have not joined in any such 
application for compensation or relief or settlement of dispute, the application shall be mad e on 
behalf of, or, for the benefit of all the legal representatives of the deceased and the legal 
representatives who have not so joined shall be impleaded as respondents to the application:  
Provided further that the person, the owner, the legal represent ative, agent, representative body or 
organisation shall not be entitled to make an application for grant of relief or compensation or 
settlement of dispute if such person, the owner, the legal representative, agent, representative body or 
organisation have  preferred an appeal under section 16.  
(3) The application, or as the case may be, the appeal filed before the Tribunal under this Act shall be 
dealt with by it as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the 
application, o r, as the case may be, the appeal, finally within six months from the date of filing of the 
application, or as the case may be, the appeal, after providing the parties concerned an opportunity to be 
heard.  
19. Procedure and powers of Tribunal .—-(1) The Tri bunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid 
down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908)  but shall be guided by the principles of natural 
justice.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own procedure.  
(3) The Tribunal shall also not be bound by the rules of evidence contained in the Indian Evidence 
Act, 1872  (1 of 1872) . 
(4) The Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act, the same 
powers as are vested in  a civil court under th e Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , while trying a 
suit, in respect of the following matters, namely :— 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and produ ction of documents ; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 18 72  
(1 of 1872) , requisitioning any public record or document or copy of such record or document from 
any office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examina tion of witnesses or documents;  
(f) reviewing its decision;  
(g) dismissing an application for default or deciding it ex parte ; 
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any application for default or any order passe d by it  
ex parte ; 
 (i) pass an interim order (including granting an injunction or stay) after providing the parties 
concerned an opportunity to be heard, on any application made or appeal filed under this Act;  
(j) pass  an order requiring any person to cease and desist from committing or causing any 
violation of any enactment specified in Schedule I;  
(k) any other matter which may be prescribed . 
(5) All proceedings before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be the judicial proceedings within the 
meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228 for the purposes of secti on 196 of the Indian Penal Code                 
(45 of 1860) and the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of  section 195 and 
Chapter XXVI of the C ode of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
20. Tribunal to apply certain princip les.—The Tribunal shall, while passing any order or decision 
or award, apply the principles of sustainable development, the precautionary principle and the polluter 
pays prin ciple.  11 
 21. Decision to be taken by majority. —-The decision of the Tribunal by majority of Members shall 
be binding:  
Provided that if there is a difference of opinion among the Members hearing an application or appeal, 
and the opinion is equally divided, the Chairperson shall hear (if he has not heard earlier such application 
or appeal) such application or appeal and decide:  
Provided further that where the Chairperson himself has heard such application or appeal along  with 
other Members of the Tribunal, an d if there is a difference of opinion among the Members in such cas es 
and the opinion is equally di vided, he shall refer the matter to other Members of the Tribunal who shall 
hear such application or appeal and decide.  
22. Appeal to Supreme Court .—-Any per son aggrieved by any award, decision or order of the 
Tribunal, may, file an appeal to the Supreme Court, within ninety days from the date of communication of 
the award, decision or order of the Tribunal, to him, on any one or more of the grounds specified in 
section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) : 
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain any appeal after the expiry of ninety days, if it is 
satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal.  
23. Cost .—-(1) While disposing of an application or an appeal under this Act, the Tribunal shall have 
power to make such order as to costs, as it may consider necessary.  
(2) Where the Tribunal holds that a claim is not maintainable, or is false or vexatious , and such claim 
is disallowed, in whole or in part, the Tribunal may, if it so thinks fit, after recording its reasons for 
holding such claim to be false or vexatious, make an order to award costs, including lost benefits due to 
any interim injunction.  
24. Deposit of amount pa yable for damage to environment .—-(1) Where any amount by way of 
compensation or relief is ordered to be paid under any award or order made by the Tribunal on the ground 
of any damage to environment, that amount shall be remitted to  the authority specified under  
sub-section ( 3) of section 7A of the Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991  (6 of 1991) , for being credited to 
the Environmental Relief Fund established under that section.  
(2) The amount of compensation or relief credited to the Environmental Relief Fund under  
sub-section ( 1), may, notwithstanding anything contained in the Publi c Liability Insurance Act, 1991  
(6 of 1991) , be utilised by such persons or authority, in such manner and for such purposes relating to 
environment, as may be prescribed.  
25. Execution of award o r order or decision of Tribunal .—(1) An award or order or decision of 
the Tribunal under this Act shall be executable by the Tribunal as a decree  of a civil court, and for this 
purpose, the Tribunal shall have all the powers of a civil court.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Tribunal may transmit any order or 
award made by it to a civil court having local jurisdiction and such civil court shall execute the order or 
award as if it were a decree made by that court.  
(3) Where the person responsible, for death of, or injury to any person or damage to any property and 
environment, against whom the award or order is made by t he Tribunal, fails to make the payment or 
deposit the amount as directed by the Tribunal within the period so specified in the award or order, such 
amount, without prejudice to the filing of complaint for prosecution for an offence under this Act or any 
other law for the time being in force, shall be recoverable from the aforesaid person as arrears of land 
revenue or of public demand.  
CHAPTER IV  
PENALTY  
26. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Tribunal .—-(1) Whoever, fails to comply with 
any order or award or decision of the Tribunal under this Act, he shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to ten crore rupees, or with 
both and in case the failure or contravention continues, with additional fine which may extend to         12 
 twenty -five thousand rupees for every day during which such failure or contravention continues after 
conviction for the first such failure or contravention:  
Provided t hat in case a company fails to comply with any order or award or a decision of the Tribunal 
under this Act, such company shall be punishable with fine which may extend to twenty -five crore rupees, 
and in case the failure or contravention continues, with ad ditional fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees for every day during which such failure or contravention continues after conviction for the first 
such failure or contravention.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the C ode of Criminal Procedure, 197 3 (2 of 1974) , every 
offence under this Act shall be deemed to be non -cognizable within the meaning of the said Code.  
27. Offences by companies .—-(1) Where any offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was directly in charge of, and was 
responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the compan y, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he prov es that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by t he company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is  attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or othe r officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
 (a) "company" means any body  corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
 (b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.  
28. Offences by Government Department .—-(1) Where any Department of the Government fails to 
comply with any order or award or decision of the Tribunal under this Act, the Head of the Department 
shall be deemed to be guilty of such failure and shall be liable to be proceeded against for having 
committed an offence under this Act and punished accordingly:  
Provided that not hing contained in this section shall render such Head of the Department liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwith standing anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a Department of the Government and it is proved that the offence has been committed with 
the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect o n the part of any officer, other than the 
Head of the Department, such officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable 
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
29. Bar of jurisdiction .—-(1) With effect from the date of establishment of the Tribunal under this 
Act, no civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any appeal in respect of any matter, which the 
Tribunal is empowered to determine under its appellate jurisdiction.   
(2) No civil  court shall have jurisdiction to settle dispute or entertain any question relating to any 
claim for granting any relief or compensation or restitution of property damaged or environment damaged 
which may be adjudicated upon by the Tribunal, and no injunct ion in respect of any action taken or to be 
taken by or before the Tribunal in respect of the settlement of such dispute or any such claim for granting 13 
 any relief or compensation or restitution of property damaged or environment damaged shall be granted 
by the civil court.  
30. Cognizance of offences .—-(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act 
except on a complaint made by — 
(a) the Central Government or any authority or officer authorised in this behalf by that 
Government; or  
(b) any p erson who has given notice of not less than sixty days in such manner as may be 
prescribed, of the alleged offence and of his intention to make a complaint, to the Central 
Government or the authority or officer authorised as aforesaid.  
(2) No court inferio r to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or, a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
31. Members and staff of Tribunal to be public servants .—-The Chairperson, the Judicial and 
Expert Members, officers and other employees of the Tribunal shall be deemed to be public servants 
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
32. Protection of action taken in good faith .—-(1) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the employe es of the Central Government or a State Government or any statutory authority, for anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made 
thereunder.  
(2) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Chairperson or, Judicial 
Member or Expert Member of the Tribunal or any other person authorised by the Chairperson or Judicial 
Member or the Expert Member for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.  
33. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act, shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having 
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.  
34. Power to amend Schedule I .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, amend the 
Schedule I by including therein any other Act, enacted by Parliament having regard to the objective of 
environmental protection and conservation of natural resources, or omitting therefrom any Act al ready 
specified therein and on the date of publication of such notification, such Act shall be deemed to be 
included in or, as the case may be, omitted from the Schedule I.  
(2) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub -section ( 1), shall  be laid in draft 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the ses sion or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
disapproving the issue of the notification or both Houses  agree in making any modification in the 
notification, the notification shall not be issued or, as the case may be, shall be issued onl y in such 
modified form as may be agreed upon by both the Houses.  
35. Power to make rules .—-(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prej udice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
 (a) rules as to the persons who shall be entitled to appear before the Tribunal under clause ( a) of 
sub-section ( 4) of section 4;  
(b) the procedure for hearing applications and appeals and other matters pertaining to the 
applications and appeals under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 4) of section 4;  
(c) the minimum number of members who shall hear the applications and appeals in respect of 
any class or classes of applications and appeals under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 4) of section 4;  14 
 (d) the transfer of cases by the Chairperson from one place of sitting (including the ordinary place 
of sitting) to other place of sitting;  
(e) the selection c ommittee and the manner of appointment of the Judicial Member and Expert 
Member of the Tribunal under sub -section ( 3) of section 6;  
(f) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service (including 
pension, gratuity and other  retirement benefits) of, the Chairperson, Judicial Member and Expert 
Member of the Tribunal under section 9;  
(g) the procedure for inquiry of the charges against the Chairperson or Judicial Member of the 
Tribunal under sub -section ( 4) of section 10;  
(h) the recruitment of officers and other employees of the Tribunal under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 12; and the salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers and other 
employees of the Tribunal under sub -section ( 4) of that section;  
(i) the financial and administrative powers to be exercised by the Chairperson of the Tribunal 
under section 13;  
(j) the form of application or appeal, the particulars which it shall contain and the documents to 
be accompanied by and the fees payable under sub-section ( 1) of section 18;  
(k) any such matter in respect of which the Tribunal shall have powers of a civil court under 
clause ( k) of sub -section ( 4) of section 19;  
(l) the  manner and the purposes for which the amount of compensation or relief credited to the 
Environment Relief Fund shall be utilised under sub -section ( 2) of section 24;  
 (m) the manner of giving notice to make a complaint under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 30;  
(n) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by rules or in respect of which 
provision is to be made by rules.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is ma de, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the  successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, howeve r, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
36. Amendment of certain enactments .—-The enactments specified in the Schedule III to this Act 
shall be amended in the manner  specified therein and such amendments shall take effect on the date of 
establishment of the Tribunal.  
37. Power to remove difficulties .—-(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government, may, by order pub lished in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from  the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
38. Repeal and savings .—-(1) The National Environment Tribunal Act, 1995  (27 of 1995)  and the 
National Environment Appellate Authority Act, 1997  (22 of 1997)  are hereby repealed (hereinafter 
referred to as the repealed Act).   15 
 (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Acts shall be 
deemed to have been  done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
(3) The National Environment Appellate Authority established under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of 
the National Environmen t Appellate Authority Act, 1997 (22 of 1997) , shall, on the establishme nt of the 
National Green Tribunal under the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010, stand dissolved.  
(4) On the dissolution of the National Environment Appellate Authority established under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 3 of the National Environmen t Appellate Aut hority Act, 1997 (22 of 1997) , the 
persons appointed as the Chairperson, Vice -chairperson and every other person appointed as Member of 
the said National Environment Appellate Authority and holding office as such immediately before the 
establishment of the  National Green Tribunal under the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010, shall vacate 
their respective offices and no such Chairperson, Vice -chairperson and every other person appointed as 
Member shall be entitled to claim any compensation for the premature t ermination of the term of his 
office or of any contract of service.  
(5) All cases pending before the National Environment Appellate Authority established under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 3 of the National Environment Appellate Authority Act, 1997  (22 of 1 997), on 
or before the establishment of the National Green Tribunal under the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010, 
shall, on such establishment, stand transferred to the said National Green Tribunal and the National Green 
Tribunal shall dispose of such cases  as if they were cases filed under that Act.  
(6) The officers or other employees who have been, immediately before the dissolution of the 
National Environment Appellate Authority appointed on deputation basis to the National Environment 
Appellate Authority , shall, on such dissolution, stand reverted to their parent cadre, Ministry or 
Department, as the case may be.  
(7) On the dissolution of the National Environment Appellate Authority, the officers and other 
employees appointed on contract basis under the N ational Environment Appellate Authority and holding 
office as such immediately before such dissolution, shall vacate their respective offices and such officers 
and other employees shall be entitled to claim compensation for three months' pay and allowances  or pay 
and allowances for the  remaining period of service, whichever is less, for the premature termination of 
term of their office under their contract of service.  
(8) The mention of the particular matters referred to in sub -sections ( 2) to ( 7) shall not  be held to 
prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897  (10 of 1897) , 
with regard to the effect of repeal.   16 
 SCHEDULE I  
[See sections 14( 1), 15( 1), 17( 1)(a), 17( 2), 19( 4) (j) and 34( 1)] 
1. The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974;  
2. The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977;  
3. The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980;  
4. The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981;  
5. The Environment (Prote ction) Act, 1986;  
6. The Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991;  
7. The Biological Diversity Act, 2002.   17 
 SCHEDULE II  
[See sections 15( 4) and 17( 1)] 
HEADS UNDER WHICH COMPENSATION OR RELIEF FOR DAMAGE MAY BE CLAIMED  
(a) Death;  
(b) Permanent, temporary, total or partial disability or other injury or sickness;  
(c) Loss of wages due to total or partial disability or permanent or temporary disability;  
(d) Medical expenses incurred for treatment of injuries or sickness;  
(e) Damages to private property;  
(f) Expenses incurred by the Government or any local authority in providing relief, aid and 
rehabilitation to the affected persons;  
(g) Expenses incurred by the Government for any administrative or legal action or to cope with any 
harm or damage, including compensation for environmental degradation and restoration of the 
quality of environment;  
 (h) Loss to the Government or local authority arising out of, or connected with, the activity causing 
any damage;  
(i) Claims on account of any harm, damage or destruction to the fauna including milch and draught 
animals and aquatic fauna;  
(j) Claims on account of any harm, damage or destruction to flora including aquatic flora, crops, 
vegetables, trees and orchards;  
(k) Claims including cost of restoration on account of any harm or damage to environment including 
pollution of soil, air, water, land and eco -systems;  
 (l) Loss and destruction of any property other than private property;  
(m) Loss of business or employment  or both;  
 (n) Any other claim arising out of, or connected with, any activity of handling of hazardous 
substance.   18 
 SCHEDULE III  
(See section 36)  
AMENDMENT TO CERTAIN ENACTMENTS  
PART I  
AMENDMENT TO THE WATER (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION) ACT, 1974  
(6 OF 1974)  
 Insertion of new section 33B .—After section 33A, the following sec tion shall be inserted, namely: — 
Appeal to National Green Tribunal. —"33B.  Any person aggrieved by, — 
(a) an order or decision of the appellate authority under section 28, made on or after the 
commencement of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010; or  
(b) an order passed by the State Government under section 29, on or after the commencement of 
the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010; or   
(c) directions issued under section 33A by a Board, on or after the commencement of the National 
Green Tribunal Act, 2010,  
may file an appeal to the National Green Tribunal established under section 3 of the National Green 
Tribunal Act, 2010, in accordance with the provisions of that Act.".  
PART II  
AMENDMENTS  TO THE  WATER  (PREVENTION  AND  CONTROL  OF POLLUTION ) CESS  ACT, 1977  
(36 OF 1977)  
1. Amendment of section 13. —In section 13, in sub -section ( 4), for the words "shall be final", the  
words, figures and letters "shall, if no appeal has been filed under section 13A, be final" shall be 
substituted.  
2. Insertion of ne w section 13A. —After section 13, the following sec tion shall be inserted, namely: — 
"13A. Ap peal to National Green Tribunal. — Any person aggrieved, by an order or decision of the 
appellate authority made under section 13, on or after the commencement of the National Green 
Tribunal Act, 2010, may file an appeal to the National Green Tribunal established under section 3 of 
the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010, in accordance with the provisions of that Act.".  
PART III  
AMENDMENT TO THE FOREST  (CONSERVATION ) ACT, 1980  
(69 OF 1980)  
Insertion of new section 2A. —After section 2,  the following sec tion shall be inserted, namely: — 
"2A. Appeal to National Green Tribunal. —Any person aggrieved, by an order or decision of the 
State Government or other authority made under section 2, on or after the commencement of the 
National Green Tribunal Act, 2010, may file an appeal to the National Gree n Tribunal established 
under section 3 of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010, in accordance with the provisions of that 
Act.".  
PART IV  
AMENDMENT TO THE AIR  (PREVENTION AND  CONTRO L OF POLLUTION ) ACT, 1981  
(14 OF 1981)  
Insertion of new section 31B. —After  section 31A, the following sec tion shall be inserted, namely: — 
"31B. Appeal to National Green Tribun al.—Any person aggrieved by an order or decision of the 
Appellate Authority under section 31, made on or after the commencement of the National Green 19 
 Tribu nal Act, 2010, may  file an appeal to the National Green Tribunal established under section 3 of 
the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010, in accordance with the provisions of that Act.".  
PART V  
AMENDMENT  TO THE  ENVIRONMENT  (PROTECTION) ACT, 1986  
(29 OF 1986)  
Insertion of new section 5A .—After section 5, the following sec tion shall be inserted, namely: — 
"5A. Appea l to National Green Tribunal. —Any person aggrieved by any directions issued under 
section 5, on or after the commencement of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010, may file an 
appeal to the National Green Tribunal established under section 3 of the National Green Tribunal Act, 
2010, in accordance with the provisions of that Act.".  
PART VI  
AMENDMENTS  TO THE  BIOLOGICAL  DIVERSITY  ACT, 2002  
(18 OF 2003)  
1. Amendment of section 52. —In section 52, after the proviso, the following provisos shall be 
inserted,  namely:— 
"Provided further that nothing contained in this section shall apply on and from the 
commencement of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010:  
 
 Provided also that any appeal pending before the High Court, before the commencement of the 
National Green Tribunal Act, 2010, shall continue to be heard and disposed of by the High Court as if 
the National Green Tribunal had not been established u nder section 3 of the National Green Tribunal 
Act, 2010.".  
 
2. Insertion of new section 52A. —After section 52, the following sec tion shall be inserted, namely: — 
 
"52A. Appe al to National Green Tribunal. —Any person aggrieved by any determination of 
benefit sharing or order of the National Biodiversity Authority or a State Biodiversity Board under 
this Act, on or after the commencement of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010, may file an appeal 
to the National Green Tribunal established under section 3 of th e National Green Tribunal Act, 2010, 
in accordance with the provisions of that Act.".  
--------------------------The Tamil Nadu Legislative Council Act, 2010--------------------------
1 
 THE TAMIL NADU LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL ACT, 2010  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______ ____  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definition . 
3. Creation of Legislative Council for Tamil Nadu . 
4. Amendment of Third Schedule and Fourth Schedule to Act 43 of 1950 . 
5. Amendment of section 15A of Act 43 of 1951 . 
  2 
  
THE TAMIL NADU LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL ACT, 2010  
ACT NO. 16 OF 2010  
[18th May , 2010.]  
An Act to provide for the creation of Legislative Council for the State of Tamil Nadu and for 
matters supplemental, incidental and consequential thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -first Year of the Republic of Indi a as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Legislative Council Act, 2010.  
2. Definition .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, each of the words and expressions 
used herein and not defined but defined in the Representation of the People  Act, 1950 (43 of 1950)  shall 
have the same meaning as in that Act.  
3. Creation of Legisl ative Council for Tamil Nadu .—(1) As from such date as the President may, 
by order appoint, there shall be a Legislative Council for the State of Tamil Nadu; and as from that date, 
in sub -clause ( a) of clause ( 1) of article 16 8, after the word “Karna taka,”, the words “Tamil Nadu ” shall 
be inserted.  
(2) In the said Council, t here shall be 78 seats of which — 
(a) the numbers to be filled by persons elected by the electorates referred to in sub -clauses ( a), (b) 
and ( c) of clause ( 3) of article 171 shall be 26, 7 and 7 respectively;  
(b) the number to be filled by persons elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly of 
Tamil Nadu in accordance with the provisions of sub -clause ( d) of the said clause shall be 26; and  
(c) the number to be filled by persons nominated by the Governor of Tamil Nadu in acc ordance 
with the provisions of sub -clause ( e) of that clause shall be 12.  
(3) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, the President, after consultation with the 
Election Commissi on, shall, by order, determine, — 
(a) the constituencies into whi ch the State of Tamil Nadu shall be divided for the purpose of 
elections to the said Council under each of the sub -clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) of clause ( 3) of article 171;  
 (b) the extent of each constituency; and  
(c) the number of seats to be allotted to ea ch constituency.  
(4) As soon as may be after such determination, steps shall be taken to constitute the said Council in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, the Representation of the People Act, 1950  (43 of 1950)  and 
the Representation of the People Act, 1951  (43 of 1951) . 
4. Amendment of Third Schedule and Fourt h Schedule to Act 43 of 1950 .—In the Represen tation 
of the People Act, 1950, — 
(a) in the  Third Schedule, after entry No. 6 relating to Karnataka, the foll owing e ntry shall be 
inserted, namely: — 
“7. Tamil Nadu  78 26 7 7 26 12”; 
(b) in the Fourth Schedule, after the heading “KARNATAKA ” and the entries thereunder, the 
following heading and ent ries shall be inserted, namely: — 
“TAMIL NADU  
1. Municipalities, as referred to in article 243Q of the Constitution.  
2. Panchayat Union Councils.  
3. Cantonment Boards.  3 
 4.District Panchayats referred to in the Tamil Nadu Panchayat Act, 1994  (Tamil Nadu                  
Act 21 of 1994 ).”. 
5. Amendment of s ection 15A of Act 43 of 1951 .—In section 15A of the Representation of the 
People Act, 1951, after the words and figures “under the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Council Act, 2005  
(1 of 2006) ”, the words and figures “and constituting the Legislative Council of the State of Tami l Nadu 
under the Tamil Nadu Legislative Council Act, 2010 ” shall be inserted . 
_________  
