--------------------------The Coinage Act, 2011--------------------------
1 
 THE COINAGE ACT, 2011  
__________________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF MINTS  
3. Power to establish and abolish Mints.  
 
CHAPTER III  
COINAGE  
4. Denominations, dimensions, designs and composition of coins.  
5. Standard weight and remedy.  
6. Coin when a legal tender.  
7. Decimal system of coinage.  
8. Power to call in coin.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
DIMINISHED, DEFACED AND COUNTERFEIT COINS  
9. Power to certain persons to cu t, diminished or defaced coins.  
10. Power to certain persons to cut counterfeit coins.  
11. Power of Mint to delegate its functions.  
 
CHAPTER V  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
12. Prohibition of making or melting or destruction of coins.  
13. Penalty for contravention of section 12.  
14. Prohibition and penalty for unlawful making, issue or possession of pieces of metal to be used as 
money.  
15. Prohibition and penalty for bringing metal piece for use as coin.  
16. Offences by companies.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
17. Forfeiture.  
18. Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 not to apply to offences under this Act.  
19. Offences to be cognizable, bailable and non -compoundable.  
20. Amendment of Act 2 of 1934.  
21. Offences may be tried summarily.  2 
 SECTIONS  
22. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
23. Power to remove difficulties.  
24. Power  to make rules.  
25. Rules to be laid before Parliament.  
26. Saving of making other coins at Mints.  
27. Repeal and savings.  
28. Continuance of existing coins.   3 
 THE COINAGE ACT, 2011  
ACT NO. 11 OF 2011  
[1st September,  2011.]  
An Act to consolidate the laws relating to coinage and the Mints, the protection of coinage and to 
provide for the prohibition of melting or destruction of coins and prohibit the making or the 
possession thereof for issue and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by P arliament in the Sixty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title , extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Coinage Act, 2011.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .— In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “coin” means any coin which is made of any metal or any other material stamped by the 
Government or any other authority empowered by the Government in this behalf and which is a legal 
tender including commemorative coin and Government of India one rupee note.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that a “coin” does not include the 
credit card, debit card, postal order and e -money issued by any bank, post office or financial 
institution;  
(b) “commemorative coin” means any coin stamped by the Government or any other authority 
empowered by the Government in this behalf to commemorate any specific occasion or event and 
expressed in Indian currency;  
(c) “deface” means any type of clipping, filing, stamping, or such other alteration of the surface 
or shape of a coin as is readily distinguishable from the effects or reasonab le wear;  
(d) “Government” means the Central Government;  
(e) “issue” means to put a coin into circulation for use as money;  
(f) “metal” means any metal, base metal, alloy, gold, silver or any other material which may be 
prescribed by the Government  for the purpose of any coin;  
(g) “Mint” means the Security Printing and Minting Corporation of India Limited formed and 
incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)  or any other organisation established by or 
under the authority of the Government to make a coin by stamping metal;  
(h) “notification” means notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(i) “per cent .” means the percentage of metals prescribed for any coin;  
(j) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(k) “remedy” means variation from the standard weight and fineness;  
(l) “standard weight” means the weight prescribed for any coin.  
  
                                                           
1. 28 th March, 2012, vide notification No. S.O. 628(E ), dated 28 th March, 2012, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, s ec.. 3 (ii). 4 
 CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF MINTS  
3. Power to establish and abolish Mints .—The Government may, by notification, — 
 (a) establish a Mint at any place which may be managed by it or by any other person, which may 
be authorised for this purpose:  
Provided that the Mints established before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to 
have been established by the Government un der this section:  
Provided further that where the Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient in 
the public interest so to do, it may authorise the minting of coins by any organisation or Government 
of any foreign country, within or beyo nd the limits of India and acquire such coins either by way of 
import or otherwise for issue under its authority;  
(b) abolish any Mint.  
CHAPTER III  
COINAGE  
4. Denominations, dimensions, de signs and composition of coins .—Coins may be minted at the 
Mints or at any other place authorised under the proviso to section 3 of such denominations not higher 
than one thousand rupees and of such dimensions and designs and containing such metals or mixed 
metals of such composition or any other material as may be prescri bed by the Government.  
5. Standard weight and remedy .—The standard weight of the coin of any denomination, minted 
under the provisions of section 4, and the remedy allowed in making of such coins, shall be such as may 
be prescribed in this behalf by the Go vernment from time to time.  
6. Coin when a legal tender .—(1) The coins issued under the authority of section 4 shall be a legal 
tender in payment or on account, in case of — 
 (a) a coin of any denomination not lower than one rupee, for any sum not exceeding one 
thousand rupees;  
(b) a half -rupee coin, for any sum not exceeding ten rupees;  
(c) any other coin, for any sum not exceeding one rupee:  
Provided that the coin has not been defaced and has not lost weight so as to be less than such weight 
as ma y be prescribed in its case.  
(2) All new coins in the naya paisa series, designated as such under the notification of the 
Government of India in the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, Number S.R.O. 1120, 
dated the 11th May, 1956 issued pr ior to the commencement of the Indian Coinage (Amendment) Act, 
1964 (17 of 1964), shall continue to be a legal tender in payment or on account, in case of, —  
(a) a half -rupee or fifty naye paise coin, for any sum not exceeding ten rupees;  
(b) any other coi n, for any sum not exceeding one rupee.  
7. Decimal system of coinage .—(1) The rupee shall be divided into one hundred units and any such 
unit may be designated by the Government, by notification, under such name as it thinks fit.  
(2) All references in any enactment or in any notification, rule or order under any enactment or in any 
contract, deed or other instrument to any value expressed in annas, paisa and pies shall be construed as 
references to that value expressed in units refer red to in sub -section ( 1) converted thereto at the rate of 
sixteen anna, sixty -four paise or one hundred and ninety -two pies to one hundred units referred to in sub -
section ( 1). 
(3) All references in any enactment or in any notification, rule or order unde r any enactment or in any 
contract, deed or other instrument to any value in naya paisa or naye paise shall be construed as 
references to that value expressed respectively in units referred to in sub -section ( 1). 5 
 8. Power to call in coin .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 6, the Government may, by 
notification, call in with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification, any coin, of 
whatever date or denomination and on and from the date so specified, such coin sh all cease to be a legal 
tender, save to such extent as may be specified in the notification.  
CHAPTER IV  
DIMINISHED, DEFACED AND COUNTERFEIT COINS  
9. Power to certain persons to cut, diminished or defaced coins .—(1) Where any coin which has 
been minted and  issued by or under the authority of the Government is tendered to any person authorised 
by it to act under this section, and such person has reason to believe that the coin — 
 (a) has been diminished in weight so as to be more than such per cent. below standard weight as 
provided in section 5; or  
(b) has been defaced,  
he shall, by himself or through another person, cut or break the coin.  
(2) A person cutting or breaking coin under the provisions of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) shall 
receive and pay for the coin at its face value.  
(3) A person cutting or breaking coin under the provisions of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) shall 
observe the following procedure, namely: — 
(a) if such person has reason to believe, that the coin has been fraudulently defaced, h e shall 
return the pieces to the person tendering the coin, who shall bear the loss caused by such cutting or 
breaking;  
(b) if such person has reason to believe, that the coin has not been fraudulently defaced, he shall 
receive and pay for the coin at its face value.  
10. Power to certain pe rsons to cut counterfeit coins .—Where any coin minted or issued by or 
under the authority of the Government is tendered to any person authorised by the Government under 
section 9 and such person has reason to believe that  the coin is counterfeit, he shall by himself or through 
another person cut or break the coin, and the tenderer shall bear the loss caused by such cutting or 
breaking.  
11. Power of Mint to delegate its functions .—The Mint may in writing authorise any other  
organisation of the Government to melt withdrawn coins or take any help of such organisation for the said 
purpose.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section “ organisation ” means any Government industrial unit 
or public sector undertaking possessing melting facilities.  
CHAPTER V  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
12. Prohibition of making or m elting or destruction of coins .—(1) No person shall — 
(i) use any metal piece as coin whether stamped or unstamped, intended to be used as money 
except by the authority of the Government, or  
(ii) melt or destroy any coin, or  
(iii) use coin other than as a medium of exchange, or  
(iv) have in his possession, custody or control, — 
(a) any melted coin, whether in the molten state or in a solid state, or  
(b) any coin in a destroyed or mutilated state, or  6 
 (c) coins substantially in excess of his reasonable requirements for the purpose of selling such 
coins for value other than their face value or for melting or for destroying or for disposing these 
coins other than as a medi um of exchange.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of determining the reasonable requirements of coins of a 
person, due regard shall be had to — 
(i) his total daily requirements of coins;  
(ii) the nature of his business, occupation or profession;  
(iii) the mode of his acquisition of coins; and  
(iv) the manner in which, and the place at which, such coins are being possessed, held or 
controlled by him.  
(2) Whoever is found to be in possession of any metal or material which contains alloys in the same 
proportions in  which they have been used in the manufacture of any coin shall be presumed, until the 
contrary is proved, to have contravened the provisions of sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply — 
 (i) to any person who is found in possession of any metal or scraps or scissel, etc., of non -
recyclable coinage metal, which he may so possess as a result of valid disposal by auctions by a Mint;  
(ii) to the Mint, Reserve Bank of India and its authorised agents, and suppliers of coins or coin 
blanks to the extent of orders placed by or under the authority of the Government until their supply or 
completion of orders placed by the Government;  
(iii) to any prospective supplier who intends to supply coin or coin blanks as samples against a 
valid tender documents  purchased by him provided that quantity is in reasonable agreement with 
quantity of samples to be supplied.  
13. Penalty f or contravention of section 12 .—Whoever contravenes any provisions of section 12 
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to seven years and with fine.  
14. Prohibition and penalty for unlawful making, issue or possession of piece s of metal to be 
used as money .—(1) No person shall — 
(a) make or issue or attempt to issue any metal piece except as provided under section 4 for the 
purpose of coin;  
(b) possess, custody or control of any metal piece with the intent to issue the piece for use as 
money for a medium of exchange.  
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be punishable with imprisonment 
which may extend to one year or with fine or with both:  
Provided that if any person convicted under this section is again convicted, he shall be punishable 
with imprisonment which may extend to three years or with fine or with both.  
15. Prohibition and penalty f or bringi ng metal piece for use as coin .—(1) No person shall bring 
by sea or by land or by air into India of any piece of metal to be used as coin except with the authority or 
permission of the Government.  
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be punishable with imprisonment 
which may extend to seven years and with fine.  
16. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of its business, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be 
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  7 
 Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall rend er any person liable to any punishment, 
if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence 
to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding, anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an y offence under this Act has 
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer, such direc tor, manager, secretary or other officer of the company shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company” means any body corporat e and includes a firm, society or other association of 
individuals; and  
(b) “director”, in relation to — 
(i) a firm, means a partner or proprietor of the firm;  
(ii) a society or other association of individuals, means the person who is entrusted, under the 
rules of the society or other association, with the management of the affairs of the society or other 
association of the individuals, as the case may be.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
17. Forfeiture .—Any coin or metal in relation to which any offence under this  Act has been 
committed shall be forfeited to the Government.  
18. Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 not to ap ply to offences under this Act .—Nothing in the 
Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 (20 of 1958) shall apply to offences under this Act.  
19. Offences to  be cognizable , bailable and non -compoundable .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the C ode of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), offences under this Act shall be 
cognizable and bailable, but shall not be compoundable.  
20. Amendment of Act 2 of 1934 .—In the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, — 
 (i) in section 2, in clause ( d), for the words and figures the Indian Coinage Act, 1906 (3 of 1906), 
the words and figures the Coinage Act, 2011shall be substituted;  
(ii) in section 39, for the words and figures "the Indian Coinage Act, 1906 (3 of 1906)", at both 
the places where they occur, the words and figures "the Coinage Act, 2011" shall be substituted.  
21. O ffences may be tried summarily .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 260 of the 
Code of Crimi nal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), offences under this Act may be tried summarily by a 
Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a Metropolitan Magistrate.  
22. Protection  of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
any person in respect of anything which is in good faith done, or intended to be done, under or in 
pursuance of the provisions of this Act.  
23. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Gove rnment may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear it to be necessary or expedient for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this s ection after the expiry of five years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  8 
 24. Power to make rules. —(1) The Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the 
purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the use of metal for the purpose  of making any coin under clause ( f) of section 2;  
(b) the per cent . of metals for any coin under clause ( i) of section 2;  
(c) the standard weight for any coin under clause ( l) of section 2;  
(d) the dimensions, designs, metals, mixed metals or their compos ition, for coins under section 4;  
(e) the standard weight of coins and the remedy allowed in making such coins under section 5.  
25. Rule s to be laid before Parliament. —Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before  each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive se ssions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the 
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any  such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule.  
26. Saving of making other coins at Mints. —Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to prohibit or 
restrict the making at any Mint in India of coins intended for issue as money by the foreign Government 
of any territories beyond the limits of India.  
27. Repeal and savings. —(1) The following enactments are hereby repealed — 
(a) the Metal Tokens Act, 1889 (1 of 1889);  
(b) the Coinage Act, 1906 (3  of 1906);  
(c) the Bronze Coin (Legal Tender) Act, 1918 (22 of 1918);  
(d) the Currency Ordinance, 1940 (Ord. IV of 1940);  
(e) the Small Coins (Offences) Act, 1971 (52 of 1971).  
(2) The repeal by this Act of the enactments and Ordinance specified in sub -section ( 1) shall not — 
(a) affect any other enactment in which the repealed enactment or Ordinance has been applied, 
incorporated or referred to;  
(b) affect the validity, invalidity, effect or consequences of anything already done or suffered, or 
any right, title, obligation or liability already acquired, accrued or incurred or any remedy or 
proceeding in respect thereof, or any release or discharge of or from any debt, penalty, obligation, 
liability, claim or demand, or any indemnity already granted, or the proof of any past act or thing;  
(c) affect any principle or rule of law, or established jurisdiction, form or course of pleading, 
practice or procedure, or existing usage, custom, privilege, restriction, exemption, office or 
appointment, notwithstanding th at the same respectively may have been in any manner affirmed or 
recognised or derived by, in or from any enactment or Ordinance hereby repealed;  
(d) revive or restore any jurisdiction, office, custom, liability, right, title, privilege, restriction, 
exemp tion, usage, practice, procedure or other matter or thing not now existing or in force.  
(3) The mention of particular matters in sub -section ( 1) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the 
general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), with regard to the effect of 
repeals.  
  9 
 28. Continuance of existing coins. —Notwithstanding the repeal of the enactments and the 
Ordinance specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 27, — 
(a) all coins issued under the said enactments; and  
(b) Gov ernment of India one rupee note issued under the Currency Ordinance, 1940 (Ord. IV of 
1940),  
which are legal tender immediately before the commencement of the Coinage Act, 2011 shall be deemed 
to be the coin and continue to be legal tender in payment or on  account under the corresponding 
provisions of this Act . 
--------------------------The National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act, 2011--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI LAWS  
(SPECIAL PROVISIONS) ACT, 2011  
_____ ___ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and duration . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Enforcement to be kept in abeyance . 
4. Provisions of this Act not to apply in certain cases . 
5. Power of Central Government to give directions . 
6. Validation of acts done or omitted to be done, etc., during 1st January, 2011 up to the date of 
commencement of this Act . 
 
  2 
 THE NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI LAWS  
(SPECIAL PROVI SIONS) ACT, 2011  
ACT NO. 5 OF 2011  
[29th March , 2011.]  
An Act to make special provisions for the National Capital Territory of Delhi for a further period 
up to the 31st day of December, 2011 and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto.  
WHEREAS there had been phenomenal increase in the population of the National Capital Territory of 
Delhi owing to migration and other factors resulting in tremendous pressure on land and infrastructure 
leading to encroachment or unauthorised  developments whi ch are not in consonance with the concept of 
planned development as provided in the Master Plan for Delhi, 2001 and the relevant Acts and building 
bye-laws made thereunder;  
AND WHEREAS  the Master Plan for Delhi, 2001 was extensively modified and notified by the Central 
Government on the 7th day of February, 2007 with the perspective for the year 2021 keeping in view the 
emerging new dimensions in urban development vis-a-vis the social, f inancial and other ground realities;  
AND WHEREAS the Master Plan f or Delhi with the perspective for the year 2021 specifically provides 
for strategies for housing for urban poor as well as to deal with the informal sector;  
AND WHEREAS  a strategy and a sche me has been prepared by the local authorities in the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi for regulation of urban street vendors in accordance with the National Policy 
for Urban Street Vendors and the Master Plan for Delhi, 2021, and is being implemented;  
AND WHEREAS based on the policy finalised by the Central Government regarding regularisation of 
unauthorised colonies, village abadi  area and its extension, the guidelines and regulations for this purpose 
have been issued;  
AND WHEREAS in pursuance of the guidelines and regulations necessary steps are being taken for 
regularisation of unauthorised colonies which, inter alia , involve scrutiny of layout plans, assessment of 
built up percentage existed as on 31st day of March, 2002, identif ication of mixed use of streets, approval 
of layout plans, fixation of boundaries, change in land use and identification of colonies not eligible for 
regularisation;  
AND WHEREAS more time is required for proper implementation of the scheme regarding hawker s and 
urban street vendors and for the regularisation of unauthorised colonies, village abadi  area and its 
extension;  
AND WHEREAS  the revised policy for proper arrangements for relocation and rehabilitation of slum 
dwellers and jhuggi -jhompri  clusters in the National Capital Territory of Delhi has been formulated and 
accordingly, the Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board Act, 2010 (Delhi Act 7 of 2010)  has been 
enacted by the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi and notified with effect fro m the 1st 
July, 2010 to provide for implementation of schemes for improvement of slums and jhuggi -jhompri  
clusters with a view to bring improvement in environment and living conditions, and to prepare housing 
scheme for such persons;  
AND WHEREAS  the draft policy regarding farm houses is under consideration in the Delhi 
Development Authority;  
AND WHEREAS  pursuant to the Master Plan for Delhi, 2021, the Zonal Development Plans in respect 
of various Zones have been notified which provides for regularisation of  schools, d ispensaries, religious 
institutions and cultural institutions;  3 
 ANDWHEREAS  the policy with respect to storages, warehouses and godowns used for agricultural 
inputs or produce (including dairy and poultry) in rural areas built on agricultural land  are under 
consideration of the Central Government in consultation with the Delhi Development Authority;  
AND WHEREAS  the National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act, 2007                 
(43 of 2007) was enacted on the 5th day of Dece mber, 2007 to make special provisions for the areas of 
the National Capital Territory of Delhi for a period up to the 31st day of December, 2008 which ceased to 
operate after the 31st December, 2008;  
AND WHEREAS  the National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws  (Special Provisions ) Act, 2009                
(24 of 2009)  was enacted  in continuation of the aforesaid Act for a period up to the 31st day of December, 
2009 to make special provisions for the areas of the National Capital Territory of Delhi and that Act 
ceased to operate  after the 31st day of December,  2009;  
AND WHEREAS  the National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Second Act, 2009  
(40 of 2009) was enacted in continuation of the aforesaid Act for a period up to the 31st day of December,  
2010 to make special provisions for the areas of the National Capital Territory of Delhi and that Act 
ceased to operate after the 31st day of December , 2010;  
AND WHEREAS  it is expedient to have a law in terms of the Master Plan for Delhi, 2021, in 
continu ation of the said Act for a period up to the 31st day of December, 2011 to provide for temporary 
relief and to minimise avoidable hardships and irreparable loss to the people of the National Capital 
Territory of Delhi against any action by the concerned ag ency in respect of persons covered by the 
policies referred to above.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent, commencement and duration .—(1) This Act may be called the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act, 2011.  
(2) It extends to the National Capital Territory of Delhi . 
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of January, 2011.  
(4) It shall cease to have effect on the 31st day of December, 2011, except as respects things done or 
omitted to be done before such cesser, and upon such cesser section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 
(10 of 1897), shall apply as if this Act had then been repealed by a Central Act.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “building bye -laws” means bye -laws made under section 481 of the Delhi Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1957 (66 of 1957) or the bye -laws made under section 188, sub -section ( 3) of 
section 189 and sub-section ( 1) of section 190 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 (Punjab Act 3 of 
1911), as in force in New Delhi or the regulations made under sub -section ( 1) of section 57 of the 
Delhi Development Act, 1957 (61 o f 1957), relating to buildings;  
(b) “Delhi” means the entire area of the National Capital Territory of Delhi except the Delhi 
Cantonment as defined in clause ( 11) of section 2 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957           
(66 of 1957);  
(c) “encroachment ” means unauthorised occupation of G overnment land or public land by way of 
putting temporary, semi -permanent or permanent structure for residential use or commercial use or 
any other use;  
(d) “local authority ” means the Delhi Municipal Corporation established under the Delhi 
Municipal Corpo ration Act, 1957 (66 of 1957), or the New Delhi Municipal Council established 
under the New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994 (44 of 1994) or the Delhi Development Authority 4 
 established under the Delhi Development Act, 1957 (61 of 1957), legally entitled t o exercise control 
in respect of the areas under their respective jurisdiction;  
(e) “Master Plan ” means the Master Plan for Delhi with the perspective for the year 2021, 
notified vide notification number S.O.141(E), dated the 7th day of February, 2007 unde r the Delhi 
Development Act, 1957 (61 of 1957);  
(f) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(g) “punitive action ” means action taken by a local authority under the relevant law against 
unauthorised  development and shall include demolition, sealing of premises and displacement of 
persons or their business establishment from their existing location, whether in pursuance of court 
orders or otherwise;  
(h) “relevant law ” means in case of — 
(i) the Delhi D evelopment Authority, the Delhi Development Act, 1957 (61 of 1957);  
(ii) the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957              
(66 of 1957); and  
(iii) the New Delhi Municipal Council, the New Delhi Municipal Council Act , 1994             
(44 of 1994);  
(i) “unauthorised development ” means use of land or use of building or construction of building 
or development of colonies carried out in contravention of the sanctioned plans or without obtaining 
the sanction of plans, or in contravention of the land use as permitted under the Master Plan or Zonal 
Plan or layout plan, as the case may be, and includes any encroachment.  
(2) Words and expressions used but not defined herein shall have the meanings respectively assigned 
to them  in the Delhi Development Act, 1957 (61 of 1957), the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957  
(66 of 1957) and the New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994 (44 of 1994).  
3. Enforcement to be kept in abeyance .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any relev ant 
law or any rules, regulations or bye -laws made thereunder, the Central Government shall before the 
expiry of this Act, take all possible measures to finalise norms, policy guidelines, feasible strategies and 
make orderly arrangements to deal with the p roblem of encroachment or unauthorised development in the 
form of encroachment by slum dwellers and Jhuggi -Jhompri  clusters, hawkers and urban street vendors, 
unauthorised colonies, village abadi  area (including urban villages), and its extension, existing  farm 
houses involving construction beyond permissible building limits and schools, dispensaries, religious 
institutions, cultural institutions, storages, warehouses and godowns used for agricultural inputs or 
produce (including dairy and poultry) in rural  areas built on agricultural land, as mentioned below:  
(a) orderly arrangements  for relocation and rehabilitation of slum dwellers and Jhuggi -Jhompri  
clusters in the National Capital Territory of Delhi in accordance with the provisions of the Delhi 
Urban S helter Improvement Board Act, 2010 (Delhi Act 7 of 2010) and the Master Plan for Delhi, 
2021 to ensure its development in a sustainable, planned and humane manner;  
(b) scheme and orderly arrangements for regulation of urban street vendors in consonance wit h 
the national policy for urban street vendors and hawkers as provided in the Master Plan for Delhi, 
2021;  
(c) orderly arrangements pursuant to guidelines and regulations for regularisation of unauthorised 
colonies, village abadi  area (including urban vill ages) and its extension, as existed on the 31st day of 
March, 2002, and where construction took place even beyond that date and up to the 8th day of 
February, 2007;  5 
 (d) policy regarding existing farm houses involving construction beyond permissible buildin g 
limits; and  
(e) policy or plan for orderly arrangement regarding schools, dispensaries, religious institutions, 
cultural institutions, storages, warehouses and godowns  used for agricultural inputs or produce 
(including dairy and poultry) in rural areas built on agricultural land.  
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1) and notwithstanding any judgment, decree 
or order of any court, status quo — 
(i) as on the 1st day of January, 2006 in respect of encroachment or unauthorised development; 
and 
(ii) in respect of unauthorised colonies, village abadi  area (including urban villages) and its 
extension, which existed on the 31st day of March, 2002 and where co nstruction took place even 
beyond that date and up to the 8th day of February, 2007, mentioned in sub -section ( 1), 
shall be maintained.  
(3) All notices issued by any local authority for initiating action against encroachment or 
unauthorised  development referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall be deemed to have been suspended and no 
punitive action shall be taken till the 31st day of December, 2011.  
(4) Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this Act, the Central Government may, at any  
time before the 31st day of December, 2011, withdraw the exemption by notification in respect of 
encroachment or unauthorised development mentioned in sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), as the case 
may be.  
4. Provisions of this Act not to apply in certai n cases .—During the period of operation of this Act, 
no relief shall be available under the provisions of section 3 in respect of the following encroachment or 
unauthorised development, namely: — 
(a) encroachment  on public land except in those cases which are covered under clauses ( a), (b) and 
(c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3;  
(b) removal of slums and Jhuggi -Jhompri  dwellers, hawkers and urban street vendors, unauthorised 
colonies or part thereof, village abadi  area (including urban villages) and its extension in accordance with 
the relevant policies approved by the Central Government for clearance of land required for specific 
public projects.  
5. Power of Central Government to give directions .—The Central Gover nment may, from time to 
time, issue such directions to the local authorities as it may deem fit, for giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act and it shall be the duty of the local authorities, to comply with such directions.  
6. Validation  of acts done o r omitted to be done, etc., during 1st January, 2011 up to the date of 
commencement of this Act .—Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, all things 
done, or, omitted to be done, and all action taken, or, not taken, during the period beg inning on or after 
the 1st day of January, 2011 and ending immediately before the date of commencement of this Act, shall, 
in so far as they are in conformity with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done, or, 
omitted to be done, or, taken, or, not taken, under these provisions as if such provisions were in force at 
the time such things were done or omitted to be done and action taken or not taken during the aforesaid 
period.  
___________  
--------------------------The National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Second Act, 2011--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI LAWS  
(SPECIAL PROVISIONS) SECOND ACT, 2011  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and duration.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Enforcement to be kept in abeyance.  
4. Provisions of this Act not to apply in certain cases.  
5. Power of Central Government to give directions.  
6. Validation of acts done or omitted to be done, etc., during 1st January, 2012 up to the date of 
enactment of this Act.  
  2 
 THE NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI LAWS  
(SPECIA L PROVISIONS) SECOND ACT, 2011  
ACT NO. 20 OF 2011  
[23rd December, 2011.]  
An Act to make special provisions for the National Capital Territory of Delhi 1[for a further 
period up to the 31st day of December,  2020 ] and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  there has been phenomenal increase in the population of the National Capital Territory of 
Delhi owing to migration and other factors resulting in tremendous pressure on land and infrastructure 
leading to encroachment or unauthorised developments which are  not in consonance with the concept of 
planned development as provided in the Master Plan for Delhi, 2001 and the relevant Acts and building 
bye-laws made thereunder;  
AND WHEREAS the Master Plan for Delhi, 2001 was extensively modified and notified by the Central 
Government on the 7th day of February, 2007 with the perspective for the year 2021 keeping in view the 
emerging new dimensions in urban development vis-a-vis the social, financial and other ground realities;  
AND WHEREAS  the Master Plan for Delhi w ith the perspective for the year 2021 specifically provides 
for strategies for housing for urban poor as well as to deal with the informal sector;  
2*   *   *   *   * 
AND WHEREAS  based on the policy finalised by the Central Government regarding regularisati on of 
unauthorised colonies, village abadi  area and their extension, the guidelines and regulations for this 
purpose have been issued;  
AND WHEREAS  based on the policy finalised by the Central Government regarding regularisation of 
unauthorised colonies, vi llage abadi  area and their extensions, the Building Regulations for Special Area, 
Unauthorised Regularised Colonies and Village Abadis , have been made by the Delhi Development 
Authority under sub -section ( 1) of section 57 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957  
(61 of 1957)  notified in the Gazette of India vide S.O. 97( E), dated the 17th January, 2011;  
AND WHEREAS  in pursuance of the guidelines and regulations necessary steps are being taken for the 
regularisation of unauthorised colonies which, inter alia , invo lve scrutiny of layout plans, assessment of 
built-up percentage existed as on the 31st day of March, 2002, identification of mixed use of streets, 
approval of layout plans, fixation of boundaries, change in land use and identification of colonies not 
eligible for regularisation;  
AND WHEREAS  the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi has received one hundred forty 
redrafted layout plans and is in process of fixing the boundary on these layout plans and the complete 
process of redrafting or finalisation of layout plans is likely to take considerable time to regularise all the 
unauthorised colonies;  
3[AND WHEREAS  more time is required for the regularisation of unauthori sed colonies, village abadi  
area and their extensions and special areas;]  
AND WHEREAS  the revised policy for proper arrangements for relocation and rehabilitation of slum 
dwellers and jhuggi -jhompri  clusters in the National Capital Territory of Delhi has been formulated and 
accordingly, the  Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board Act, 2010  (Delhi Act 7 of 2010)  has been 
enacted by the Legislature of the National Capital Territory of Delhi and notified with effect from the 1st 
July, 2010to provide for implementation of schemes for improvement of slums and jhuggi -jhompri  
clusters wit h a view to bring improvement in environment and living conditions, and to prepare housing 
scheme for such persons;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 2017 , s. 2, for “for a further period up to the 31 st December, 201 7” (w.e.f. 31-12-2017). 
2. Fourth p aragraph omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -12-2017).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for ninth  and tenth paragraph s (w.e.f. 31 -12-2017).  3 
 AND WHEREAS  the Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board has identified about six hundred and 
eighty -five jhuggi -jhompri  clusters in the Nation al Capital Territory of Delhi and relocation thereof is 
likely to take considerable time;  
AND WHEREAS  the draft policy regarding farm houses is being prepared by the Delhi Development 
Authority and its finalisation is likely to take about two years;  
AND WH EREAS  pursuant to the Master Plan for Delhi, 2021, the Zonal Development Plans in respect 
of various Zones have been notified which provides for regularisation of schools, dispensaries, religious 
institutions and cultural institutions established on or bef ore the 1st January, 2006 in  
non-conforming areas;  
AND WHEREAS  the policy with respect to storages, warehouses and godowns  used for agricultural 
inputs or produce (including dairy and poultry) in rural areas built on agricultural land and guidelines for 
redevelopment of existing godown clusters in non -conforming areas (including those for a storage of non -
agricultural goods) required to cater to the needs of the people of the National Capital Territory of Delhi 
are under consideration of the Central Government in consultation with the Delhi Development 
Authority;  
 AND WHEREAS  with respect to special areas (being the areas cons isting of walled city, walled city 
extension and area known as Karol Bagh and as such other areas as may be designated as special area) 
referred to in clause ( vi) of regulation 2 of the Building Regulations for Special Area, Unauthorised 
Regularised Coloni es and Village Abadis , 2010 notified in the Gazette of India vide S.O. 97( E), dated the 
17th January, 2011, is being taken for formulation of redevelopment plan and schemes by concerned local 
authority which is likely to take considerable time;  
AND WHEREAS  rule 12 of the Delhi Development (Master Plan and Zonal Development Plan) Rules, 
1959 provides for amendment of whole or any part of the Master Plan, if necessary, at the expiry of every 
five years and accordingly in pursuance of the aforesaid rule 12, th e process of quinquennial revision of 
the provisions of the Master Plan notified on the 7th February, 2007, is being undertaken for such 
modifications and updating that have emerged based on ground realities which is likely to take some time 
for finalisati on; 
AND WHEREAS  in view of the foregoing paragraphs, it is expedient and in public interest that no 
hardship be caused (whether by way of sealing or demolition of the structures or otherwise), to the public 
until the revision of Master Plan as stated in th e preceding paragraph is undertaken to facilitate the 
smooth review of the Master Plan;  
AND WHEREAS  the National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act, 2007        (43 
of 2007) was enacted on the 5th day of December, 2007 to make special  provisions for the areas of 
National Capital Territory of Delhi for a period of up to the 31st day of December, 2008 which ceased to 
operate after the 31st December, 2008;  
AND WHEREAS  the National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act, 2009       (24 of 
2009) was enacted in continuation of the aforesaid Act for a period up to the 31st day of December, 2009 
to make special provisions for the areas of the National Capital Territory of Delhi and that Act ceased to 
operate after the 31st day of December, 2009;  
AND WHEREAS  the National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Second Act, 2009 
(40 of 2009) was enacted in continuation of the aforesaid Act for a period up to the 31st day of December, 
2010 to make special provisions for  the areas of National Capital Territory of Delhi and that Act ceased to 
operate after the 31st day of December, 2010;  
AND WHEREAS  the National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act, 2011          (5 
of 2011) has been enacted to give con tinued effect to provisions of the enactment specified in the 
preceding paragraph for a period up to the 31st day of December, 2011 and to make special provisions for 
the areas of the National Capital Territory of Delhi and that Act, shall cease to operate  after the 31st day 
of December, 2011;  4 
 AND WHEREAS  it is expedient to have a law in terms of the Master Plan for Delhi, 2021, in 
continuation of the said Acts 1[for a period up to the 31st day of December, 20 20] to provide for relief and 
to minimise  avoidable hardships and irreparable loss to the people of the National Capital Territory of 
Delhi against any punitive action by any agency in respect of the persons covered by the policies referred 
to above.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, ext ent, commencement and duration .—(1) This Act may be called the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Second Act, 2011.  
(2) It extends to the National Capital Territory of Delhi.  
(3) It shall come into force on the 1st day of January, 2012.  
(4) 2[It shall cease to have effect o n the 31st day of December, 20 20], except as respects things done 
or omitted to be done before such ce sser, and upon such cesser section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 
(10 of 1897), shall apply as if this Act had then been repealed by a Central Act.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “building bye -laws” means b ye-laws made under section 481 of the Delhi Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1957 (66 of 1957) or the bye -laws made under section 188, sub -section ( 3) of 
section 189 and sub -section ( 1) of section 190 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 (Punjab Act 3 of 
1911), as in force in New Delhi or the regulations made under sub -section ( 1) of section 57 of the 
Delhi Development Act, 1957 (61 of 1957), relating to buildings;  
(b) “Delhi” means the entire area of the National Capital Territory of Delhi except the Delhi 
Cantonme nt as defined in clause ( 11) of section 2 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957         
(66 of 1957);  
(c) “encroachment” means unauthorised  occupation of Government land or public land other than 
streets, lanes, footpath and parks, by way of putting temporary, semi -permanent or permanent 
structure for residential use or commercial use or any other use;  
(d) “local authority” means the Delhi Mu nicipal Corporation established under the Delhi 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 (66 of 1957), or the New Delhi Municipal Council established 
under the New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994 (44 of 1994) or the Delhi Development Authority 
established under t he Delhi Development Act, 1957 (61 of 1957), legally entitled to exercise control 
in respect of the areas under their respective jurisdiction;  
(e) “Master Plan” means the Master Plan for Delhi with the perspective for the year 2021, 
notified vide notificat ion number S.O.141(E), dated the 7th day of February, 2007 under the Delhi 
Development Act, 1957 (61 of 1957 ); 
(f) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(g) “punitive action” means action taken by a local authority under th e relevant law against 
unauthorised development and shall include demolition, sealing of premises and displacement of 
persons or their business establishment from their existing location, whether in pursuance of court 
orders or otherwise;  
(h) “relevant law ” means in case of — 
(i) the Delhi Development Authority, the Delhi Development Act, 1957 (61 of 1957);  
(ii) the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957  
(66 of 1957); and  
(iii) the New Delhi Municipal Council, the New Delh i Municipal Council Act, 1994  
(44 of 1994);  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 201 7, s. 3, for “for a period up to the 31 st day of  December, 201 7” (w.e.f. 31-12-2017). 
2. Subs. by  s. 4, for “It shall cease to have effect on the 31 st day of December, 201 7” (w.e.f. 31-12-2017). 5 
 (i) “special area”, shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( vi) of regulation 2 of the 
Building Regulations for Special Area, Unauthorised Regularised Colonies and Village Abadis, 2010 
notified in the G azette of India vide S.O. 97(E), dated the 17th January, 2011;  
(j) “unauthorised  development” means use of land or use of building or construction of building 
or development of colonies carried out in contravention of the sanctioned plans or without obtaining 
the sanction of plans, or in contravention of the land use as permitted unde r the Master Plan or Zonal 
Plan or layout plan, as the case may be, and includes any encroachment.  
 (2) The words and expressions used but not defined herein shall have the meanings respectively 
assigned to them in the Delhi Development Act, 1957 (61 of 19 57), the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 
1957 (66 of 1957) and the New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994 (44 of 1994).  
3. Enforcement to be kept in abeyance .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any relevant 
law or any rules, regulations or bye -laws made thereunder, the Central Government shall before the 
expiry of this Act, take all possible measures to finalise norms, policy guidelines, feasible strategies and 
make orderly arrangements to deal with the problem of encroachment or unauthorised develop ment in the 
form of encroachment by slum dwellers and Jhuggi -Jhompri  clusters, 1*** unauthorised colonies, village 
abadi  area (including urban villages), and their extensions, existing farm houses involving construction 
beyond permissible building limits a nd schools, dispensaries, religious institutions, cultural institutions, 
storages, warehouses and godowns used for agricultural inputs or produce (including dairy and poultry) in 
rural areas built on agricultural land, as mentioned below: — 
(a) orderly arra ngements for relocation and rehabilitation of slum dwellers and Jhuggi -Jhompri  
clusters in Delhi in accordance with the provisions of the Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board 
Act, 2010 (Delhi Act 7 of 2010) and the Master Plan for Delhi, 2021 to ensure it s development in a 
sustainable, planned and humane manner;  
2*   *   *   *  *  
(c) orderly arrangements pursuant to guidelines and regulations for regularisation of unauthorised 
colonies, village  abadi  area (including urban villages) and their extensions, as existed on the 31st day 
of March, 2002, and where construction took place even beyond that date and 3[up to the 1st day of 
June, 2014];  
(d) policy regarding existing farm houses involving constructi on beyond permissible building 
limits;  
 (e) policy or plan for orderly arrangement regarding schools, dispensaries, religious institutions, 
cultural institutions, storages, warehouses and godowns used for agricultural inputs or produce 
(including dairy and  poultry) in rural areas built on agricultural land and guidelines for redevelopment 
of existing godown clusters (including those for a storage of non -agricultural goods) required to cater 
to the needs of the people of the National Capital Territory of Del hi; 
(f) orderly arrangements in respect of special areas in accordance with the Building Regulations 
for Special Area, Unauthorised Regularised Colonies and Village Abadis , 2010 within overall ambit 
of Master Plan in force; and  
(g) policy or plan for order ly arrangements in all other areas of the National Capital Territory of 
Delhi in consonance with the Master Plan on its review.  
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1) and notwithstanding any judgment, decree 
or order of any court, status quo — 
(i) as on the 1st day of January, 2006 in respect of encroachment or unauthorised development;  
                                                           
1. The words “hawkers and urban street vendors ,” omitted by Act 32 of 2017, s. 5 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2017).  
2. Clause ( b) omitted by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -12-2017).  
3. Subs. by Act 39 of 2014, s.  5, for “up to the 8 th day of February, 2007” (w.e.f. 26 -12-2014).   6 
 (ii) in respect of unauthorised colonies, village abadi  area (including urban villages) and their 
extensions, which existed on the 31st day of March, 2002 and where construction took place even 
beyond that date and 1[up to the 1st day of June, 2014] , mentioned in sub -section ( 1); 
(iii) in respect of special ar eas as per the Building Regulations for Special Area, Unauthorised 
Regularised Colonies and Village Abadis , 2010; and  
 (iv) in respect of all other areas within the National Capital Territory of Delhi as on the 8th day 
of February, 2007,  
shall be maintaine d. 
Explanation .— For the purposes of this sub -section, it is hereby clarified that any development 
approved by the competent authority or the local authority under the relevant laws and the rules or 
regulations made thereunder, including repairs permissibl e under the building bye -laws in force, shall 
continue to remain permitted.  
(3) All notices issued by any local authority for initiating action against encroachment or 
unauthorised development in respect of areas referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall be deemed to have been 
suspended and no punitive action shall be taken 2[till the 31st day of December, 20 20], if— 
(a) it is constructed prior to the dates specified for different areas as enumerated in  
sub-section ( 2); 
(b) it conforms to the safety standards as in force or such other safety requirements as may be 
notified by the Central Government; and  
(c) it complies with the directions with respect to safety, if any, issued by the Central 
Government:  
Provided that in case pu nitive action is required to be taken by any local authority, prior approval of 
the Administrator of the National Capital Territory of Delhi or the officer authorised by him in this 
behalf, shall be obtained by the authority or officer concerned.  
(4) Notwi thstanding any other provision contained in this A ct, the Central Government may, 3[at any 
time befor e the 31st day of December, 20 20], withdraw the exemption by notification in respect of 
encroachment or unauthorised development mentioned in sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), as the case 
may be.  
4. Provisions of this Act  not to apply in certain cases .—During the period of operation of this Act, 
no relief shall be available under the provisions of section 3 in respect of the following encroachment or 
unauthorised development, namely: — 
(a) encroachment on public land except in those cases which are covered under clauses 4[(a) and 
(c)] of sub -section ( 1) of section 3;  
(b) removal of slums and Jhuggi -Jhompri  dwellers, 5*** unauthorised colonies or part th ereof, 
village abadi  area (including urban villages) and their extensions in accordance with the relevant 
policies approved by the Central Government for clearance of land required for specific public 
projects.  
5. Power of Central  Government to give directions .—The Central Government may, from time to 
time, issue such directions to the local authorities as it may deem fit, for giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act and it shall be the duty of the local authorities, to comply w ith such directions.  
6. Validation of acts done or omitted to be done, etc., during 1st January, 2012 up to the  date of 
enactment of this Act .—Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, all things done, or, 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 9 of 2014, s.  5, for “up to the 8 th day of February, 2007” (w.e.f. 26 -12-2014).  
2. Subs. by Act 32 of 2017, s. 5, for “till the 31st  day of December, 201 7” (w.e.f. 31-12-2017). 
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “at any time before the 31 st day of December , 2017” (w.e.f.  31-12-2017). 
4. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “( a), (b) and ( c)” (w.e.f. 31 -12-2017).  
5. The words “hawkers and urban street vendors ,” omitted by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 31-12-2017).  7 
 omitted to be done, and all acti on taken, or, not taken, during the period beginning on or after the 1st day 
of January, 2012 and ending immediately before the date of enactment of this Act, shall, in so far as they 
are in conformity with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have bee n done, or, omitted to be done, or, 
taken, or, not taken, under these provisions as if such provisions were in force at the time such things 
were done or omitted to be done and action taken or not taken during the aforesaid period . 
 
 
 
 
___________  
--------------------------The Orissa (Alteration of Name) Act, 2011--------------------------
1 
 THE ORISSA (ALTERATION OF NAME) ACT, 2011  
ACT NO. 15 OF 2011  
[23rd September, 2011.]  
An Act to alter the name of the State of Orissa . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Orissa (Alteration of Name) 
Act, 2011.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
 2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —  
(a) “appointed day ” means the date appointed under sub -section ( 2) of section 1 for the coming 
into force of this Act;  
(b) “appropriate Government ” means, as respects a law relating to a matter enumerated  in List I 
in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, the Central Government, and as respects any other law, 
the State Government;  
(c) “law” includes any enactment, Ordinance, regulation, order, bye -law, rule, scheme, 
notification or other instrument hav ing the force of law in the whole or any part of the State of Orissa.  
 3. Alterat ion of name of State of Orissa .—As from the appointed day, the State of Orissa shall be 
known as the State of Odisha.  
4. Amendment of article 164 .—In article 164 of the Constitution, in clause (1 ), in the proviso, for 
the word “Orissa ”, the word “Odisha ” shall be substituted.  
 5. Amendment of article 273 .—In article 273, in clause (1 ), for the word “Orissa ”, the word 
“Odisha ” shall be substituted.  
6. Amendment of Firs t Schedule to the Constitution .— In the First Schedule to the Constitution, 
under the heading “I. THE STATES ”, in entry 10, under the column “Name ”, for the word “Orissa ”, the 
word “Odisha ” shall be substituted.  
7. Amendment of Fourt h Schedule to the Constitution .— In the Fourth Schedule to the 
Constitution, under the heading  “TABLE ”, in entry  14, in the second column, for the word  “Orissa ”, the 
word “Odisha ” shall be substituted.  
8. Power to adapt laws .—(1) For the purpose of giving effect to the alteration of the name of the 
State of Orissa by section 3, the appropriate Government may, before the expiration of one year from the 
appointed day, by order, make such adaptations and modifications of any law made before the appointed 
day, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon every 
such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to prevent a competent Legislature or other competent 
authority from repealing or amending any law adapted or modified by the appropriate Government under 
the said sub -section.  
9. Power to construe laws .—Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has been 
made under section  8 for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal or 
authority, required or empowered to enforce such law, may construe the law in such manner, without 
affecting the substance, as may be necessary or proper in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or 
authority.  
10. Legal proceedings .—Where  immediately before the appointed day any legal proceedings are 
pending to which the State of Orissa is a party, the State of Odisha shall be deemed to have been 
substituted for the State of Orissa in those proceedings.         
                                                           
1. 1st November, 2011, vide notification No. G.S.R. 791(E), dated 1st November, 2011, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, s ec. 3 ( i). 
