--------------------------The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research Act, 2011--------------------------
1 
 THE ACADEMY OF SCIENTIFIC AND INNOVATIVE RESEARCH, 2011  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Establishment of Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research.  
4. Object of Academy.  
5. Relationship of Academy with Council of Scientific  and Industrial Research.  
6. Declaration of Academy as an institution of national importance.  
7. Transfer of assets, liabilities, etc., of existing Academy t o Academy established under this Act 
and other provisions, etc.  
8. Functions and powers of Academy.  
9. Academy  open to all castes, creed, race or class.  
10. Authorities of Academy.  
11. Composition of Board of Governors.  
12. Appointment of Chairperson . 
13. Nomination of distinguished scientists or academicians of global eminence, eminent industrialists 
or technologists and heads of three premier institutions in the field of imparting education in 
science and technology . 
14. Nomination of distinguished scientists or outstandin g scientists of Council of Scientific and 
Industrial   Research or Directors of Council of Scientific and Industrial Research laboratories.  
15. Allowances payable to members of Board.  
16. Term of office of members of Board.  
17. Powers of Board.  
18. Senate.  
19. Powers of Senat e. 
20. Chancellor of Academy . 
21. Director of Academy.  
22. Appointment and duty of Director of Academy, etc.  
23. Associate Directors.  
24. Powers of other authorities.  
25. Funds of Academy.  
26. Accounts.  
27. Audit of accounts and its publication.  
28. Statutes.  
29. Matters to be provided by Statutes.  
30. Ordinances.  
31. Review of functioning of Academy.  
32. Appointments.  
33. Conditions of service.  
34. Arbitration.  
35. Resignation, removal and suspension of Chairperson and other Member or Director.  
36. Meetings.  
37. Vacancies , etc., not to  invalidate acts or proceedings of  Board, Academy or any other body.  
38. Power to remove difficulties.  
  2 
 THE ACADEMY OF SCIENTIFIC AND INNOVATIVE RESEARCH, 2011  
ACT NO. 13 OF 2012  
[6th February,  2012.]  
An Act  to establish an Academy for furtherance of the advancement of learning and prosecution 
of research in the field of science and technology  in association with Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research and to declare the institution known as the Academy  of Scientific 
and Innovative Research, to be an institution of national importance to provide for its 
incorporation and matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -second Year of the Republic of India as fol lows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Academy of Scientific 
and Innovative Research Act, 2011.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, and in all Statutes and Ordinances made thereunder, unless t he context 
otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Academy ” means the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research established under sub -
section ( 1) of section 3;  
(b) “Board ” means the Board of Governors of the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research 
referred to in section 10; 
(c)  “Council of Scientific and Industrial Research ” means a society registered by the name of the 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860);  
(d) “Chairperson ” means the Chairperson of the Boa rd appointed under section 12;  
(e) “Chancellor ” means the Chancellor of the Academy referred to in section 20;  
(f) “Director ” means the Director of the Academy appointed under section 22;  
(g) “distinguished scientists ” or “outstanding scientists ” of the Council of Scientific and Industrial 
Research means scientists of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research designated as such;  
(h) “existing Academy ” means the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research established in 
pursuance of the Resolution of the Government of India in the Ministry of Science and Technology, 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research,              
vide No. 6/1/CSIR -Ac SIR/2010 -PPD, dated the 1st July, 2010;  
(i) “Faculty of the Academy ” means Academy Professors, Professors of Eminence, Distinguished 
Professors, Outstanding Professors, Senior Professors, Emeritus Professors, Pro fessors, Associate 
Professors, Assistant Professors, visiting faculty, and such other persons as may be appointed for 
imparting instruction or conducting research in the Academy or institutions maintained by the 
Academy and includes the scientists of Counc il of Scientific and Industrial Research assigned for 
imparting instruction or co nducting research ; 
(j) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(k) “Statutes and Ordinances ” means the Statutes and the Ordinances of the Acad emy for the time 
being in force . 
                                                           
1. 3rd April, 2012 [excep t sub -section ( 2) of section 5], v ide notification No. S.O. 709(E), dated 2nd April, 2012, see 
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3 (ii). 
26th June, 2013 [sub -sec. ( 2) of section 5] , vide notification No. S.O. 1850(E), dated 26th June, 2013, see Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, Part  II, sec. 3 (ii). 3 
 3. Establishment of Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research. —(1) With effect from such 
date as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established for 
the purposes of this Act an Academy to be called the “Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research ” a 
body corporate by such  name.  
(2) The headquarters of the Academy shall be at such place as the Central Government may, by 
notification, specify.  
(3) The Academy may have such number of regional centres and campuses, as it may deem fit.  
(4) The Academy shall have perpetual succe ssion and a common seal with power, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract, and shall by that name, 
sue and be sued.  
4. Objects of Academy. —(1) The objects of the Academy shall  be to — 
 (a) disseminate advanced knowledge in science and technology, by providing teaching and 
research facilities in such branches of learning as it may deem fit, particularly in emerging areas and 
such areas as may emerge in future;  
(b) undertake inter -disciplinary  studies and research;  
(c) conduct courses in, and integrate into its courses, inter -disciplinary and multi -disciplinary 
areas covering natural sciences, life sciences, mathematical and computational sciences, medical 
sciences, engineering, applied art, hu manities, social sciences, law relating to these areas and 
interfaces thereof;  
(d) take appropriate measures for innovations in teaching and learning processes;  
(e) create an ambience for learning and scholarship in advanced science and technology instead of 
exclusively focusing on marks or grades;  
(f) educate and train manpower in scientific and technological fields;  
(g) establish linkages with industries in India and outside India for the promotion of science and 
technology;  
(h) collaborate, in appropriat e areas in the field of science and technology, with reputed 
universities and institutions in India or outside India;  
(i) promote research in science and technology having a bearing on social, economic, cultural, 
intellectual and academic welfare of the pe ople.  
(2) The Academy shall primarily focus on research and imparting instruction in such areas as are not 
ordinarily taught in regular academic universities in India.  
(3) The curricula, pedagogy and evaluation of the Academy shall be innovative and direct ed towards 
creating highest quality personnel with cross -disciplinary knowledge, aiming to provide leaders in the 
field of science and technology.  
5. Relationship of Academy with Council of Scientific and Industrial Research .—(1) The 
Academy shall be, provided, or, allowed to use, the infrastructure and scientific manpower of the Council 
of Scientific and Industrial Research for teaching and research purposes for mutual benefit.  
(2) The Academy, within two weeks of the commencement of this Act, shall, n otwithstanding 
anything contained in any other Act, rules, regulations or bye -laws for the time being in force, enter into a 
Memorandum of Understanding with the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, for the purposes 
of its affiliation with the Ac ademy for the purposes of academics, teaching and award of degrees or 
diplomas, and, the persons pursuing the studies in the Council for award of any degree or diploma, after 
entering of such Memorandum of Understanding, be awarded degrees or diplomas by t he said Academy:  
Provided that any person pursuing any academic or research course, before the commencement of this 
Act, in the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research for award of any degree or diploma and 
registered for the said purpose with any ot her university, may, with the approval of the university with 4 
 which such person is registered, migrate after such commencement to the Academy established under this 
Act and be registered with the said Academy for grant of the same degree or diploma by the Academy 
established under this Act and such person shall be deemed to have migrated and registered with the 
Academy established under this Act at the same level of study in the university from which such person 
migrated.  
(3) Nothing contained in sub -sectio n (1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be construed to affect the functions 
or powers of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, being discharged or exercised, before the 
commencement of this Act, by the Council or to affiliate with any other university  or institution for the 
purposes of academics, teaching and award of degrees or diplomas or for any other purposes necessary 
for pursuing its objects.  
6. Declaration of Academy as an institution of national importance .—It is hereby declared that 
the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research shall be an institution of national importance.  
7. Transfer of assets, liabilities, etc., of existing Academy to Academy established under this Act 
and other provisions, etc .—(1) On and from the date of  establi shment of the Academy, — 
(a) any reference to the existing Academy in any law other than this Act or in any contract or other 
instrument shall be deemed as a reference to the Academy;  
(b) all properties and assets, movable and immovable, of, or belonging to , the existing Academy, 
shall vest in the Academy;  
(c) all rights and liabilities of the existing Academy shall be transferred to, and be the rights and 
liabilities of, the Academy;  
(d) without prejudice to the provisions of clause ( c), all debts, obligati ons and liabilities incurred, 
all contracts entered into and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for the existing 
Academy immediately before that date, for or in connection with the purpose of the said existing 
Academy shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into or engaged to be done by, with or for, the 
Academy;  
(e) all sums of money due to the existing Academy immediately before that date shall be deemed to 
be due to the Academy;  
(f) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or against 
the existing Academy immediately before that date may be continued or may be instituted by or against 
the Academy;  
(g) every employee (including those appointed for imparting instruction or condu cting research in 
the existing Academy) holding any office under the existing Academy or teaching therein immediately 
before that date shall hold his office in the Academy or continue teaching therein by the same tenure 
and upon the same terms and conditio ns of service as respects remuneration, leave, provident fund, 
retirement and other terminal benefits as he would have held such office if the Academy had not been 
established and shall continue to do so as an employee of the Academy or until the expiry of  the period 
of six months from that date if such employee opts not to be the employee of the Academy within such 
period.  
(2) Any person pursuing any academic or research course, before the commencement of this Act, in 
the existing Academy for award of any degree or diploma or certificate shall be entitled to pursue such 
academic or research course after the establishment of the Academy under this Act and be registered with 
the said Academy for grant of the same degree or diploma or certificate by the Academ y established 
under this Act and such person shall be deemed to have migrated and registered with the Academy 
established under this Act at the same level of study in the existing Academy from which such person 
migrated.  
(3) Any person, who immediately bef ore the commencement of this Act, had been awarded a degree 
or diploma or certificate for having qualified any course by the existing Academy, shall be entitled to 
award of equivalent degree or diploma by the Academy subject to approval by the Board of the  Academy.  5 
 (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) or in any 
other law for the time being in force, absorption of any employee by the Academy in its regular service 
under this section shall not entitle such e mployee to any compensation under that Act or other law and no 
such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
8. Functions and powers of Academy .—(1) The Academy shall discharge its functions and exercis e 
the following powers, n amely: — 
 (i) to provide for instructions and conduct research in such branches of learning like natural 
sciences, life sciences, mathematical and computational sciences, medical sciences, engineering, 
applied art, humanities, social sciences, law relating to these areas and interfaces thereof, and in 
particular, in inter -disciplinary and multi -disciplinary areas of these branches, and in all such areas as 
may emerge in future and other emerging areas of knowledge, as the Academy may from time to time 
determ ine and make provision for advancement and dissemination of knowledge;  
(ii) to lay administrative standards and structures and decide on all matters of creation of posts, 
laying down standards for recruitment, determining compensation packages, and contractual 
arrangements;  
(iii) to design its curriculum and pedagogy for award of  diplomas or certificates and confer degrees 
or other academic distinctions as it may deem fit;  
(iv) to grant, subject to such conditions as the Academy may determine, diplomas or certificates and 
confer degrees or other academic distinctions on the basis of such methods of evaluation and to hold its 
examinations, as the Academy may, from time to time, determine and to withdraw any such diplomas, 
certificates, degrees or other academic distinctions for good and sufficient cause;  
(v) to frame Statutes and Or dinances and to alter, modify or rescind the same;  
(vi) to organise and undertake extramural studies, training and extension services;  
(vii) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions;  
(viii) to provide distance education in such branches of learning  and to such persons as it may 
determine;  
(ix) to institute professorships, associate professorships and assistant professorships including 
Academy Professors, Professors of Eminence, Distinguished Professors, Outstanding Professors, Senior 
Professors, Eme ritus Professors, or visiting positions and other teaching or academic or other positions, 
required by the Academy and to make appointments to such positions;  
(x) to appoint persons from any other university, or institution, or industry, or persons of emin ence 
from appropriate fields of studies, including those outside the country, as Faculty of the Academy;  
(xi) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make appointments thereto;  
(xii) to co -operate or collaborate or associate with any body including, any university or institution, 
or industry, located in India or outside India;  
(xiii) to establish such centres and specialised laboratories or other units for research and instruction 
as may be required;  
(xiv) to set up schools, centres an d campuses and function there  from or conduct classes from any 
place of its choice, including the premises of laboratories or other centres of the Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research;  
(xv) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, student ships, medals and prizes;  
(xvi) to conduct research, advisory and consultancy services with or for any entity, public or 
private, whether in India or outside India, which are in conformity with the spirit and object of the 
Academy;  
(xvii) to engage scienti sts of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research as Faculty in 
imparting instruction and conducting research in the Academy;  6 
 (xviii) to establish, maintain and manage institutions and hostels for residence of students or 
establish and maintain such  institutions through the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research or any 
other body;  
(xix) to fix, demand and receive payment of fees and other charges;  
(xx) to determine the standards of admission to the Academy, which may include examination, 
other  innovative models of testing or evaluation;  
(xxi) to supervise the residences of the students of the Academy and to make arrangements for 
promoting their health, general welfare, cultural and corporate life;  
(xxii) to lay down conditions of service for al l categories of employees, including their code of 
conduct;  
(xxiii) to regulate and enforce discipline, among the students and employees and to take such 
disciplinary measures in this regard as may be necessary;  
(xxiv) to make arrangements for promoting th e health and general welfare of the employees;  
(xxv) to receive grants, benefactions, donations, gifts, bequests and transfer or acquire, hold and 
manage and dispose of any property movable or immovable, including trust and endowment properties 
for the pur poses of the Academy:  
Provided that no such grants, benefactions, donations, gifts, bequests and transfer shall be accepted by 
the Academy which in the opinion of the Board involves conditions or obligations opposed to the spirit 
and object of this Act;  
(xxvi) to borrow, on the security of property of the Academy or otherwise, money for the purposes 
of the Academy or utilise its property for such purposes as are in conformity with the spirit and object 
of this Act;  
(xxvii ) to do all such other acts and thin gs as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the 
attainment of all or any of its objects.  
(2) In exercising its powers referred to in sub -section (1), it shall be the endeavour of the Academy to 
maintain an all India character and high standards of teaching and research, and, the Academy shall, 
among other measures which may be necessary for the said purpose, take, in particular, the following 
measures,  namely: — 
(i) subject to the provisions of section 9, the admission of students shall be made on merit;  
(ii) continuous evaluation or other innovative methods of evaluation and choice based credit 
system may be introduced and the Academy may enter into agr eements with other universities and 
academic institutions in India or outside India for credit transfer and joint degree programmes;  
(iii) innovative courses and programmes of studies shall be introduced with a provision for 
periodic review and restructuri ng; 
(iv) the imparting of instruction shall be, as far as may be, through use of modern techniques or 
technologies;  
(v) the systems and structures of the Academy should be flexible to adapt to the requirements of 
multi -disciplinary and inter -disciplinary s tudies;  
(vi) active participation of students may be ensured in governance of academic matters of the 
Academy.  
9. Academy open to all castes, creed, race or class. —(1) The Academy shall be open to all persons, 
of either sex, irrespective of caste, creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the Academy to adopt 
or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to be entitled to be 
appointed as a Faculty of the Academy or to hold any other office therein, or to  be employed therein or to 
be admitted as a student in the Academy or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege 
thereof.  7 
 (2) The Academy shall make special provision for the employment or admission of women, persons 
with disabilities or of persons belonging to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the 
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the other socially and educationally backward classes of 
citizens and any exemption from making such reservation under the proviso  to clause (b) of section 4 of 
the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006 (5 of 2007) shall no t be 
applicable to the Academy:  
Provided that no such special provision shall be made on the ground of domicile.  
10. Authorities of  Academy. —The following shall be the aut horities of the Academy, namely: — 
(a) The Board;  
(b) Senate;  
(c) Director;  
(d) Boards of Studies;  
(e) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the Academy.  
11. Com position of  Board of Governors. —(1) The Board referred to in clause ( a) of section 10 
shall consist of the following, namely: — 
        (a)   the Chairperson of the Board, to be appointed under section 12;  
(b) the Director -General of the Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research,  ex officio  vice-chairperson;  
(c) the President of the Indian National Science 
Academy,  ex officio  member;  
(d) the Chairman, Atomic Energy  Commission, 
Government of India,  ex officio  member;  
 (e) the Chairman, Space Commission, 
Government of India , ex officio  member;  
(f) the Chairman, University Grants Commission, 
Government of India,  ex officio  member;  
(g) the Finance Secretary in the Ministry of finance 
Government of India,  ex officio  member;  
(h) the heads of three premier institutions in the field of 
imparting education in Science and Technology,  members to be nominated 
under section 13;  
(i) four distinguished scientists or academicians of 
global eminence, of which two should be from reputed 
institutions outside India,  mem bers to be nominated 
under section 13;  
(j) three eminent industrialists or technologists,  members to be nominated 
under section 13;  
(k) four distinguished scientists or outstanding 
scientists or Directors of laboratories of Council of 
Scientific and Indu strial Research,  members to be nominated 
under section 14;  
(l) the Director of the Academy , ex officio  member . 8 
 (2) The Chairperson shall ordinarily preside over the meetings of the Board.  
(3) The Board may evolve its own procedure for the purpose of conducting its meetings and 
transacting business therein.  
(4) The Associate Director in charge of administration of the Academy shall be the Secretary of the 
Board.  
12. Appointment of Chairperson. —(1) The Chairperson shall be appointed by the President of the 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, on the recommendation of the selection committee 
constituted under sub -section ( 2): 
Provided that the Director -General of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, being the               
ex offic io Vice -Chairperson , as referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 11, shall act as the 
Chairperson until the first Chairperson is selected and appointed in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act: 
Provided further that no person shall be selected and appointed as Chairperson unless such person is 
an Indian citizen.  
(2) The selection committee referred to in sub -section (1) shall consist of four eminent scientists or 
technologists of international repute, as may be nominated by the Presiden t of the Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research.  
(3) At least two eminent scientists or technologists of international repute nominated under              
sub-section ( 2) shall be from the heads of international societies, academies, or similar orga nisations in 
the field of science and technology.  
(4) The selection committee referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall — 
(a) be constituted within six months before the completion of tenure of the incumbent as the 
Chairperson of the Board;  
(b) submit its recommendation at least three months before the completion of the tenure of the 
incumbent Chairperson.  
(5) The selection committee may evolve its own procedure for the purposes of meetings and making 
recommendations under sub -section ( 1) includ ing making recommendations in respect of a person who 
has not applied for the post of Chairperson.  
(6) Three members of the selection committee referred to in sub -section (1) shall form quorum for the 
meeting of the committee.  
(7) The Chairperson shall exe rcise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be 
assigned to him by this Act or the Statutes.  
13. Nomination of distinguished scientists or academicians of global eminence, eminent 
industrialists or technologists and heads of three premie r institutions in the field of imparting 
educa tion in science and technology. —The heads of three premier institutions in the field of imparting 
education in science and technology, referred to in clause ( h), the distinguished scientists or academicians 
of global eminence referred to in clause ( i), and eminent industrialists or technologists referred to in 
clause (j), of sub -section ( 1) of section 11, shall be nominated, by the President of the Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Research.  
14. Nomination of  distinguished scientists or outstanding scientists of Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research or Directors of Council of Scientific and Industrial Research laboratories. — 
The nomination of distinguished scientists or outstanding scientists of the Co uncil of Scientific and 
Industrial Research or Directors of Council of Scientific and Industrial Research laboratories, referred to 
in clause ( k) of sub -section ( 1) of section 11 shall be made by the Governing Body of the Council of 
Scientific and Industri al Research.  
15. Allowanc es payable to members of Board. —The members of the Board shall be entitled to such 
allowances, if any, from the Academy, as may be provided for, in the Statutes but no member other than 9 
 the Director of the Academy referred to in cl ause (l) of sub -section (1) of section 11, shall be entitled to 
any salary by reason of this section.  
16. Term  of office of members of Board .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, term of 
office of the Chairperson or any other nominated member of  the Board shall be four years, being one term 
of the Board and they shall not be eligible to be re -appointed as Chairperson  or nominated as a member, 
as the case may be.  
Explanation I .—The period of term of office of the Chairperson or any other nominated member of 
the Board [other than ex officio  Vice -Chairperson and ex officio  members and nominated members under 
clause ( k) of sub -section ( 1) of section 11]  of the existing Academy shall  be counted for the purposes of 
this sub -section.  
Explanation II. —For the removal of doubt it is hereby declared that a person who held the office of a 
member shall not be eligible to be re -appointed as a member but may be appointed as the Chairperson in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that an outgoing member of the Board shall, unless or otherwise directed, continue in office 
until another person is appointed, or, as the case may be, nominated as a member in his place.  
(2) In the event  of vacancy in the office of the Chairperson, by reason of his death or resignation or 
otherwise, the Vice -Chairperson shall act as the Chairperson until a new Chairperson is appointed in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill the vacancy and e nter upon his office:  
Provided that a person appointed due to a vacancy in the office of Chairperson under sub -section ( 2), 
shall be eligible to be appointed as Chairperson in accordance with the provisions of this Act only for one 
term in addition to the period for which he was appointed to fill the vacancy of Chairperson.  
(3) In the event of vacancy in the office of a nominated member under clauses ( h), (i), (j) and ( k) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 11 by reason of his death or resignation or otherwise, t he vacancy shall be filled 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that a person nominated under sub -section ( 1) of section 11 due to a vacancy in the office of 
the member, such person shall be eligible to be nominated only for one term as member in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act, in addition to the period for which he was nominated to fill the vacancy.  
(4) The term of office of an ex officio  member shall continue as long as he holds the office by virtue 
of which he is a member.  
(5) One -fourth of the members, being distinguished scientists or outstanding scientists or Directors of 
laboratories of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research nominated under clause ( k) of sub -section 
(1) of section 11 shall retire every year an d new members shall be nominated in their place in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that, notwithstanding anything contained in this sub -section, the members, being 
distinguished scientists or outstanding scientists of the Council of Sc ientific and Industrial Research or 
Directors of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research laboratories nominated under clause ( k) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 11, immediately after the commencement of this Act for the first time, may hold 
office for such period, as may be specified in their nomination and provisions of this sub -section shall not 
be applicable to such nominated members.  
17. Powers of Board .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board shall be responsible for 
the general su perintendence, direction and control of the affairs of the Academy and shall exercise all the 
powers of the Academy not otherwise provided for by this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, and shall 
have the power to review the acts of the Senate.  
(2) With out prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Board shall have the power s to— 
 (a) take decisions on questions of policy relating to the administration and working of the 
Academy;  
(b) institute courses of study at the Academy;  10 
 (c) make Statutes;  
(d) institute and appoint persons to academic as well as other posts in the Academy;  
(e) consider and modify or cancel or rescind Ordinances;  
(f) consider and pass resolutions on the annual report, the annual accounts and the budget 
estimates of the Academy for the next financial year, together with a statement of its development 
plans;  
(g) approve investments in infrastructure of the Academy in any land or building;  
(h) exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or i mposed 
upon it by this Act or the Statutes.  
(3) The Board shall also have the power to appoint such committees of one or more persons as it 
considers necessary for exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties and hold enquiries under 
this Act.  
18. Senate .—(1) The Senate shall co nsist of the following, namely :— 
 (a) the Director, ex officio , who shall be the Chairperson of the Senate;  
(b) all Associate Directors, ex officio members;  
(c) all Deans of the Academy, ex officio  members;  
(d) two Professors from each area of study represented by the Boards of Studies of the Academy, 
as may be nominated by the Board, ex officio  members;  
(e) two scientists of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, who being the youngest in 
age; and recipient of Shanti Swaroop Bhatnagar Award; and who are also Faculty of the Academy, as 
may be nominated by the Director -General of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research;  
(f) two scientists of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research,  who being the youngest in 
age; and recipient of CSIR -Young Scientist Award; and who are Faculty of the Academy, as may be 
nominated by the Director -General of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research;  
(g) three Directors or distinguished scientis ts or outstanding scientists of the Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research laboratories, nominated by its Director -General;  
(h) three persons, not being the employees of the Academy or the Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research, to be nominat ed by the Chancellor in consultation with the Director from 
amongst educationists of repute, one being from each of the fields of science, engineering and social 
sciences;  
(i) such other members of the staff as may be laid down in the Statutes.  
(2) The ten ure of the nominated members under clauses ( d) to ( h) of sub -section (1) shall be two 
years:  
Provided that the Senate shall not, at any time, have less than fifty per cent. of its members from the 
Council  of Scientific and Industrial Research scientists teaching in the Academy . 
19. Powers of Senate. —Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the 
Senate of the Academy shall have the control and general regulation, and be responsible for the 
maintenance, of standards of instruct ion, education and examinations in the Academy and shall exercise 
such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed upon it by the Statutes 
and Ordinances.  
20. Chancellor of Academy. —(1) The Chairperson of the Board shall be th e Chancellor of the 
Academy.  
(2) The Chancellor shall ordinarily preside at the Convocations of the Academy.  11 
 21. Director of Academy. —The Director shall be the principal academic and executive officer of the 
Academy and shall be responsible for the adminis tration of the Academy and imparting instruction, 
research and maintenance of discipline.  
22. Appointment and du ty of Director of Academy, etc. —(1) The Director shall be appointed, by 
the President of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, on the recommendation of the selection 
committee constituted under sub -section ( 2). 
(2) The selection committee referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall consist of — 
(a) the Chairperson of the Board;  
(b) the Vice -Chairperson of the Board;  
(c) the President of the Indian National Science Academy;  
(d) the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission, Government of India;  
(e) the Chairman, Space Commission, Government of India.  
(3) The selection committee referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall — 
(a) be constituted within six months before the completion of tenure of the incumbent as the 
Director;  
(b) submit its recommendation at least three months before the completion of the tenure of the 
incumbent Director.  
(4) The selection committee may evolve its own procedure for the pur poses of meetings and making 
recommendations under sub -section ( 1) including making recommendations in respect of a person who 
has not applied for the post of Director.  
(5) Three members of the selection committee referred to in sub -section (1) shall form quorum for the 
meeting of the committee:  
Provided that no person shall be selected or nominated as Director unless such person is an Indian 
citizen.  
(6) It shall be the duty of the Director that the decisions taken by the Board are implemen ted. 
(7) The Director shall submit an annual report and accounts of the Academy to the Board.  
(8) The Director shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be assigned to 
him by this Act or the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(9) The term of the Di rector shall be five years.  
23. Associate Directors .—(1) The Associate Directors of the Academy shall, be appointed by the 
Director with the approval of the Board, from amongst Professors of the Academy or scientists of the 
Council of Scientific and Indust rial Research engaged in academic activity in the Academy, for such 
period, and on such terms and conditions, as may be laid down by the Statutes, and, shall exercise such 
powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to them by this Act or the Statute s or by the Director.  
(2) The Board may assign any other designation for the Associate Directors, for the purpose of 
administrative convenience or academic efficiency . 
24. Powers of other authorities. —(1) The constitution and powers of Board of Studies shall be such 
as may be provided in the Statutes.  
(2) The powers, including the financial powers and duties of authorities, officers and other 
functionaries of the Academy shall be as provided by the Statutes.  
25. Funds of Academ y.—(1) The Academy shall ma intain and retain a fund to which shall be 
credited — 
(a) all fees (including tuition fees) and other charges received by the Academy;  12 
 (b) all monies received by the Academy by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests 
or transfers;  
(c) monies  for projects undertaken by the Academy;  
(d) income from investment made by the Academy or from any other source;  
(e) the funds received from the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, by way of loan or 
otherwise;  
(f) all monies received by the Aca demy in any other manner or from any other source.  
(2) All monies credited to the fund of the Academy shall be deposited in such banks or invested in 
such manner as the Academy may, with the approval of the Board, decide.  
(3) The fu nd shall be applied for meeting ,— 
(a) the salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the Chairperson, members of the Board or 
Faculty, officers and other employees or members of the committees set up by the Academy;  
(b) the expenses of the Academy in the discharge of its functions or exercise of its powers under 
section 8;  
(c) the expenses on objects of, and for purposes authorised by, this Act.  
(4) All expenditure of the Academy shall be within the framework of a budget  approved by the 
Board.  
26. Accounts. —(1) The Academy shall maintain proper and separate accounts giving therein the 
details of all receipts in, and, expenditure from, such fund and other relevant particulars.  
(2) The accounts referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be prepared and got audited before the expiry of 
six months from the end of each financial year.  
(3) The Academy shall submit to the Board and the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, the 
accounts referred to in sub -section ( 1) duly audit ed under section 27 and signed by the Director, Associate 
Director in charge of Finance and Associate Director in charge of Administration.  
(4) The Council of Scientific and Industrial Research referred to in sub -section ( 3), the Board and any 
other person  appointed by them in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Academy shall have 
the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and 
papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Academy.  
27. Audit o f accounts and its publication .—(1) The accounts of the Academy shall, without 
prejudice to the provisions contained in the Comptroller and Auditor -Generals (Duties, Powers and 
Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 (56 of 1971), be audited by auditors who may be appointed by the 
Board for the term of one year and such auditors shall be eligible for re -appointment.  
(2) No person shall be eligible to be appointed as an auditor under sub -section ( 1) unless he is a 
chartered accountant as defined in clause ( b) of s ub-section (1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants 
Act, 1949 (38 of 1949), and who has obtained a certificate of practice under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 
of that Act.  
(3) The accounts of the Academy shall, after the completion of the audit under s ub-section ( 1) and 
submission thereof to the Board and the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research be published on the 
website of the Academy.  
28. Statutes. —(1) The Statutes of the Academy shall be enacted by the Board.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the Senate may make 
recommendations for enactment of Statutes to the Board.  
(3) The Board may, from time to time, make new Statutes or may amend or repeal or rescind the 
Statutes with effect from such date as it may  direct.  13 
 29. Matters to be provided by Statutes. —Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may 
provide for all or any of the matters considered necessary by the Board for functioning of the Academy 
within the framework of this Act, including the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the conferment of degrees and diplomas;  
(b) the constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Studies;  
(c) the tuition fee and other fees to be charged;  
(d) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, medals and prizes;  
(e) the term of office and the method of appointment of officers of the Academy;  
(f) the qualification of Faculty of the Academy (other than the scientists of the Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Research engaged in the service of the Academy),  officers and other staff of 
Academy:  
Provided that the scientists of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research engaged in the 
service of the Academy shall be governed by the qualifications specified by the Council and nothing 
contained in this Act  shall be construed to disqualify them from undertaking the service of the 
Academy or engaging them as Faculty of the Academy;  
(g) the classification, the method of appointment and the determination of the terms and 
conditions of service of Faculty, office rs and other staff of the Academy;  
(h) the provision of insurance fund, provident fund and other retirement benefits, for the benefit 
of the Faculty, officers and other staff of the Academy ; 
(i) the constitution, powers and duties of authorities of the Academy ; 
(j) the establishment and maintenance of hostels;  
(k) the conditions of residence of students of the Academy and the levying of fees for residence in 
the hostels and of other charges;  
(l) the allowances to be paid to the Chairperson and other memb ers of the Board and any 
committee constituted by the Academy;  
(m) the meetings of the Board, the Senate, or any committee, the quorum at such meetings and the 
procedure to be followed in the conduct of their business;  
(n) any other matter which may be req uired or necessar y for the purposes of this Act.  
30. Ordinances .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances of the 
Academy may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
 (a) the admission of the students;  
(b) the courses of study;  
(c) the conditions under which students shall be admitted and shall be eligible for degrees, 
diplomas and certificates and to the examinations of the Academy, and shall be eligible for the 
degrees, diplomas and certificates;  
(d) the conditions of award of the fellowships, scholarships, medals and prizes;  
(e) the condition and mode of appointment and duties of examining bodies, examiners and 
moderators;  
(f) the conduct of examinations;  
(g) the maintenance of discipline among students o f the Academy;  
(h) any other matter which by this Act or the Statute, is to be, or, may be, provided for by the 
Ordinances.  14 
 (2) Save as otherwise provided in this section, Ordinances shall be made by the Senate.  
(3) All Ordinances made by the Senate shall  have the effect from such date as it may direct, but every 
Ordinance so made shall be submitted, as soon as may be, to the Board and shall be considered by the 
Board in its subsequent meeting.  
(4) The Board shall have the power by resolution to modify or cancel or rescind any of the 
Ordinances and such Ordinances shall, from the date of such resolution stand modified accordingly or 
cancelled or rescinded, as the case may be.  
31. Review of functioning of Academy .—(1) There shall be a review of the function ing of the 
Academy once in every four years by persons of eminence to be appointed by the Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research.  
(2) The Academy shall meet the expenses for conducting the review under sub -section (1) and upon 
receipt of the report of such review, the Board may take appropriate action.  
(3) In addition to the review under sub -section ( 1), the Board may conduct review of functioning of 
administrative and academic wings of the Academy, in such manner and at such intervals, as may be 
provided in the Statutes.  
32. Appointments .—All appointments of the staff of the Academy (except appointment of the 
Director), shall be made in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Statute, by — 
(a) the Board for the academic staff;  
(b) the Director, in any other case.  
33. Conditions of service .—(1) Every employee of the Academy shall be appointed on contractual 
basis under a written contract, which shall be lodged with the Academy and a copy of which shall be 
furnished to the employee  concerned:  
Provided that all scientists and other employees of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 
engaged in the service of the Academy shall be governed by the service conditions, rules and regulations 
of the Council of Scientific and Indu strial Research.  
(2) The Academy shall have a flexible compensation system which recognises performance, as laid 
down in the Statutes, to bring the best talent in the Academy:  
Provided that the scientists of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Researc h— 
(a) engaged in the service of the Academy; and  
(b) who draw their salary from the Council,  
shall be eligible for such allowances or honorarium, as may be determined by the Statute . 
34. Arbitration .—(1) Any dispute arising out of a contract between the Academy and any of its 
employees shall, at the request of the employee concerned or at the instance of the Academy, be referred 
to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by the Director, one member nominated 
by the employee, and such two arbitrators shall appoint the third arbitrator who shall act as the presiding 
arbitrator.  
(2) The arbitration under sub -section ( 1) shall be governed by the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996 (26 of 1996).  
 35. Resignation, removal and suspension o f Chairperson  and other Members or Director. —(1) 
The Chairperson or any Member of the Board other than ex officio  Members of the Board or Director 
may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the President of the Council of Scientific and 
Industri al Research, resign his office:  
Provided that the Chairperson or such Member or Director shall, unl ess he is permitted by the President 
of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office 15 
 until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as 
his successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is the earliest.  
(2) The President of the Council of Scientific and  Industrial Research may remove from office the 
Chairperson or any Member of the Board or the Director, who — 
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) being the Director has engaged at any time, during his term of office, in any paid 
employment; or  
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude; or  
(d) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such Chairperson or Member or 
Director; or  
(e) is of unsound mind and stands so declar ed by a competent court; or  
(f) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially the exercise of 
his functions as such Chairperson or Member or Director; or  
(g) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in of fice prejudicial to the public 
interest; or  
(h) has been guilty of proved misbehavior ; or 
(i) has such other disqualifications as may be prescribed.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Chairperson or a Member of the Board 
or the Director shall not be removed from his office on the grounds specified in clause ( f) or clause ( g) or 
clause ( h) of sub -section ( 1), except by an order made by the President of the Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research after an inquiry made in this  behalf in which such Chairperson or Member or Director 
has been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in 
respect of those charges.  
(4) In the event of inquiry instituted under sub -section ( 2), the President of the Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research may suspend such Chairperson or Member or Director against whom inquiry has 
been instituted for a period not exceeding six months if it is considered necessary in public interest.  
(5) The President of th e Council of Scientific and Industrial Research may, by rules, regulate the 
procedure for the inquiry referred to in sub -section ( 2). 
(6) In case any nominated member under clause (k) of sub -section ( 1) of section 11 in the Board 
incurs any of the disquali fications under clauses (a) to (i) of sub -section ( 1), such nominated member 
shall not be eligible to be nominated as such and his nomination as nominated member shall be revoked 
by those who nominated such member.  
36. Meetings. —The meetings of the Board, Senate, or other committees constituted by the Academy 
may be held using contemporary tools of information and communication technologies (including video -
conferencing) without the members necessarily having to be physically pres ent.  
37. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate acts or proceedings of Bo ard, Academy or any other 
body. —No act of the Board or the Academy or any other body set up under this Act or the Statutes, shall  
be invalid merely by reason of — 
 (a) any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution thereof; or  
(b) any defect in the selection, nomination or appointment of a person acting as a member 
thereof; or  
(c) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the case.  
  16 
 38. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or ex pedient for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is mad e, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the suc cessive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the order or both Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, howe ver, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previ ously done under that order.  
 
___________  
--------------------------The Factoring Regulation Act, 2011--------------------------
1 
 THE FACTORING REGULATION ACT, 2011  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________ _ 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
REGISTRATION OF FACTORS  
3. Registration of factors.  
4. Provisions of non -banking finan cial companies apply to factor.  
5. Requirement for registration as a factor not to apply to bank or Statutory cor poration or 
Government co mpany.  
6. Powers of Reserve Bank to give directions and to collect information from factors.  
 
CHAPTER III  
ASSIG NMENT OF RECEIVABLES  
7. Assignment  of receivables.  
8. Notice to debtor and discharge of obligation of such debtor.  
9. Discharge of liability of debtor on payment to assignee.  
10. Payment made by debtor to assignor to be held in trust for benefit o f assignee in certain cases.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF PARTIES TO CONTRACT FOR ASSIGMENT OF RECEIVABLES  
11. Rights an d obligations of parties to contract for assignment of receivables.  
12. Liability of debtor.  
13. Assignor to be trustee of assignee.  
14. Liability of debtor in case of an as signor being mircro or small enterprises.  
15. Principle of debtor protection.  
16. Defences and right of set off of debtor.  
17. Modification of original contract.  
18. Breach of contract.  
 
CHAPTER V  
REGISTRATION OF ASSIGNMENTS  
19. Registration of certain assignment s of receivables transactions.  
20. Public inspection.  
  2 
 CHAPTER VI  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
SECTIONS  
21. Penalties.  
22. Penalties for non -compliance of direction of Reserve Bank.  
23. Offences.  
24. Cognizance of offences.  
25. Offences by factors . 
 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
26. Provision s of this Act to override other laws.  
27. Application of other laws not barred.  
28. Limitation.  
29. Confidentiality of information.  
30. Power to exempt.  
31. Provisio ns of this Act not to apply or a ffect in certain cases.  
32. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
33. Laying of rules.  
34. Power to remove difficulties.  
35. Amendments to certain enactments.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
 
 
  3 
 THE FACTORING REGULATION ACT, 2011  
ACT NO. 12 OF 2012  
  [22nd January, 2012.]  
An Act to provide for and regulate assignment of receivables by making provision for 
registration there  for and rights and obligations of parties to contract for assignment of 
receivables and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Fac toring Regulation 
Act, 2011.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification i n the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act, and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming 
into force of that provision.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —  
(a) “assignment ” means  transfer by agreement, of undivided interest of any assignor in any 
receivable due from any debtor in favour  of a factor and includes an assignment wher e either the 
assignor or the debtor, are situated or established outside India.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, undivided interest of any assignor in any 
receivable shall not include creation of rights in receivables as security for loans and  advances or 
other obligations by a bank or a financial institution;  
(b) “assignee” means a factor in whose favour the receivable is transferred;  
(c) “assignor” means any person who is the owner of any receivable;  
(d) “bank” means,  —  
(i) a banking compan y; 
(ii) a corresponding new bank;  
(iii) the State Bank of India;  
(iv) a subsidiary bank;  
(v) such other bank which the Central Government may by notification specify for the purposes 
of this Act on the recommendations of the Reserve Bank; or  
(vi) a Multi -State Co -operative Society registered under the Multi -State Co -operative Societies 
Act, 2002 (39 of 2002) and licensed to undertake business of banking by the Reserve Bank under 
the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949);  
(e) “banking company” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( c) of section 5 of the 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949);  
(f) “business enterprise ” means any enterprise or medium enterprise, micro enterprise or small 
enterprise as defined in clau ses ( e), (g), (h) and ( m) of section 2 of the Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises Development Act, 2006 (27 of 2006), respectively engaged in any business activity;  
                                                           
1. 2nd April, 2012 (Ss. 19, 20, 21, 32), vide notification No. S.O. 711(E), dated 2nd April, 2012, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, s ec. 3 ( ii). 
1st February, 2012 (expect ss. 19, 20, 21 and 32),  vide notification No. S.O. 1399(E), dated 21st June, 2012, see 
Gazette of India, Extraordina ry, Part II, s ec. 3( ii). 4 
 (g) “corresponding new bank ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( da) of sectio n 5 of 
the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949);  
(h) “debtor” means any person liable to the assignor, whether under a contract or otherwise, to 
pay any receivable or discharge any obligation in respect of the receivable whether existing, accruing, 
future, conditional or contingent;  
(i) “factor” means a non -banking financial company as defined in clause ( f) of section 45 -I of the 
Reserv e Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934) which has been granted a certificate of registration 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 or anybody  corporate established under an Act of Parliament or any 
State Legislature or any Bank or any company registere d under  the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) 
engaged in the factoring business;  
(j) “factoring business ” means the busine ss of acquisition of receivables of assignor by accepting 
assignment of such receivables or financing, whether by way of making loans or advances or 
otherwise against the security interest over any receivables but does not include —  
(i) credit facilities p rovided by a bank in its ordinary course of business against security of 
receivables;  
(ii) any activity as commission agent or otherwise for sale of agricultural produce or goods of 
any kind whatsoever or any activity relating to the production, storage, s upply, distribution, 
acquisition or control of such produce or goods or provision of any services.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause —  
(i) the expression “agricultural produce ” shall have the meaning assigned to it under clause 
(a) of section 2 of the Agricultural Produce (Grading and Marking) Act, 1937 (1 of 1937); and  
(ii) the expressions “goods” and “commission agent ” shall have the meanings assigned to 
them respectively under clause ( d) and Explanation  (ii) of clause ( i) of section 2 of the F orward 
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 (74 of 1952);  
(k) “financial contract ” means any spot, forward, future, option or swap transaction involving 
interest rates, commodities, currencies, shares, bonds, debentures or any other financial instrument, 
any repurchase of securities and lending transaction or any other similar transacti on or combination of 
such transactions entered into in the financial markets;  
(l) “netting agreement ” means any agreement among the system participants for the purpose of 
determination by the system provider of the amount of money or securities due or paya ble or 
deliverable as a result of setting off or adjusting the payment obligations or delivery obligations 
among the system participants, including the claims and obligations arising out of the termination by 
the system provider, on the insolvency or disso lution or winding up of any system participant or such 
circumstances as the system provider, may specify in its rules or regulations or bye -laws (by whatever 
name called), of the transactions admitted for settlement at a future date so that only a net clai m be 
demanded or a net obligation be owned;  
(m) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(n) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(o) “property” means,— 
(i) the immovable property;  
(ii) the movable property;  
(iii) any debt or any right to receive payment of money, whether secured or unsecured;  
(iv) the receivables;  
(v) the intangible assets, being know -how, patent, copyright, design, trade mark, licence, 
franchise or any other business or commercial right of similar nature;  5 
 (p) “receivables ” mean all or part of or undivided interest in any right of any person under a 
contract including an international contract where either the assignor or the debtor or the assignee is 
situated or established in a Sta te outside India; to payment of a monetary sum whether such right is 
existing, future, accruing, conditional or contingent arising from and includes, any arrangement 
requiring payment of toll or any other sum, by whatever name called, for the use of any in frastructure 
facility or services;  
(q) “Reserve Bank ”, means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under section 3 of the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
(r) “State Bank of India ” means the State Bank of India constituted under section 3 of t he State 
Bank of India Act, 1955 (23 of 1955);  
(s) “Subsidiary Bank ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( k) of section 2 of the State 
Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 (38 of 1959);  
(t) words and expressions used and not defined in t his Act but defined in the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), the Companies Act, 
1956 (1 of 1956), the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of 
Security Interest Act, 2002 (54 of 2002), the Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005 
(30 of 2005), or the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 (27 of 2006), shall 
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts.  
CHAPTER II  
REGISTRA TION OF FACTORS  
3. Registration of factors .—(1) No factor shall commence or carry on the factoring business unless it 
obtains a certificate of registration from the Reserve Bank to commence or carry on the fa ctoring business 
under this Act . 
(2) Every factor shall make an application for registration to the Reserve Bank in such form and 
manner as it may specify:  
Provided that a company registered as a non -banking financial company and existing on the 
commencement of this Act and engaged in factoring bus iness as its principal business before such 
commencement shall make an application for registration as a factor to the Reserve Bank before the 
expiry of the period of six months from such commencement and, notwithstanding anything contained in 
sub-section (1), may continue to carry on the factoring business until a certificate of registration is issued 
to it or rejection of application for registration is communicated to it.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts it is hereby clarified that a non -banking fi nancial company 
engaged in factoring business shall be treated as engaged in factoring business as its “principal business ” 
if it fulfils the following conditions, namely: — 
(a) if its financial assets in the factoring business are more than fifty per cent.  of its total assets or 
such per cent. as may be stipulated by the Reserve Bank; and  
(b) if its income from factoring business is more than fifty per cent. of the gross income or such 
per cent. as may be stipulated by the Reserve Bank.  
(3) Every applicant for grant of a certificate of a registration as a factor shall comply, for the purpose 
of registration, with all the requirements to be fulfilled by an applicant for grant of certificate of 
registration as non -banking financial company under the Reserve Ba nk of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934) and 
all the provisions of that Act, so far as they relate to the registration of non -banking financial companies, 
shall (except those provided for under this Act) mutatis mutandis  apply.  
(4) In the case of existing non -banking financial company the Reserve Bank may issue a fresh 
certificate of registration as a factor, if the principal business of the non -banking financial company is the 
factoring business.  
(5) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, every factor including  factors not subject to requirement of 
registration under section 5, shall be governed by the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), the 6 
 rules and regulations made thereunder and the directions or guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank, from 
time to t ime. 
4. Provisions of non -banking financial companies apply to factor. —-All provisions of Chapter 
IIIB of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934) relating to non -banking financial companies 
which have been granted a certificate of registration under sub -section ( 5) of section 45 -IA of the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934 shall (except those specifically provided for under this Act) mutatis mutandis  
apply to a factor which has been granted a certificate of registration under section 3.  
5. Recruit ment for registration as a factor not to apply to bank or Statutory corporation or 
Government company .—Nothing contained in section 3 shall apply to a bank or any corporation 
established under an Act of Parliament or State Legislature, or a Government Comp any as defined under 
section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).  
6. Powers of Reserve Bank to give directions and to collect information from factors .—(1) The 
Reserve Bank may, at any time by general or special order, direct that every factor shal l furnish to it, in 
such form, at such intervals and within such time, such statements, information or particulars relating to 
factoring business undertaken by the factor, as may be specified by the Reserve Bank from time to time.  
(2) The Reserve Bank may , if it considers necessary in the interest of business enterprises availing 
factoring services or in the interest of factors or interest of other stake holders give directions to the 
factors either generally or to any factor in particular or group of fact ors in respect of any matters relating 
to or connected with the factoring business undertaken by such factors.  
(3) If any factor fails to comply with any direction given by the Reserve Bank under sub -section ( 2), 
the Reserve Bank may prohibit such factor from undertaking the factoring business:  
Provided that before prohibiting any factor from undertaking the factoring business, the factor shall 
be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
CHAPTER III  
ASSIGNMENT OF RECEIVABLES  
7. Assignment of receivables .—(1) Any assignor may, by an agreement in writing, assign any 
receivable due and payable to him by any debtor, to any factor, being the assignee, for a consideration as 
may be agreed between the assignor a nd the assignee and the assignor shall at the time of such 
assignment, disclose to the assignee any defences and right of set off that may be available to the debtor:  
Provided that if the debtor liable to pay the receivable or the business of factor is sit uated or 
established outside India, any assignment of receivable shall be subject to the provisions of the Foreign 
Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999).  
(2) On execution of agreement in writing for assignment of receivables, all the rights, remedies  and 
any security interest created over any property exclusively to secure the due payment of receivable shall 
vest in the assignee and the assignee shall have an absolute right to recover such receivable and exercise 
all the rights and remedies of the ass ignor whether by way of damages or otherwise, or whether notice of 
assignment as provided in section 8 is given or not.  
(3) Any assignment of receivables which constitute security for repayment of any loan advanced by 
any Bank or other creditor and if the assignor has given notice of such encumbrance to the assignee, then 
on accepting assignment of such receivable, the assignee shall pay the consideration for such assignment 
to the Bank or the creditor, as the case may be.  
8. Notice to debtor and dischar ge of obligation of such debtor .—Any assignee of a receivable 
shall not be entitled to demand payment of the receivable from the debtor in respect of such receivables 
unless notice of such assignment is given to the debtor by the assignor or the assignee along with  express 
authority in its favors  granted by the assignor.  
9. Discharge of liability of debtor on payment to assignee .—Where a notice of assignment of 
receivable is given by the assignor or the assignee, as the case may be, under section 8 the debtor on 
receipt of such notice, shall make payment to the assignee and payment made to such assignee in 7 
 discharge of any obligation in relation to the receivables specified in the notice shall fully discharge the 
debtor making the payment, from corresponding li ability in respect of such payment.  
10. Payment made by debtor to assignor to be held in trust for benefit of assignee in certain 
cases .—Where no notice of assignment of receivables is given by the assignor or under his authority by 
the assignee, any payme nt made by the debtor in respect of such receivables to the assignor shall be held 
in trust for the benefit of the assignee which shall be forthwith be paid over to such assignee, as the case 
may be, or its agent duly authorised in this behalf.  
CHAPTER IV  
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF PARTIES TO CONTRACT FOR ASSIGNMENT OF RECEIVABLES  
11. Rights and obligations of parties to contract for assignment of receivables .—Without 
prejudice to the provisions contained in any other law for the time being in force, the deb tor shall have the 
right to notice of assignment under section 8 before any demand is made on it by the assignee and until 
notice is served on the debtor, the debtor shall be entitled to make payments to the assignor in respect of 
assigned receivables in a ccordance with the original contract and such payment shall fully discharge the 
debtor from corresponding liability under the original contract.  
Explanation. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that nothing contained in this section 
shall aff ect the rights of debtor to make payment to the assignee under  section 9.  
12. Liability of debtor .—Where a notice of assignment as referred to in section  8 is served, the 
debtor shall,  — 
 (a) intimate the assignee the details of the deposits or advance or payment on account made to 
the assignor before the receipt of notice of assignment and also provide any other information to the 
assignee relating to the receivable as and when called upon by the assignee to do so;  
(b) not be entitled to a valid discharge of his liability in respect of assigned receivables, unless he 
makes the payment due on an assigned receivables to the assignee.  
13. Assignor to be trustee of assignee. —Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, where a debtor makes any payment to an assignor which represents 
payment due on an assigned receivable, such payment shall be deemed to be for the benefit of the 
assignee, and the assignor shall be de emed to have received the amount of such payment as a trustee of 
the assignee and the assignor shall make payment of such amount to the assignee.  
14. Liability of debtor in case of an assignor being micro or small enterprises .—(1) If the 
assignor of receiv ables is a micro or small enterprise, the liability of the debtor to make payment due on 
assigned receivables shall be subject to the provisions contained in sections 15 to 17 of the Micro, Small 
and Medium Enterprise s Development Act, 2006 (27 of 2 006) wi th regards to the delayed payments of 
the receivables.  
(2) In the event of delay in payment on the part of the debtor to pay the receivable of any micro or 
small enterprise, the assignee shall be entitled to receive interest for the delayed period and sha ll take 
steps under the provisions of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006                  
(27 of 2006) for the purpose of the recovery of the interest and shall pay such interest to the micro or 
small enterprise.  
15. Principle of  debtor protection. —(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, any assignment of 
the receivable shall not, without the express consent of the debtor in writing, affect the rights and 
obligations of the debtor (including the terms and conditions of the con tract).  
(2) Consequent upon the assignment of receivables, the payment instruction under the contract 
entered into between assignor and debtor may modify the name of person, address or account to which the 
debtor is required to make payment, but such instructions shall not modify: — 
(a) the amount of debt specified in the original contract; or  8 
 (b) the place specified in the original contract at which payment is to be made or in case no such 
place is mentioned in the contract, the place of payment to a p lace other than where the debtor is 
situated; or  
(c) the date on which payment is to be made or other terms of the original contract relating to 
payment.  
16. Defences and right of set off of debtor .— In a claim by the assignee against the debtor for 
paymen t of the assigned receivable, the debtor may raise against the assignee, — 
 (a) all defences and right of set off arising from the original contract, entered into between the 
assignor and debtor or any other contract that was part of the same transaction, o f which the debtor 
could avail himself as if the assignment had not been made and such claim were made by the assignor 
instead of assignee:  
Provided that the assignee shall, unless otherwise agreed between the parties, be entitled to 
recover from the assig nor, any loss suffered by it as a result of any such defences and right of set off 
being exercised by the debtor;  
(b) any other right of set off if it was available to the debtor at the time notice, under section 8, of 
the assignment was received by the de btor. 
17. Modification of original contract .—(1) Any agreement made before service of notice, under 
section 8, of the assignment of a receivable between the assignor and the debtor that affects the assignee's 
rights in respect of that receivable shall be effective as against the assignee, and the assignee shall acquire 
rights in the assigned receivables, as modified by such agreement.  
(2) Any agreement made, after notice of the assignment between the assignor and the debtor that 
affects the assignee's righ ts, shall be ineffective as against the assignee unless, — 
(a) the assignee consents to it; or  
(b) the receivable is not fully earned by performance and either the modification is provided for in 
the original contract or, in the context of the original cont ract, a reasonable assignee would consent to 
the modification.  
(3) Nothing contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall affect any right of the assignor or the assignee 
arising from breach of an agreement between them.  
18. Breach of contract. —If the assigno r commits any breach of the original contract with the debtor, 
such breach shall not entitle the debtor to recover from the assignee any sum paid by the debtor to the 
assignor or the assignee pursuant to the factoring transactions:  
Provided that nothing co ntained in this section shall affect the rights of the debtor to claim from the 
assignor any loss or damages caused to him by reason of breach of the original contract.  
CHAPTER V  
REGISTRATION OF ASSIGNMENTS  
19. Registration of certain assignments of receiv ables transactions. —(1) Every factor shall file, 
for the purposes of registration, the particulars of every transaction of assignment of receivables in his 
favour with the Central Registry to be set -up under section 20 of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of 
Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (54 of 2002), within a period of thirty 
days from the date of such assignment or from the date of establishment of such registry, as the case may 
be, in the manner and subjec t to payment of such fee as may be prescribed in this behalf.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of filing of particulars of every transaction of assignment of 
receivables with the Central Registry, the receivables may be described specifically or generally with  
reference to the debtor, or the period to which they relate or by any other general description by which 
such receivables can be identified.  9 
 (2) For the purposes of this Act, a record called the Central Register shall be kept at the head office of 
the Cen tral Registry for entering the particulars of the transactions relating to assignment of receivables in 
favour of a factor.  
(3) On realisation of the assigned receivables or settlement of the claim against the debtors, the factor 
shall file satisfaction of  the assignment of receivables in its favour, in such manner and subject to 
payment of such fees as may be prescribed in this behalf.  
(4) The provisions for registration of transactions contained in the Securitisation and Reconstruction 
of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (54 of 2002) and the rules made 
thereunder shall, mutatis mutandis , apply to the record of assignment of receivables in favour of a factor 
in the Central Register with the Central Registry.  
20. Public inspection .—(1) The particulars of transactions of assignment of receivables entered in 
the Central Register of such transactions under section  19 shall be open during business hours for 
inspection by any person on payment of such fee as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Central Register referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 19 maintained in electronic form, 
shall also be open during the business ho urs or such extended hours as may be specified by the Central 
Registry for inspection by any person through electronic media on payment of such fee as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) The provisions for maintenance of Central Register and public inspection thereof c ontained in the 
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002              
(54 of 2002) and the rules made thereunder shall, mutatis mutandis , apply.  
CHAPTER VI  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
21. Penalties .—If a default is made in filing under section 19 the particulars of any transaction of 
assignment of receivables and realisation of receivables by a factor, such company and every officer of 
the company who is in default shall be punishable with fine which ma y extend to five thousand rupees for 
every day during which the default continues.  
22. Penalties for non -compliance of direction of Reserve Bank .—(1) If any factor fails to comply 
with any direction issued by the Reserve Bank under section 6, the Reserve B ank may impose a penalty 
which may extend to five lakh rupees and in the case of a continuing offence, with an additional fine 
which may extend to ten thousand rupees for every day during which the default continues.  
(2) For the purpose of adjudging the pe nalty under sub -section ( 1), the Reserve Bank shall serve 
notice on the factor requiring it to show cause why the amount specified in the notice should not be 
imposed and a reasonable opportunity of being heard shall also be given to such factor.  
(3) Any p enalty imposed by the Reserve Bank under this section shall be payable within a period of 
fourteen days from the date on which notice issued by the Reserve Bank demanding payment of the sum 
is served on the factor and in the event of failure of the factor to pay the sum within such period, may be 
levied on a direction made by the principal civil court having jurisdiction in the area where the registered 
office of the factor is situated; or, in the case of a factor incorporated outside India, where its princ ipal 
place of business in India is situated:  
Provided that no such direction shall be made except on an application made to the court by the 
Reserve Bank or any officer authorised by Reserve Bank in this behalf.  
(4) The court which makes a direction under sub-section ( 3) shall issue a certificate specifying the 
sum payable by the factor and every such certificate shall be enforceable in the same manner as if it were 
a decree made by the court in a civil suit.  
23. Offences. —If any person contravenes or attem pts to contravene or abets the contravention of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rules made thereunder, for which no specific penalty has been provided 
for, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine,  or 
with both.  10 
 24. Cognizance of offences. —(1) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Act except upon a complaint in writing made by an officer of the Reserve Bank, generally or 
specially authorised in writing in this behalf by  the Reserve Bank.  
(2) No Court other than that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or 
a court superior thereto shall try any such offence punishable under this Act.  
25. Offences by factors. —(1) Where an offence under t his Act has been committed by a factor, every 
person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the factor, for 
the conduct of the business of the factor, as well as the factor, shall be deemed to be guilty of the o ffence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded a gainst and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without  his knowledge or 
that he has exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a factor and it is proved that the offence  has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the factor, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty o f 
the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, a “director”, in relation to a factor means any officer 
entrusted with the management of the whole or substantially the affai rs of the factor.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
26. Provisions of this Act to override other laws .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect, 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or 
any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law.  
27. Appli cation of other laws not barred. —The provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder 
shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (26 of 1881), the 
Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (4 of 1882), the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), the Securitisation and 
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Secu rity Interest Act, 2002 (54 of 2002), the 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 (27 of 2006) or any other law for the time 
being in force.  
28. Limitation. —No assignee of any receivable shall be entitled to take any measures for recovery  of 
any assigned receivable, through any court or Tribunal unless his claim in respect of the receivable is 
made within the period of limitation specified under the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963).  
29. Confidentiality of information .—Save as otherwise pr ovided in this Act, or unless required to 
do so by an order passed by any Court or Tribunal or any other statutory authority under any provision of 
law for the time being in force or for the purpose of recovery of the receivable, a factor shall maintain 
confidentiality and shall not disclose to any person information obtained by it from, any assignor, its 
present and future customers, its commercial and business activities and the terms of sale between the 
assignor and any debtor and other detail about the assignor.  
30. Power to exempt .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the public interest, direct 
that any of the provisions of this Act,  
(a) shall not apply to such class or classes of banks or a company or a factor; or  
(b) shall apply to the such class or classes of banks or a company or a factor with such exceptions, 
modifications and adaptations as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) A copy of every notification issued under sub -section ( 1), shall be laid before each House of 
Parliamen t, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 11 
 session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
notification or both the Houses agree that the notification shall not be issued or, the notification shall have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any s uch 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
the notification.  
31. Provisions of this Act not to apply or affect in certain cases .—(1) The provisions of this Act 
shall not apply to any assignment of receivables arising under or from the following transactions, 
namely:— 
 (a) any merger, acquisition or amalgamation of business activities or sale or change in the 
ownership or legal status of the business;  
(b) transactions on any stock exchange or commodities exchange regulated by the Securities and 
Exchange Board of India constituted under the provisions of the Securities and Exchange Board of 
India Act, 1992(15 of 1992) or by the Forward M arkets Commission under the Forward Contracts 
(Regulation) Act, 1952 (74 of 1952), respectively;  
(c) financial contracts governed by netting agreements, except a receivable owed on the 
termination of all outstanding transactions;  
(d) foreign exchange tran sactions except receivables in any foreign currency;  
(e) inter -bank payment systems, inter -bank payment agreements or clearance and settlement 
systems relating to securities or other financial assets or instruments;  
(f) bank deposits;  
(g) a letter of credi t or independent guarantee;  
(h) rights and obligations of any person under the law governing negotiable instruments, 
negotiable warehouse receipts under the Warehousing (Development and Regulation) Act, 2007                
(37 of 2007) or to instruments wh ich are for the time being, by law or custom negotiable or any 
mercantile document of title to goods;  
(i) sale of goods or services for any personal, family or household use;  
(j) any assignment of loan receivables by a bank or non -banking financial company  to another 
bank or non -banking financial company;  
(k) securitisation transactions (including assignment of receivables to special purpose vehicles or 
trusts that issue securities against such receivables, bought from a single debtor or single group of 
debtors).  
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall affect the rights and obligations of a consumer, manufacturer, 
trader or service provider under the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (68 of 1986).  
32. Power of Ce ntral Government to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, in 
consultation with the Reserve Bank, by notification and in the Electronic Gazette as defined in clause ( 5) 
of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000) make rules for 
carrying out t he provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
 (a) the form and manner in which the transactions of assignment of receivables in favour of a 
factor shall be filed and the fee for filing such transaction under sub -section ( 1) of section 19;  
(b) the form and manner in which  the satisfaction of assignment of receivable or settlement of the 
claim shall be registered and t he fee for filing such transactions under sub -section ( 3) of section 19;  
(c) fee for inspecting the Central Register under section 20; and  
(d) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed, in respect of which provision is 
to be made or may  be made by rules.  12 
 33. Laying of rules .—Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in  two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be mad e, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.  
34. Pow er to remove difficulties. —-(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appea r to be necessary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of two years from 
the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
35. Amendments to certain enactments .—The enactments specified in the Schedule shall be 
amended in the manner specified therein.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  13 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 35)  
 
Year  Act No.  Short Title  Amendment  
1899  2 The Indian Stamp Act, 
1899  After section  8C,the following section  
shall be inserted, namely: —  
„8D. Agre ement or document for 
assignment of  receivables  not liable to 
stamp duty.— 
Notwithstanding anything contained in 
this Act or any other law for the time being 
in force, any agreement or other document 
for assignment of “receivables ” as defined 
in clause ( p) of section 2 of the Factoring 
Regulation Act, 2011 in favour of any 
“factor” as defined in  clause ( i) of section 2 
of the said Act shall not be liable to duty 
under this Act or any other law for the time 
being in force. ‟. 
1908  5 The Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908  In Order XXXVII, in rule 1, in sub-rule 
(2), in clause ( b), after sub -clause ( iii), the 
following sub -clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
“(iv) suit for recovery  of receivables 
instituted by any assignee of a receivable. ”. 
1934  2 The Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934  In clause (d) of sub -section (1) of section 8, 
for the words “one Government officials” 
the words “two Government officials ” shall 
be substituted.  
2005  30 The Credit Information 
Companies (Regulation) 
Act, 2005  In section  2, in clause ( f), after sub -clause 
(ii), the following sub -clause shall be 
inserted, namely: —  
“(iia) a factor as defined under clause ( i) 
of section 2 of the Factoring Regulation 
Act, 2011. ”. 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------The National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences, Bangalore Act, 2012--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF MENTAL HEALTH AND  
NEURO -SCIENCES, BANGALORE ACT, 2012  
__________________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTION S 
__________________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration of National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro -Sciences, Bangalore, as an 
institution of national importance.  
3. Definitions.  
4. Incorporation of Institute.  
5. Composition of Institute.  
6. Term of office of and vacancies among members.  
7. Powers and functions of President.  
8. Vice -President of Institute.  
9. Allowances of President , Vice -President and other members.  
10. Meeting s of Institute.  
11. Governing Body and other committees of Institute.  
12. Staff of Institute.  
13. Objects of Institute.  
14. Functions of Institute.  
15. Vesting of property.  
16. Payment to Institute.  
17. Fund of Institute.  
18. Budget of Institute.  
19. Accounts and audit.  
20. Annual report.  
21. Pension and provident funds.  
22. Authentication of orders and instruments of Institute.  
23. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc.  
24. Grant of medical degrees, diplomas, etc., by Institute.  
25. Recognition of medi cal qualifications granted by Institute.  
26. Control by Central Government.  
27. Resolution of differences.  
28. Returns and information.  
29. Transfer of service of existing employees.  
30. Power to make rules.  
31. Power to make regulations.  
32. Laying of rules and regulations before Parliament.  
33. Power to remove difficulties.  
  2 
 THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF MENTAL HEALTH AND  
NEURO -SCIENCES, BANGALORE ACT, 2012  
ACT NO. 38 OF 2012  
[13th September, 2012 .] 
An Act to declare the institution known as the National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro -
Sciences, Bangalore, to be an institution of national importance and to provide for its 
incorporation and for matters connected therewith . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -third Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the National Institute of Mental 
Health and Neuro -Sciences, Bangalore Act, 2012.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declara tion of National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro -Sciences, Bangalore, as an 
institution of national importance .—Whereas the objects of the National Institute of Mental Health and 
Neuro -Sciences, Bangalore are such as to make the institution one of nat ional importance, it is hereby 
declared that the National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro -Sciences, Bangalore is an institution of 
national importance.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) "Fund" means the Fund of the Institute referred to in section 17;  
(b) "Governing Body" means the Governing Body of the Institute;  
(c) "Institute" means the institution known as the National Institute of Mental  Health and Neuro -
Sciences, Bangalore, incorporated under this Act;  
(d) "member" means a member of the Institute;  
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(f) "specified" means specified by regulations made under this Act.  
4. Incorporation of Institute .—The National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro -Sciences, 
Bangalore, an Institute registered under the Karnataka Societies Registration Act, 1960 (Karnataka Act, 
XVII of 1960) on the 27th day of December, 1974, is hereby constituted a body corporate by the name 
aforesaid and as such body corporate, it shall have perpetual succession and a common seal with power, 
subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract and shall, by 
that name, sue and be sued.  
5. Composition of Institute .—(1) The Institute shall con sist of the following members, namely: — 
 (a) the Minister of Health and Family Welfare, ex officio ; 
(b) the Minister of Health and Family Welfare (Medical Education), Government of Karnataka, 
ex officio ; 
(c) Secretary to the Government of India in the Mini stry or Department of Health and Family 
Welfare, ex officio ; 
(d) the Director of the Institute, ex officio ; 
(e) Secretary to the Government of India or his nominee (not below the rank of Joint Secretary) 
Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, ex officio ; 
                                                           
1. 29th November , 2013, vide notification No S.O. 3534(E), dated 29th November , 2013 see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, s ec. 3( ii). 3 
 (f) Secretary to the Government of India or his nominee (not below the rank of Joint Secretary) in 
the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development, ex officio ; 
(g) the Director -General of Health Services, Government of India, ex officio ; 
(h) the Vice -Chancellor of Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Sciences, Karnataka, ex officio ; 
(i) the Chief Secretary to the Government of Karnataka or his nominee who shall not be  below 
the rank of Secretary to that Government;  
(j) seven persons of whom one shall be a non -medical scientist representing the Indian Sciences 
Congress Association, and, one each from biological; behavioural and physical sciences, of repute, 
from any Uni versity to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed;  
(k) four representatives of medical faculties of Indian Universities, of whom one shall be from the 
National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro -Sciences, to be nominat ed by the Central Government 
in such manner as may be prescribed;  
(l) three Members of Parliament of whom two shall be elected from among themselves by the 
members of the House of the People and one from among themselves by the members of the Council 
of St ates. 
(2) It is hereby declared that the office of member of the Institute shall not disqualify its holder for 
being chosen as, or for being, a member of either House of Parliament.  
6. Term of office of and vacancies among members .—(1) Save as otherwise pr ovided in this 
section, the term of office of a member shall be five years from the date of his nomination or election.  
(2) The term of office of a member elected under clause ( l) of sub -section ( 1) of section 5 shall come 
to an end as soon as he becomes a  Minister or Minister of State or Deputy Minister or the Speaker or the 
Deputy Speaker of the House of the People or the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States or ceases to 
be a member of the House from which he was elected.  
(3) The term of office of an ex officio  member shall continue so long as he holds the office by virtue 
of which he is such a member.  
(4) The term of office of a member nominated or elected to fill a casual vacancy shall continue for the 
remainder of the term of the member in whose pla ce he is nominated or elected.  
(5) An outgoing member other than a member elected under clause ( l) of sub -section ( 1) of section 5 
shall continue in office until another person is nominated as a member in his place or for a period of three 
months, whicheve r is earlier:  
Provided that the Central Government shall nominate a member in place of an outgoing member 
within the said period of three months.  
(6) An outgoing member shall be eligible for re -nomination or re -election.  
(7) A member may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government 
but he shall continue in office until his resignation is accepted by that Government.  
(8) The manner of filling vacancies among members shall be such as may be prescribed.  
7. Pow ers and function s of President .—(1) There shall be a President of the Institute who shall be 
nominated by the Central Government from amongst the members other than the Director of the Institute.  
(2) The President shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as  are laid down in this Act 
or as may be prescribed.  
8. Vice -President of Institute .—There shall be a Vice -President of the Institute who shall be 
nominated by the Central Government from amongst the members other than the Director of the Institute.  
9. Allowances of President, Vi ce-President and other members .—The President, Vice -President 
and other members shall receive such allowances from the Institute as may be prescribed.  4 
 10. Meetings of Institute .—The Institute shall hold its first meeting at such time and place as may be 
appointed by the Central Government and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the 
transaction of business at the first meeting as may be laid down by that Government, and thereafter, the 
Institute shall meet at such ti mes and places and observe such rules of procedure in regard to the 
transaction of business at its meetings as may be specified.  
11. Governing Body and other committees of Institute .—(1) There shall be a Governing Body of 
the Institute which shall be constituted by the Institute in such manner as may be specified : 
Provided that the number of persons who are not members of the Institute shall not exceed one -third 
of the total membership of the Governing Body.  
(2) The Governing Body shall be the executive committee of the Institute and shall exercise such 
powers and discharge such functions as the Institute may specify in this behalf.  
(3) The President of the Institute shall be the Chairpe rson of the Governing Body and as Chairperson 
thereof he shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as may be specified.  
(4) The procedure to be followed in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions by the 
Governing Body, and t he term of office of, and the manner of filling vacancies among the members of the 
Governing Body shall be such as may be specified.  
(5) Subject to such control and restrictions as may be prescribed, the Institute may constitute as many 
standing committees  and as many ad hoc  committees as it thinks fit for exercising any power or 
discharging any function of the Institute or for inquiring into, or reporting or advising upon, any matter 
which the Institute may refer to them.  
(6) The Chairperson and members of  the Governing Body and the Chairperson and the members of a 
standing committee or an ad hoc  committee shall receive such allowances, as may be specified.  
12. Staff of Institute .—(1) There shall be a chief executive officer of the Institute who shall be 
designated as the Director of the Institute and shall, subject to such rules as may be prescribed, be 
appointed by the Institute:  
Provided that the first Director of the Institute shall be appointed by the Central Government.  
(2) The Director shall hold offi ce for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his 
office or until he attains the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier.  
(3) The Director shall act as the Secretary to the Institute as well as the Governing Body.  
(4) The Director  shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as may be specified or as 
may be delegated to him by the Institute or the President of the Institute or the Governing Body or the 
Chairperson of the Governing Body.  
(5)  Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, the Institute may appoint such number of other 
officers and employees as may be necessary for the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions 
and the designations and grades of other officers and employees shall be such as may be s pecified.  
(6) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, the Director and other officers and employees of the 
Institute shall be entitled to such salary and allowances and shall be governed by such conditions of 
service in respect of leave, pension, provi dent fund and other matters as may be specified.  
13. Objects of Institute .—The objects of the Institute shall be —  
(a) to develop patterns of teaching in undergraduate and postgraduate medical education in all its 
branches with a focus on mental health, ne uro-sciences and allied specialities so as to demonstrate a 
high standard of medical education;  
(b) to bring together, as far as may be, in one place educational facilities of the highest order for 
the training of personnel in all important branches of hea lth activity;  5 
 (c) to attain self -sufficiency in postgraduate medical education to meet the country's needs for 
specialists and medical teachers, particularly in the field of mental health, neuro -sciences and allied 
specialities;  
(d) to evolve innovative st rategies to offer diagnostic and comprehensive therapeutic service 
facilities in the field of mental health and neuro -sciences, utilising the advances in information 
technology;  
(e) to make an in -depth study and research in the field of mental health, neur o-sciences and allied 
specialities.  
14. Functions of Institute .—With a view to the promotion of the objects specified in section 13, the 
Institute may — 
(a) provide for undergraduate and postgraduate teaching in the science of modern medicine and 
other allied sciences including physical and biological sciences;  
(b) provide facilities for research in the various branches of such sciences;  
(c) provide for the teaching of humanities;  
(d) conduct experiments in new methods of medical education, both undergra duate and 
postgraduate, in order to arrive at high standard of such education;  
(e) specify courses and curricula for both undergraduate and postgraduate studies;  
(f) notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, establish  and 
maintain,— 
 (i) one or more medical institutions with different departments staffed and equipped to 
undertake education and conduct research in different subjects,  
(ii) one or more well equipped hospitals to provide clinical services,  
(iii) nursing colleges staffed and equipped for the training of nurses,  
(iv) rural and urban health centres which will form centres for the field training of the medical 
and nursing students of the Institute, and  
(v) other institutions for the training of different type s of health workers such as 
physiotherapists, occupational therapists and medical technicians of various kinds;  
(g) trained teachers from different medical colleges in India;  
(h) hold examinations and grant such degrees, diplomas and other academic distinc tions and titles 
in undergraduate and postgraduate medical, nursing and allied specialities education as may be laid 
down in the regulations;  
(i) induct and appoint persons as professors, readers, lecturers and in posts of other description in 
accordance w ith regulations;  
(j) receive grants from the Government and gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests and transfers 
of properties, both movable and immovable, from donors, benefactors, testators or transferors, as the 
case may be;  
(k) deal with any property  belonging to, or vested in, the Institute in any manner which is 
considered necessary for promoting the objects specified in section 12;  
(l) demand and receive with the prior approval of the Central Government such fees and other 
charges as may be specifi ed; 
(m) construct quarters for its staff and allot such quarters to the staff in accordance with such 
regulations as may be made in this behalf;  
(n) borrow money, with the prior approval of the Central Government, on the security of the 
property of the Institute;  6 
 (o) do all such other acts and things as may be necessary in furtherance of the objects specified in 
section 13.  
15. Vesting of Property .—(1) The properties of the National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro -
Sciences, Bangalore, registered under the Karnataka Societies Registration Act, 1960 (Katnataka Act 
XVII of 1960) shall, on the date of commencement of this Act, vest in the Institute.  
(2) All income and property of the Institute shall be applied towards the promotion of the objects 
thereof as set forth in this Act.  
(3) No portion of the income and property of the Institute shall be paid or transferred, directly or 
indirectly, by way of profit to the persons, who at any time, or have been members of the Institute:  
Provided that nothing he rein contained shall prevent the payment of remuneration and other 
allowances to any member thereof or other persons for the services rendered to the Institute.  
16. Payment to Institute .—The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliamen t by law in this behalf, pay to the Institute in each financial year such sums of money and in 
such manner as may be considered necessary for the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions 
under this Act.  
17. Fund of Institute .—(1) The Institute  shall maintain a Fund to which shall be credited —  
(a) all moneys provided by the Central Government and the State Government of Karnataka;  
(b) all fees and other charges received by the Institute;  
(c) all moneys received by the Institute by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests 
or transfers; and  
(d) all moneys received by the Institute in any other manner or from any other source.  
(2) All moneys credited to the Fund shall be deposited in such banks or invested in such manner as 
the Institute may, with the approval of the Central Government, decide.  
(3) The Fund shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of the Institute including expenses 
incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions under section 14.  
18. Budget of Institute .—The Institute shall prepare in such for m and at such time every year a 
budget in respect of the financial year next ensuing showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the 
Institute and shall forward to the Central Government suc h number of copies thereof as may be 
prescribed.  
19. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Institute shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the balance -sheet in such form as the Central 
Governm ent may prescribe, and in accordance with such general directions as may be issued by that 
Government, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Institute shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and 
any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Institute to the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him i n connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Institute shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India has in connection with the 
audit of the Government accounts and,  in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the offices of the 
Institute as well as of the institutions established and maintained by it.  
(4) The accounts of the Institute as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shal l cause the same to be laid before both the 
Houses of Parliament.  7 
 20. Annual report .—The Institute shall prepare for every year a report of its activities during that 
year and submit the report to the Central Government in such form and on or before such d ate as may be 
prescribed and a copy of this report shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament within one month of its 
receipt.  
21. Pension and provident funds .—(1) The Institute shall constitute for the benefit of its officers, 
teachers and other emplo yees in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be specified such 
pension and provident funds as it may deem fit.  
(2) Where any such pension or provident fund has been constituted, the Central Government may 
declare that the provisions of the Pro vident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925) shall apply to, such fund as if it 
were a Government Provident Fund.  
22. Authentication of order s and instruments of Institute .—All orders and decisions of the 
Institute shall be authenticated by the Director or any other member authorised by the Institute in this 
behalf and all other instruments shall be authenticated by the signature of the Director or such officers as 
may be authorised by the Institute.  
23. Acts and proceedings not to be  invalidated by vacancies, e tc.—No act done or proceeding 
taken by the Institute, Governing Body or any standing or ad hoc  committee under this Act shall be 
questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of the 
Institute, Governing B ody or such standing or ad hoc  committee.  
24. Grant of medical degrees , diplomas, etc., by Institute .—Notwithstanding anything contained in 
any other law for the time being in force, the Institute shall have the power to grant medical and nursing 
degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions and titles under this Act.  
25. Recognition of medical quali fications granted by Institute .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956), the Rehabilitation Council of India Act, 
1992 (34 of 1992), the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947 (48 of 1947) and the University Grants 
Commission Act, 1956 (3 of 1956), the medical degrees, diplomas, nursing degrees and certificates 
granted by the Institute under this Act s hall be recognised medical qualifications for the purposes of the 
Acts aforesaid and shall be deemed to be included in the Schedule to the respective Acts.  
26. Control by Central Government .—The Institute shall carry out such directions as may be issued 
to it from time to time by the Central Government for the efficient administration of this Act.  
27. Resolution of differences .—If in, or in connection with, the exercise of its powers and discharge 
of its functions by the Institute under this Act, any disput e or difference arises between the Institute and 
the Central Government, the decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final.  
28. Returns and information .—The Institute shall furnish to the Central Government such reports, 
returns and other information as that Government may require from time to time.  
29. Transfer of  service of existing employees .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, every person 
who is employed in the National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro -Sciences, Bangalore, immed iately 
before the commencement of this Act, shall, on and from such commencement, become an employee of 
the Institute and shall hold his office or service therein by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and 
upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension, leave, gratuity, 
provident fund and other matters as he would have held the same on the date of commencement of this 
Act if this Act had not been passed, and shall continue to do so unless and until his employm ent is 
terminated or until such tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions are duly altered by regulations:  
Provided that the tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions of service of any such person shall 
not be altered to his disadvantage without th e previous approval of the Central Government.  
30. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may in consultation with the Institute by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
  8 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
 (a) the manner of nomination of members under clauses ( j) and ( k) of sub-section ( 1) of section 
5; 
(b) the manner of filling vacancies of members under sub -section ( 8) of section 6;  
(c) the powers and functions to be exercised and discharged by the President of the Institute under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 7;  
(d) the allowances to be paid to the President and other memb ers of the Institute under section 9;  
(e) the control and restrictions in relation to the constitution of standing and  ad hoc  committees 
under sub -section ( 5) of section 11;  
(f) appointment of Director and other officers and employees and salaries and allo wances and 
other conditions of service of the Director and other officers and employees of the Institute under 
section 12;  
(g) the form in which, and the time at which, the budgets and reports shall be prepared by the 
Institute under section 18;  
(h) the fo rm of annual statement of accounts including balance -sheet under  sub-section ( 1) of 
section 19;  
(i) the form of annual report under section 20;  
(j) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed by rules.  
31. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Institute with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, may by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and 
the rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act, and without prejudice to the general ity of 
this power, such regulations may provide for — 
(a) the summoning and holding of meetings, other than the first meeting, of the Institute, the time 
and place where such meetings are to be held and the conduct of business at such meetings under 
section  10; 
(b) the manner of constituting the Governing Body and standing and ad hoc committees, the term 
of office of, and the manner of filling vacancies therein, the allowances to be paid to the members and 
the procedure to be followed by the Governing Body; standing and ad hoc  committees in the conduct 
of their business, exercise of their power, discharge of their function under section 11;  
(c) the powers and duties of the Director of the Institute under sub -section ( 4), the designations 
and grades of other o fficers and employees under sub -section ( 5) and other conditions of service 
under sub -section ( 6) of section 12;  
(d) the power of the Institute under section 14, to specify — 
 (i) courses and curricula for undergraduate and postgraduate studies under clause  (e); 
(ii) hold examination and grant degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic 
distinctions and titles under clause ( h); 
(iii) the professorships, readerships, lecturerships and other posts which may be instituted and 
persons who may be appointed  to such posts under clause ( i); 
(iv) the management of the properties of the Institute under clauses ( k) and ( m); 
(v) the fees and other charges which may be demanded and received by the Institute under 
clause ( l); 
(e) the manner in which, and the conditi ons subject to which, pension and provident funds may be 
constituted for the benefit of officers, teachers and other employees of the Institute under sub -section 
(1) of section 21;  
(f) any other matter for which under this Act provisions may be made by reg ulations.  9 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the first regulations under this Act shall be 
made by the Central Government; and any regulations so made may be altered or rescinded by the 
Institute in exercise of its powers under sub -section ( 1). 
32. Laying of rules and  regulations before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty  days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shal l be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation.  
33. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published  in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years from th e date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament . 
_____________  
 
 
 
--------------------------The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012--------------------------
1 THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN FROM SEXUAL OFFENCES ACT, 2012 
__________________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
__________________ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
SECTIONS
1.Short title, extent and commencement. 
2.Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
SEXUAL OFFENCES AGAINST CHILDREN
A.—P ENETRATIVE SEXUAL ASSAULT AND PUNISHMENT THEREFOR
3.Penetrative sexual assault. 
4.Punishment for penetrative sexual assault. 
B.—A GGRAVATED PENETRATIVE SEXUAL ASSAULT AND PUNISHMENT THEREFOR
5.Aggravated penetrative sexual assault. 
6.Punishment for aggravated penetrative sexual assault. 
C.—S EXUAL ASSAULT AND PUNISHMENT THEREFOR
7.Sexual assault. 
8.Punishment for sexual assault. 
D.—A GGRAVATED SEXUAL ASSAULT AND PUNISHMENT THEREFOR
9.Aggravated sexual assault. 
10.Punishment for aggravated sexual assault. 
E.—S EXUAL HARASSMENT AND PUNISHMENT THEREFOR
11.Sexual harassment. 
12.Punishment for sexual harassment. 
CHAPTER III 
USING CHILD FOR PORNOGRAPHIC PURPOSES AND PUNISHMENT THEREFOR
13.Use of child for pornographic purposes. 
14.Punishment for using child for pornographic purposes. 
15.Punishment for storage of pornographic material involving child. 
CHAPTER IV 
ABETMENT OF AND ATTEMPT TO COMMIT AN OFFENCE
16.Abetment of an offence. 
17.Punishment for abetment. 
18.Punishment for attempt to commit an offence. 2 CHAPTER V 
PROCEDURE FOR REPORTING OF CASES 
SECTIONS
19.Reporting of offences. 
20.Obligation of media, studio and photographic facilities to report cases. 
21.Punishment for failure to report or record a case. 
22.Punishment for false complaint or false information. 
23.Procedure for media. 
CHAPTER VI 
PROCEDURES FOR RECORDING STATEMENT OF THE CHILD
24.Recording of statement of  a child. 
25.Recording of statement of a child by Magistrate. 
26.Additional provisions regarding statement to be recorded. 
27.Medical examination of a child. 
CHAPTER VII 
SPECIAL COURTS
28.Designation of Special Courts. 
29.Presumption as to certain offences. 
30.Presumption of culpable mental state. 
31.Application of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to proceedings before a Special Court. 
32.Special Public Prosecutors. 
CHAPTER VIII 
PROCEDURE AND POWERS OF SPECIAL COURTS AND RECORDING OF EVIDENCE
33.Procedure and powers of Special Court. 
34.Procedure in case of commission of offence by child and determination of age by Special Court. 
35.Period for recording of evidence of child and disposal of case. 
36.Child not to see accused at the time of testifying. 
37.Trials to be conducted in camera . 
38.Assistance of an interpreter or expert while recording evidence of child. 
CHAPTER IX 
MISCELLANEOUS
39.Guidelines for child to take assistance of experts, etc. 
40.Right of child to take assistance of legal practitioner. 
41.Provisions of sections 3 to 13 not to apply in certain cases. 
42.Alternative punishment. 
42A. Act not in derogation of any other law. 
43.Public awareness about Act. 
44.Monitoring of implementation of Act. 
45.Power to make rules. 
46.Power to remove difficulties. 
THE SCHEDULE. 3 THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN FROM SEXUAL OFFENCES ACT, 2012 
ACT NO. 32 OF 2012  
[19th June, 2012.]
An Act to protect children from offences of sexual assault, sexual harassment and pornography 
and provide for establishment of Special Courts for trial of such offences and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
WHEREAS  clause (3) of article 15 of the Constitution, inter alia , empowers the State to make special 
provisions for children; 
AND WHEREAS , the Government of India has acceded on the 11th December, 1992 to the Convention 
on the Rights of the Child, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations, which has prescribed 
a set of standards to be followed by all State parties in securing the best interests of the child; 
AND WHEREAS it is necessary for the proper development of the child that his or her right to privacy 
and confidentiality be protected and respected by every person by all means and through all stages of a 
judicial process involving the child; 
AND WHEREAS it is imperative that the law operates in a manner that the best interest and well being 
of the child are regarded as being of paramount importance at every stage, to ensure the healthy physical, 
emotional, intellectual and social development of the child; 
AND WHEREAS the State parties to the Convention on the Rights of the Child are required to 
undertake all appropriate national, bilateral and multilateral measures to prevent— 
(a)the inducement or coercion of a child to engage in any unlawful sexual activity; 
(b)the exploitative use of children in prostitution or other unlawful sexual practices; 
(c)the exploitative use of children in pornographic performances and materials; 
AND WHEREAS  sexual exploitation and sexual abuse of children are heinous crimes and need to be 
effectively addressed. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Protection of Children 
from Sexual Offences Act, 2012. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) "aggravated penetrative sexual assault" has the same meaning as assigned to it in section 5; 
(b) "aggravated sexual assault" has the same meaning as assigned to it in section 9; 
(c) "armed forces or security forces" means armed forces of the Union or security forces or police 
forces, as specified in the Schedule; 
(d) "child" means any person below the age of eighteen years; 
(e) "domestic relationship" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( f) of section 2 
of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (43 of 2005); 
1. 14th November, 2012, vide notification No. S.O. 2705 (E), dated 9th November, 2012, see Gazette of India Extraordinary, Part 
II, sec. 3( ii). 4 (f) "penetrative sexual assault" has the same meaning as assigned to it in section 3; 
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(h) “religious institution” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the Religious 
Institutions (Prevention of Misuse) Act, 1988 (41 of 1988).  
(i) "sexual assault" has the same meaning as assigned to it in section 7; 
(j) "sexual harassment" has the same meaning as assigned to it in section 11; 
(k) "shared household" means a household where the person charged with the offence lives or has 
lived at any time in a domestic relationship with the child; 
(l) "Special Court" means a court designated as such under section 28; 
(m) "Special Public Prosecutor" means a Public Prosecutor appointed under section 32.  
(2) The words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Indian Penal Code            
(45 of 1860), the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974),the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection 
of Children) Act, 2000 (56 of 2000) and the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000) shall have 
the meanings respectively assigned to them in the said Codes or the Acts.
CHAPTER II 
SEXUAL OFFENCES AGAINST CHILDREN
A.—PENETRATIVE SEXUAL ASSAULT AND PUNISHMENT THEREFOR
3. Penetrative sexual assault .—A person is said to commit "penetrative sexual assault" if— 
(a) he penetrates his penis, to any extent, into the vagina, mouth, urethra or anus of a child or 
makes the child to do so with him or any other person; or 
(b) he inserts, to any extent, any object or a part of the body, not being the penis, into the vagina, 
the urethra or anus of the child or makes the child to do so with him or any other person; or 
(c) he manipulates any part of the body of the child so as to cause penetration into the vagina, 
urethra, anus or any part of body of the child or makes the child to do so with him or any other 
person; or 
(d) he applies his mouth to the penis, vagina, anus, urethra of the child or makes the child to do so 
to such person or any other person. 
4. Punishment for penetrative sexual assault. —Whoever commits penetrative sexual assault shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description  for a term which shall not be less than seven years 
but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
B.—A GGRAVATED PENETRATIVE SEXUAL ASSAULT AND PUNISHMENT THEREFOR
5. Aggravated penetrative sexual assault .—(a) Whoever, being a police officer, commits 
penetrative sexual assault on a child —  
(i) within the limits of the police station or premises at which he is appointed; or 
(ii) in the premises of any station house, whether or not situated in the police station, to which he 
is appointed; or 
(iii) in the course of his duties or otherwise; or 
(iv) where he is known as, or identified as, a police officer; or 
(b) whoever being a member of the armed forces or security forces commits penetrative sexual assault 
on a child —
(i) within the limits of the area to which the person is deployed; or 
(ii) in any areas under the command of the forces or armed forces; or 
(iii) in the course of his duties or otherwise; or 
(iv) where the said person is known or identified as a member of the security or armed forces; or 5 (c) whoever being a public servant commits penetrative sexual assault on a child; or 
(d) whoever being on the management or on the staff of a jail, remand home, protection home, 
observation home, or other place of custody or care and protection established by or under any law for the 
time being in force, commits penetrative sexual assault on a child, being inmate of such jail, remand 
home, protection home, observation home, or other place of custody or care and protection; or 
(e) whoever being on the management or staff of a hospital, whether Government or private, commits 
penetrative sexual assault on a child in that hospital; or 
(f) whoever being on the management or staff of an educational institution or religious institution, 
commits penetrative sexual assault on a child in that institution; or 
(g) whoever commits gang penetrative sexual assault on a child. 
Explanation. —When a child is subjected to sexual assault by one or more persons of a group in 
furtherance of their common intention, each of such persons shall be deemed to have committed gang 
penetrative sexual assault within the meaning of this clause and each of such person shall be liable for that 
act in the same manner as if it were done by him alone; or 
(h) whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a child using deadly weapons, fire, heated 
substance or corrosive substance; or 
(i) whoever commits penetrative sexual assault causing grievous hurt or causing bodily harm and 
injury or injury to the sexual organs of the child; or 
(j) whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a child, which— 
(i) physically incapacitates the child or causes the child to become mentally ill as defined under 
clause ( b) of section 2 of the Mental Health Act, 1987 (14 of 1987) or causes impairment of any kind 
so as to render the child unable to perform regular tasks, temporarily or permanently; or 
(ii) in the case of female child, makes the child pregnant as a consequence of sexual assault; 
(iii) inflicts the child with Human Immunodeficiency Virus or any other life threatening disease 
or Infection which may either temporarily or permanently impair the child by rendering him 
physically incapacitated, or mentally ill to perform regular tasks; or 
(k) whoever, taking advantage of a child's mental or physical disability, commits penetrative sexual 
assault on the child; or 
(l) whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on the child more than once or repeatedly; or 
(m) whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a child below twelve years; or 
(n) whoever being a relative of the child through blood or adoption or marriage or guardianship or in 
foster care or having a domestic relationship with a parent of the child or who is living in the same or 
shared household with the child, commits penetrative sexual assault on such child; or 
(o) whoever being, in the ownership, or management, or staff, of any institution providing services to 
the child, commits penetrative sexual assault on the child; or 
(p) whoever being in a position of trust or authority of a child commits penetrative sexual assault on 
the child in an institution or home of the child or anywhere else; or 
(q) whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a child knowing the child is pregnant; or 
(r) whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a child and attempts to murder the child; or 
(s) whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a child in the course of communal or sectarian 
violence; or 
(t) whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a child and who has been previously convicted of 
having committed any offence under this Act or any sexual offence punishable under any other law for 
the time being in force; or 6 (u) whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a child and makes the child to strip or parade 
naked in public, 
is said to commit aggravated penetrative sexual assault. 
6. Punishment for aggravated penetrative sexual assault. —Whoever, commits aggravated 
penetrative sexual assault, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be 
less than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine. 
C. —S EXUAL ASSAULT AND PUNISHMENT THEREFOR
7. Sexual assault. —Whoever, with sexual intent touches the vagina, penis, anus or breast of the child 
or makes the child touch the vagina, penis, anus or breast of such person or any other person, or does any 
other act with sexual intent which involves physical contact without penetration is said to commit sexual 
assault. 
8. Punishment for sexual assault. —Whoever, commits sexual assault, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may 
extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
D. —A GGRAVATED SEXUAL ASSAULT AND PUNISHMENT THEREFOR
9. Aggravated sexual assault. —(a) Whoever, being a police officer, commits sexual assault on a 
child— 
(i) within the limits of the police station or premises where he is appointed; or 
(ii) in the premises of any station house whether or not situated in the police station to which he is 
appointed; or 
(iii) in the course of his duties or otherwise; or 
(iv) where he is known as, or identified as a police officer; or 
(b) whoever, being a member of the armed forces or security forces, commits sexual assault on a 
child— 
(i) within the limits of the area to which the person is deployed; or 
(ii) in any areas under the command of the security or armed forces; or 
(iii) in the course of his duties or otherwise; or 
(iv) where he is known or identified as a member of the security or armed forces; or 
(c) whoever being a public servant commits sexual assault on a child; or 
(d) whoever being on the management or on the staff of a jail, or remand home or protection home or 
observation home, or other place of custody or care and protection established by or under any law for the 
time being in force commits sexual assault on a child being inmate of such jail or remand home or 
protection home or observation home or other place of custody or care and protection; or 
(e) whoever being on the management or staff of a hospital, whether Government or private, commits 
sexual assault on a child in that hospital; or 
(f) whoever being on the management or staff of an educational institution or religious institution, 
commits sexual assault on a child in that institution; or 
(g) whoever commits gang sexual assault on a child. 
Explanation .—when a child is subjected to sexual assault by one or more persons of a group in 
furtherance of their common intention, each of such persons shall be deemed to have committed gang 
sexual assault within the meaning of this clause and each of such person shall be liable for that act in the 
same manner as if it were done by him alone; or 
(h) whoever commits sexual assault on a child using deadly weapons, fire, heated substance or 
corrosive substance; or 7 (i) whoever commits sexual assault causing grievous hurt or causing bodily harm and injury or injury 
to the sexual organs of the child; or 
(j) whoever commits sexual assault on a child, which— 
(i) physically incapacitates the child or causes the child to become mentally ill as defined under 
clause ( l) of section 2of the Mental Health Act, 1987 (14 of 1987) or causes impairment of any kind 
so as to render the child unable to perform regular tasks, temporarily or permanently; or 
(ii) inflicts the child with Human Immunodeficiency Virus or any other life threatening disease or 
infection which may either temporarily or permanently impair the child by rendering him physically 
incapacitated, or mentally ill to perform regular tasks; or 
(k) whoever, taking advantage of a child’s mental or physical disability, commits sexual assault on the 
child; or 
(l) whoever commits sexual assault on the child more than once or repeatedly; or 
(m) whoever commits sexual assault on a child below twelve years; or 
(n) whoever, being a relative of the child through blood or adoption or marriage or guardianship or in 
foster care, or having domestic relationship with a parent of the child, or who is living in the same or 
shared household with the child, commits sexual assault on such child; or 
(o) whoever, being in the ownership or management or staff, of any institution providing services to 
the child, commits sexual assault on the child in such institution; or 
(p) whoever, being in a position of trust or authority of a child, commits sexual assault on the child in 
an institution or home of the child or anywhere else; or 
(q) whoever commits sexual assault on a child knowing the child is pregnant; or 
(r) whoever commits sexual assault on a child and attempts to murder the child; or 
(s) whoever commits sexual assault on a child in the course of communal or sectarian violence; or 
(t) whoever commits sexual assault on a child and who has been previously convicted of having 
committed any offence under this Act or any sexual offence punishable under any other law for the time 
being in force; or 
(u) whoever commits sexual assault on a child and makes the child to strip or parade naked in public, 
is said to commit aggravated sexual assault. 
10. Punishment for aggravated sexual assault. —Whoever, commits aggravated sexual assault shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than five years but 
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
E.—S EXUAL HARASSMENT AND PUNISHMENT THEREFOR
11. Sexual harassment. —A person is said to commit sexual harassment upon a child when such 
person with sexual intent,— 
(i) utters any word or makes any sound, or makes any gesture or exhibits any object or part of 
body with the intention that such word or sound shall be heard, or such gesture or object or part of 
body shall be seen by the child; or 
(ii) makes a child exhibit his body or any part of his body so as it is seen by such person or any 
other person; or 
(iii) shows any object to a child in any form or media for pornographic purposes; or 
(iv) repeatedly or constantly follows or watches or contacts a child either directly or through 
electronic, digital or any other means; or 
(v) threatens to use, in any form of media, a real or fabricated depiction through electronic, film 
or digital or any other mode, of any part of the body of the child or the involvement of the child in a 
sexual act; or 
(vi) entices a child for pornographic purposes or gives gratification therefor. 8 Explanation .—Any question which involves “sexual intent” shall be a question of fact. 
12. Punishment for sexual harassment. —Whoever, commits sexual harassment upon a child shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years and shall 
also be liable to fine. 
CHAPTER III 
USING CHILD FOR PORNOGRAPHIC PURPOSES AND PUNISHMENT THEREFOR
13. Use of child for pornographic purposes. —Whoever, uses a child in any form of media 
(including programme or advertisement telecast by television channels or internet or any other electronic 
form or printed form, whether or not such programme or advertisement is intended for personal use or for 
distribution), for the purposes of sexual gratification, which includes— 
(a) representation of the sexual organs of a child; 
(b) usage of a child engaged in real or simulated sexual acts (with or without penetration); 
(c) the indecent or obscene representation of a child,  
shall be guilty of the offence of using a child for pornographic purposes. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression ‘‘use a child’’ shall include involving a 
child through any medium like print, electronic, computer or any other technology for preparation, 
production, offering, transmitting, publishing, facilitation and distribution of the pornographic material. 
14. Punishment for using child for pornographic purposes. —(1) Whoever, uses a child or children 
for pornographic purposes shall be punished with imprisonment of either description which may extend to 
five years and shall also be liable to fine and in the event of second or subsequent conviction with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years and also be liable to fine. 
(2) If the person using the child for pornographic purposes commits an offence referred to in section 
3, by directly participating in pornographic acts, he shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which shall not be less than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment for 
life, and shall also be liable to fine. 
(3) If the person using the child for pornographic purposes commits an offence referred to in section 
5, by directly participating in pornographic acts, he shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for life 
and shall also be liable to fine. 
(4) If the person using the child for pornographic purposes commits an offence referred to in section 
7, by directly participating in pornographic acts, he shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which shall not be less than six years but which may extend to eight years, and shall 
also be liable to fine. 
(5) If the person using the child for pornographic purposes commits an offence referred to in section 
9, by directly participating in pornographic acts, he shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which shall not be less than eight years but which may extend to ten years, and 
shall also be liable to fine.
15. Punishment for storage of pornographic material involving child. —Any person, who stores, 
for commercial purposes any pornographic material in any form involving a child shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description which may extend to three years or with fine or with both.
CHAPTER IV 
ABETMENT OF AND ATTEMPT TO COMMIT AN OFFENCE
16. Abetment of an offence. —A person abets an offence, who— 
First .—Instigates any person to do that offence; or 9 Secondly .— Engages with one or more other person or persons in any conspiracy for the doing of 
that offence, if an act or illegal omission takes place in pursuance of that conspiracy, and in order to 
the doing of that offence; or 
Thirdly .—Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, the doing of that offence. 
Explanation I .—A person who, by wilful misrepresentation, or by wilful concealment of a material 
fact, which he is bound to disclose, voluntarily causes or procures, or attempts to cause or procure a thing 
to be done, is said to instigate the doing of that offence. 
Explanation II .—Whoever, either prior to or at the time of commission of an act, does anything in 
order to facilitate the commission of that act, and thereby facilitates the commission thereof, is said to aid 
the doing of that act. 
Explanation III .—Whoever employ, harbours, receives or transports a child, by means of threat or use 
of force or other forms of coercion, abduction, fraud, deception, abuse of power or of a position, 
vulnerability or the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having 
control over another person, for the purpose of any offence under this Act, is said to aid the doing of that 
act. 
17. Punishment for abetment. —Whoever abets any offence under this Act, if the act abetted is 
committed in consequence of the abetment, shall be punished with punishment provided for that offence. 
Explanation. — An act or offence is said to be committed in consequence of abetment, when it is 
committed in consequence of the instigation, or in pursuance of the conspiracy or with the aid, which 
constitutes the abetment. 
18. Punishment for attempt to commit an offence. —Whoever attempts to commit any offence 
punishable under this Act or to cause such an offence to be committed, and in such attempt, does any act 
towards the commission of the offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of any description provided 
for the offence, for a term which may extend to one half of the imprisonment for life or, as the case may 
be, one-half of the longest term of imprisonment provided for that offence or with fineor with both. 
CHAPTER V 
PROCEDURE FOR REPORTING OF CASES
19. Reporting of offences. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of1974)any person(including the child), who has apprehension that an offence under 
this Act is likely to be committed or has knowledge that such an offence has been committed, he shall 
provide such information to,— 
(a) the Special Juvenile Police Unit; or 
(b) the local police. 
(2) Every report given under sub-section ( 1) shall be— 
(a) ascribed an entry number and recorded in writing; 
(b) be read over to the informant; 
(c) shall be entered in a book to be kept by the Police Unit. 
(3) Where the report under sub-section ( 1) is given by a child, the same shall be recorded under          
sub-section ( 2) in a simple language so that the child understands contents being recorded. 
(4) In case contents are being recorded in the language not understood by the child or wherever it is 
deemed necessary, a translator or an interpreter, having such qualifications, experience and on payment of 
such fees as may be prescribed, shall be provided to the child if he fails to understand the same. 
(5) Where the Special Juvenile Police Unit or local police is satisfied that the child against whom an 
offence has been committed is in need of care and protection, then, it shall, after recording the reasons in 
writing, make immediate arrangement to give him such care and protection including admitting the child 
into shelter home or to the nearest hospital within twenty-four hours of the report, as may be prescribed. 10 (6) The Special Juvenile Police Unit or local police shall, without unnecessary delay but within a 
period of twenty-four hours, report the matter to the Child Welfare Committee and the Special Court or 
where no Special Court has been designated, to the Court of Session, including need of the child for care 
and protection and steps taken in this regard. 
(7) No person shall incur any liability, whether civil or criminal, for giving the information in good 
faith for the purpose of sub-section ( 1). 
20. Obligation of media, studio and photographic facilities to report cases. —Any personnel of the 
media or hotel or lodge or hospital or club or studio or photographic facilities, by whatever name called, 
irrespective of the number of persons employed therein, shall, on coming across any material or object 
which is sexually exploitative of the child (including pornographic, sexually-related or making obscene 
representation of a child or children) through the use of any medium, shall provide such information to 
the Special Juvenile Police Unit, or to the local police, as the case may be. 
21. Punishment for failure to report or record a case. —(1) Any person, who fails to report the 
commission of an offence under sub-section ( 1) of section 19 or section 20 or who fails to record such 
offence under sub-section ( 2) of section 19 shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
which may extend to six months or with fine or with both. 
(2) Any person, being in-charge of any company or an institution (by whatever name called) who fails 
to report the commission of an offence under sub-section ( 1) of section 19 in respect of a subordinate 
under his control, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and with 
fine. 
(3) The provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall not apply to a child under this Act. 
22. Punishment for false complaint or false information. —(1) Any person, who makes false 
complaint or provides false information against any person, in respect of an offence committed under 
sections 3, 5, 7 and section 9, solely with the intention to humiliate, extort or threaten or defame him, 
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine or with both. 
(2) Where a false complaint has been made or false information has been provided by a child, no 
punishment shall be imposed on such child. 
(3) Whoever, not being a child, makes a false complaint or provides false information against a child, 
knowing it to be false, thereby victimizing such child in any of the offences under this Act, shall be 
punished with imprisonment, which may extend to one year or with fine or with both. 
23. Procedure for media. —(1) No person shall make any report or present comments on any child 
from any form of media or studio or photographic facilities without having complete and authentic 
information, which may have the effect of lowering his reputation or infringing upon his privacy.
(2) No reports in any media shall disclose, the identity of a child including his name, address, 
photograph, family details, school, neighbourhood or any other particulars which may lead to disclosure 
of identity of the child: 
Provided that for reasons to be recorded in writing, the Special Court, competent to try the case under 
the Act, may permit such disclosure, if in its opinion such disclosure is in the interest of the child. 
(3) The publisher or owner of the media or studio or photographic facilities shall be jointly and 
severally liable for the acts and omissions of his employee. 
(4) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) shall be liable to 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a period which shall not be less than six months 
but which may extend to one year or with fine or with both. 
CHAPTER VI 
PROCEDURES FOR RECORDING STATEMENT OF THE CHILD 
24. Recording of statement of a child. —(1) The statement of the child shall be recorded at the 
residence of the child or at a place where he usually resides or at the place of his choice and as far as 
practicable by a woman police officer not below the rank of sub-inspector. 11 (2) The police officer while recording the statement of the child shall not be in uniform. 
(3) The police officer making the investigation, shall, while examining the child, ensure that at no 
point of time the child come in the contact in any way with the accused. 
(4) No child shall be detained in the police station in the night for any reason. 
(5) The police officer shall ensure that the identity of the child is protected from the public media, 
unless otherwise directed by the Special Court in the interest of the child. 
25. Recording of statement of a child by Magistrate. —(1) If the statement of the child is being 
recorded under section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)(herein referred to as the 
Code), the Magistrate recording such statement shall, notwithstanding anything contained therein, record 
the statement as spoken by the child:  
Provided that the provisions contained in the first proviso to sub-section ( 1) of section 164 of the 
Code shall, so far it permits the presence of the advocate of the accused shall not apply in this case.  
(2) The Magistrate shall provide to the child and his parents or his representative, a copy of the 
document specified under section 207 of the Code, upon the final report being filed by the police under 
section 173 of that Code. 
26. Additional provisions regarding statement to be recorded. —(1) The Magistrate or the police 
officer, as the case may be, shall record the statement as spoken by the child in the presence of the parents 
of the child or any other person in whom the child has trust or confidence. 
(2) Wherever necessary, the Magistrate or the police officer, as the case may be, may take the 
assistance of a translator or an interpreter, having such qualifications, experience and on payment of such 
fees as may be prescribed, while recording the statement of the child. 
(3) The Magistrate or the police officer, as the case may be, may, in the case of a child having a 
mental or physical disability, seek the assistance of a special educator or any person familiar with the 
manner of communication of the child or an expert in that field, having such qualifications, experience 
and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed, to record the statement of the child. 
(4) Wherever possible, the Magistrate or the police officer, as the case may be, shall ensure that the 
statement of the child is also recorded by audio-video electronic means.
27. Medical examination of a child. —(1) The medical examination of a child in respect of whom 
any offence has been committed under this Act, shall, notwithstanding that a First Information Report or 
complaint has not been registered for the offences under this Act, be conducted in accordance with 
section 164A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1973).  
(2) In case the victim is a girl child, the medical examination shall be conducted by a woman doctor. 
(3) The medical examination shall be conducted in the presence of the parent of the child or any other 
person in whom the child reposes trust or confidence. 
(4) Where, in case the parent of the child or other person referred to in sub-section (3) cannot be 
present, for any reason, during the medical examination of the child, the medical examination shall be 
conducted in the presence of a woman nominated by the head of the medical institution. 
CHAPTER VII 
SPECIAL COURTS
28. Designation of Special Courts. —(1) For the purposes of providing a speedy trial, the State 
Government shall in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, designate for each district, a Court of Session to be a Special Court to try the offences under the 
Act: 
Provided that if a Court of Session is notified as a children’s court under the Commissions for 
Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 (4 of 2006)or a Special Court designated for similar purposes under 
any other law for the time being in force, then, such court shall be deemed to be a Special Court under 
this section. 12 (2) While trying an offence under this Act, a Special Court shall also try an offence [other than the 
offence referred to in sub-section ( 1)], with which the accused may, under the Code of Criminal 
Procedure,1973 (2 of 1974) be charged at the same trial. 
(3) The Special Court constituted under this Act, notwithstanding anything in the Information 
Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000)shall have jurisdiction to try offences under section 67B of that Act in 
so far as it relates to publication or transmission of sexually explicit material depicting children in any act, 
or conduct or manner or facilitates abuse of children online.  
29. Presumption as to certain offences. —Where a person is prosecuted for committing or abetting 
or attempting to commit any offence under sections 3, 5, 7 and section 9 of this Act, the Special Court 
shall presume, that such person has committed or abetted or attempted to commit the offence, as the case 
may be unless the contrary is proved. 
30. Presumption of culpable mental state. —(1) In any prosecution for any offence under this Act 
which requires a culpable mental state on the part of the accused, the Special Court shall presume the 
existence of such mental state but it shall be a defence for the accused to prove the fact that he had no 
such mental state with respect to the act charged as an offence in that prosecution. 
(2) For the purposes of this section, a fact is said to be proved only when the Special Court believes it 
to exist beyond reasonable doubt and not merely when its existence is established by a preponderance of 
probability. 
Explanation .—In this section, "culpable mental state" includes intention, motive, knowledge of a fact 
and the belief in, or reason to believe, a fact. 
31. Application of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to proceedings before a Special Court. —
Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973                 
(2 of 1974)(including the provisions as to bail and bonds)shall apply to the proceedings before a Special 
Court and for the purposes of the said provisions, the Special Court shall be deemed to be a court of 
Sessions and the person conducting a prosecution before a Special Court, shall be deemed to be a Public 
Prosecutor. 
32. Special Public Prosecutors. —(1) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint a Special Public Prosecutor for every Special Court for conducting cases only under the 
provisions of this Act. 
(2) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as a Special Public Prosecutor under sub-section ( 1) 
only if he had been in practice for not less than seven years as an advocate. 
(3) Every person appointed as a Special Public Prosecutor under this section shall be deemed to be a 
Public Prosecutor within the meaning of clause ( u) of section 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
(2 of 1974)and provision of that Code shall have effect accordingly. 
CHAPTER VIII 
PROCEDURE AND POWERS OF SPECIAL COURTS AND RECORDING OF EVIDENCE
33. Procedure and powers of Special Court. —(1) A Special Court may take cognizance of any 
offence, without the accused being committed to it for trial, upon receiving a complaint of facts which 
constitute such offence, or upon a police report of such facts. 
(2) The Special Public Prosecutor, or as the case may be, the counsel appearing for the accused shall, 
while recording the examination-in-chief, cross-examination or re-examination of the child, communicate 
the questions to be put to the child to the Special Court which shall in turn put those questions to the 
child. 
(3) The Special Court may, if it considers necessary, permit frequent breaks for the child during the 
trial. 
(4) The Special Court shall create a child-friendly atmosphere by allowing a family member, a 
guardian, a friend or a relative, in whom the child has trust or confidence, to be present in the court. 13 (5) The Special Court shall ensure that the child is not called repeatedly to testify in the court. 
(6) The Special Court shall not permit aggressive questioning or character assassination of the child 
and ensure that dignity of the child is maintained at all times during the trial. 
(7) The Special Court shall ensure that the identity of the child is not disclosed at any time during the 
course of investigation or trial:  
Provided that for reasons to be recorded in writing, the Special Court may permit such disclosure, if 
in its opinion such disclosure is in the interest of the child. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section, the identity of the child shall include the identity 
of the child's family, school, relatives, neighbourhood or any other information by which the identity of 
the child may be revealed. 
(8) In appropriate cases, the Special Court may, in addition to the punishment, direct payment of such 
compensation as may be prescribed to the child for any physical or mental trauma caused to him or for 
immediate rehabilitation of such child. 
(9) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a Special Court shall, for the purpose of the trial of any 
offence under this Act, have all the powers of a Court of Session and shall try such offence as if it were a 
Court of Session, and as far as may be, in accordance with the procedure specified in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) for trial before a Court of Session. 
34. Procedure in case of commission of offence by child and determination of age by Special 
Court. —(1) Where any offence under this Act is committed by a child, such child shall be dealt with 
under the provisions of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 (56 of 2000). 
(2) If any question arises in any proceeding before the Special Court whether a person is a child or 
not, such question shall be determined by the Special Court after satisfying itself about the age of such 
person and it shall record in writing its reasons for such determination. 
(3) No order made by the Special Court shall be deemed to be invalid merely by any subsequent proof 
that the age of a personas determined by it under sub-section ( 2) was not the correct age of that person. 
35. Period for recording of evidence of child and disposal of case. —(1) The evidence of the child 
shall be recorded within a period of thirty days of the Special Court taking cognizance of the offence and 
reasons for delay, if any, shall be recorded by the Special Court. 
(2) The Special Court shall complete the trial, as far as possible, within a period of one year from the 
date of taking cognizance of the offence. 
36. Child not to see accused at the time of testifying. —(1) The Special Court shall ensure that the 
child is not exposed in anyway to the accused at the time of recording of the evidence, while at the same 
time ensuring that the accused is in a position to hear the statement of the child and communicate with his 
advocate. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), the Special Court may record the statement of a child through 
video conferencing or by utilising single visibility mirrors or curtains or any other device. 
37. Trials to be conducted in camera .—The Special Court shall try cases in camera and in the 
presence of the parents of the child or any other person in whom the child has trust or confidence: 
Provided that where the Special Court is of the opinion that the child needs to be examined at a place 
other than the court, it shall proceed to issue a commission in accordance with the provisions of section 
284 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
38. Assistance of an interpreter or expert while recording evidence of child. —(1) wherever 
necessary, the Court may take the assistance of a translator or interpreter having such qualifications, 
experience and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed, while recording the evidence of the child. 
(2) If a child has a mental or physical disability, the Special Court may take the assistance of a special 
educator or any person familiar with the manner of communication of the child or an expert in that field, 14 having such qualifications, experience and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed to record the 
evidence of the child. 
CHAPTER IX 
MISCELLANEOUS
39. Guidelines for child to take assistance of experts, etc. —Subject to such rules as may be made 
in this behalf, the State Government shall prepare guidelines for use of non-governmental organisations, 
professionals and experts or persons having knowledge of psychology, social work, physical health, 
mental health and child development to be associated with the pre-trial and trial stage to assist the child. 
40. Right of child to take assistance of legal practitioner. —Subject to the proviso to section 301 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)the family or the guardian of the child shall be entitled 
to the assistance of a legal counsel of their choice for any offence under this Act: 
Provided that if the family or the guardian of the child are unable to afford a legal counsel, the Legal 
Services Authority shall provide a lawyer to them. 
41.Provisions of sections 3 to 13 not to apply in certain cases. —The provisions of sections 3 to 13 
(both inclusive) shall not apply in case of medical examination or medical treatment of a child when such 
medical examination or medical treatment is undertaken with the consent of his parents or guardian. 
1[42. Alternate punishment. —Where an act or omission constitutes an offence punishable under this 
Act and also under sections 166A, 354A, 354B, 354C, 354D, 370, 370A, 375, 376, 2[376A, 376AB, 
376B, 376C, 376D, 376DA, 376DB], 376E or section 509 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, the offender found guilty of 
such offence shall be liable to punishment only under this Act or under the Indian Penal Code as provides 
for punishment which is greater in degree. 
42A. Act not in derogation of any other law. —The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and 
not in derogation of the provisions of any other law for the time being in force and, in case of any 
inconsistency, the provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect on the provisions of any such law to 
the extent of the inconsistency.]
43. Public awareness about Act. —The Central Government and every State Government, shall take 
all measures to ensure that— 
(a) the provisions of this Act are given wide publicity through media including the television, 
radio and the print media at regular intervals to make the general public, children as well as their 
parents and guardians aware of the provisions of this Act; 
(b) the officers of the Central Government and the State Governments and other concerned 
persons (including the police officers) are imparted periodic training on the matters relating to the 
implementation of the provisions of the Act. 
44. Monitoring of implementation of Act. —(1) The National Commission for Protection of Child 
Rights constituted under section 3, or as the case may be, the State Commission for Protection of Child 
Rights constituted under section 17, of the Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005                
(4 of 2006) shall, in addition to the functions assigned to them under that Act, also monitor the 
implementation of the provisions of this Act in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) The National Commission or, as the case may be, the State Commission, referred to in sub-section 
(1), shall, while inquiring into any matter relating to any offence under this Act, have the same powers as 
are vested in it under the Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 (4 of 2006). 
(3) The National Commission or, as the case may be, the State Commission, referred to in sub-section 
(1), shall, also include, its activities under this section, in the annual report referred to in section 16 of the 
Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 (4 of 2006).  
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 29, for s. 42 (w.e.f. 3-2-2013). 
 2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 25, for “376A, 376C, 376D” (w.e.f. 21-4-2018). 15 45. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the qualifications and experience of, and the fees payable to, a translator or an interpreter, a 
special educator or any person familiar with the manner of communication of the child or an expert in 
that field, under sub-section ( 4) of section 19; sub-sections( 2) and ( 3) of section 26 and section 38; 
(b) care and protection and emergency medical treatment of the child under sub-section ( 5) of 
section 19; 
(c) the payment of compensation under sub-section ( 8) of section 33; 
(d) the manner of periodic monitoring of the provisions of the Act under sub-section ( 1) of 
section44. 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
46. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removal of the difficulty: 
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of the period of two years 
from the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament. 16 THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 2( c)] 
ARMED FORCES AND SECURITY FORCES CONSTITUTED UNDER
(a) The Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950); 
(b) The Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950); 
(c) The Assam Rifles Act, 2006 (47 of 2006); 
(d) The Bombay Home Guard Act, 1947 (3 of 1947); 
(e) The Border Security Force Act, 1968 (47 of 1968); 
(f) The Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968 (50 of 1968); 
(g) The Central Reserve Police Force Act, 1949 (66 of 1949); 
(h) The Coast Guard Act, 1978 (30 of 1978); 
(i) The Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 (25 of 1946); 
(j) The Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force Act, 1992 (35 of 1992); 
(k) The Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957); 
(l) The National Investigation Agency Act, 2008 (34 of 2008); 
(m) The National Security Guard Act, 1986 (47 of 1986); 
(n) The Railway Protection Force Act, 1957 (23 of 1957); 
(o) The SashastraSeemaBalAct, 2007 (53 of 2007); 
(p) The Special Protection Group Act, 1988 (34 of 1988); 
(q) The Territorial Army Act, 1948 (56 of 1948); 
(r) The State police forces (including armed constabulary) constituted under the State laws to aid the 
civil powers of theState and empowered to employ force during internal disturbances or otherwise 
including armed forces as defined inclause ( a) of section 2 of the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 
1958 (28 of 1958). 
____________ 
--------------------------The Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Act, 2012--------------------------
1 
 THE RAJIV GANDHI NAT IONAL INSTITUTE OF YOUTH D EVELOPMENT ACT, 2012  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration of Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development as an institution of national 
importance . 
3. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL  INSTITUTE OF YOUTH DEVELOPMENT  
4. Incorporation of Institute.  
5. Effect of establishment of Institute.  
6. Object s of Institute.  
7. Function s of Institute . 
8. Institute to be open to all ra ces, creeds, gender and classes.  
9. Teaching at Institute . 
10. Visitor.  
CHAPTER III  
AUTHORITIES OF THE  INSTITUTE  
11. Authorities of Institute.  
12. Establishment of Executive Council.  
13. Term s of office of, vacancies among, and allowances payable to members of Executive Council.  
14. Meeting s of Executive Council.  
15. Powers and functions of Executive Council.  
16. Academic Council.  
17. Function s of Academic Council.  
18. Finance Committee.  
19. Functions of Finance Commi ttee. 
20. Other authorities.  
CHAPTER IV  
OFFICERS OF THE INSTITUTE  
21. Officers of Institute.  
22. Director.  
23. Registrar.  
24. Other officers.  
 
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
25. Grants by Central Government.  
26. Fund of Institute.  2 
 SECTION S 
27. Endowment to  other funds.  
28. Accounts and audit.  
29. Pension and provident fund.  
30. Appointment of staff of Institute.  
31. Power to make Statutes.  
32. Statutes how to be made.  
33. Power to make Ordinance s. 
34. Ordinance s how to be made.  
35. Conduct of business by authorities of Insti tute. 
36. Tribunal of Arbitration.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
37. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies.  
38. Grant of degree s, etc., by I nstitute.  
39. Sponsored schemes.  
40. Meetings of Academic Council and Finance Committee.  
41. Power of Central G overnment to give directions to Institute.  
42. P rotection action taken in good f aith. 
43. Power to make rules.  
44. Statutes, Ordinances  notifications to be  published i n Official Gazette and to be laid before 
Parliament.  
45. Power to remove difficulties.  
46. Transitional provisions.  
 
  3 
 THE RAJIV GANDHI NAT IONAL INSTITUTE OF YOUTH D EVELOPMENT ACT, 2012  
ACT NO. 35 OF 2012  
[30th August , 2012 .] 
An Act to declare the institution known as the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth 
Development, to be an institution of national importance and to provide for its incorporation 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -third Year of  the Republic of India as follow s:— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute 
of Youth Development Act, 2012.  
(2) It shall come  into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration of Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development as an institution of 
national importance .—Whereas the objects of the instituti on known as the Rajiv Gandhi National 
Institute of Youth Development are such as to make the institution one of national importance, it is hereby 
declared that the institution known as the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development is an 
institut ion of national importance.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Academic Council ” means the Academic Council of the Institute;  
(b) “appointed day ” means the date appointed under sub -section ( 2) of section 1 for coming into 
force of this Act;  
(c) “Chairperson ” means a Chairperson to the Executive Council referred to in clause  (a) of               
sub-section ( 2) of section 12;  
(d) “Director” means the Director of the Institute referred to in clause ( a) of section 21;  
(e) “Executive Council ” means the Executive Council of the Institute established under                
section 12;  
(f) “existing Institute ” means the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development, 
Sriperumbudur, established under the provisions of the Socie ty Registration Act, 1860 (21 o f 1860) 
and declared as deemed to be a University under section 3 of the University Grants Commissio n Act, 
1956 (3 of  1956), and which is in existence immediately before the commencement of this Act;  
(g) “Fund” means the fund of the Institute to be maintained under section 26;  
(h) “Institute” means the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Developmen t incorporated 
under section 4;  
(i) “notification ” means the notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(j) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(k) “Registrar” means the Registrar of the Institute referred to in section 23;  
(l) “Statutes” and “Ordinances ” mean the Statutes and Ordinances of the Institute made under this 
Act. 
  
                                                           
1.19th November, 2012, vide notification  No. S.O. 2747(E), dated 19th November, 2012, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, s ec. 3( ii). 4 
 CHAPTER II  
RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL  INSTITUTE OF YOUTH DEVELOPMENT  
4. Incorporation of Institute. —(1) The Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development shall 
be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions 
of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract, and shall, by th at name, sue and be 
sued.  
(2) The first Chairperson, the first Director and the first members of the Executive Council and the 
Academic Council, and all persons who may hereafter become such officers or members, so long as they 
continue to hold such offic e or membership, shall constitute the Institute.  
(3) The headquarters of the Institute shall be in the district of Kanchipuram, in the State of            
Tamil Nadu.  
(4) The Institute may establish and maintain centres at such other places in India as it  may deem fit.  
5. Effect of establishment of Institute .—On and from the appointed day and subject t o other 
provisions of this Act, — 
 (a) any reference to the existing Institute in any contract or other instrument shall be deemed as a 
reference to the Institute;  
(b) all property, movable and immovable, of or belonging to the existing Institu te shall vest in the 
Institute;  
(c) all rights and liabilities of the existing Institute shall be transferred to, and be the rights and 
liabilities of, the Institute ; and  
(d) every person employed by the existing Institute immediately before the appointed day shall 
hold office or service in the Institute by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same 
terms and conditions and with the same rights and pr ivileges as to pension, leave, gratuity, provident 
fund and other matters as he would have held the same if this Act had not been passed, and shall 
continue to do so unless and until his employment is terminated or until such tenure, remuneration 
and terms  and conditions are duly altered by the Statutes:  
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee, his employment may be 
terminated by the Institute in accordance with the terms of the contract with the employee or, if no 
provisi on is made therein in this behalf, on payment to him by the Institute a compensation equivalent to 
three months' remuneration in the case of permanent employees and one month's remuneration in the case 
of other employees.  
6. Objects of Institute. —The obj ects of the Institute shall be ,— 
 (a) to evolve and achieve an integrated approach to youth development for preparing and 
empoweri ng the youth for the future, by — 
 (i) providing action oriented research inputs for policy formulation;  
(ii) implementation of policy through extension and other programmes;  
(iii) promoting assessment and impact study and conducting teaching, training and other 
academic programmes;  
 (b) to set up advanced National Youth Resource Centre commensurate with the in ternational 
standards to provide for comprehensive and scientifically analysed data on all youth -related issues 
and matters, with adequate library facility, documentation and publication;  
(c) to provide for research and development and dissemination of kno wledge through extension 
and outreach programmes;  
(d) to act as a nodal agency for capacity building of stakeholders including youth bodies, 
organisations and agencies relating to youth;  5 
  (e) to empower youth to participate in inclusive development and na tion building;  
 (f) to evolve as an institute of advanced study in the field of youth and to develop such 
professional excellence as may be required for the purpose;  
 (g) to provide for higher education in the field of youth development through employment -
oriented and inter -disciplinary courses at the post graduate level.  
7. Functions of Institute. —(1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in section 6, the 
Institute shall, — 
 (a) develop a “think tank ” by way of carrying out policy research, evaluation and impact analysis 
on youth programmes and issues of contemporary and future relevance;  
(b) function as a repository of knowledge pertaining to data on youth;  
(c) develop documentation, information and publication services for youth training and extension;  
(d) provide technical advice and consultancy for formulation of youth related policy and 
promotion of youth programme;  
(e) build the professional capacity of youth organisations, both in Government and voluntary 
sector;  
 (f) design, develop and conduct appropriate training and orientation programmes;  
(g) conduct seminars, workshops and conferences on issues relating to youth;  
(h) set up centres for disseminat ion of academic and training programmes;  
(i) collaborate with national and international university, centres, institutes and such other 
agencies relating to youth training and youth development;  
(j) establish programmes of study and research and to provid e for instruction in such branches of 
study as the institute deems appropriate;  
(k) award, subject to such conditions as the Institute may determine, degrees, diplomas, 
certificates or other academic distinctions or titles at various academic levels;  
 (l) confer honorary degrees or other distinction awards, fellowships, scholarships, prizes and 
medals;  
(m) determine, demand and receive fees and other charges for its courses , programmes and other 
matters ; 
(n) conduct and coordinate projects and studies rel ating to youth sponsored by the Government of 
India and other developmental agencies;  
(o) create with the prior approval of the Central Government, academic, technical, administrative, 
managerial and other posts in the Institute and make appointments there to in accordance with the 
rules and regulations of the Institute;  
(p) regulate the conduct of the affairs of the Institute;  
(q) supervise and control the discipline of all categories of employees and students of the 
Institute;  
 (r) purchase, hire, lease,  exchange or acquire property, movable or immovable and to construct, 
alter and maintain any building or  buildings as may be necessary;  
(s) set up distance learning or education centres, in collaboration with Open Universities, to 
provide access to the asp iring young professionals enabling them to take up a career in the field of 
youth development;  
 (t) establish, maintain and manage halls of residences and hostels for students;  6 
  (u) lay down conditions of service including a code of conduct for teachers an d other categories 
of employees;  
(v) supervise, control and regulate the discipline of students of the Institute and to make 
arrangements for promoting th eir health and general welfare;  
(w) coordinate student exchange programmes with reputed International  Youth Development 
Institutions;  
(x) undertake, assist and promote all such activities conducive or incidental to the attainment of 
the objectives.  
(2) The Institute may receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from the Government and to 
receive bequests, donations and transfers of movable or immovable properties from the testators, donors 
or transferors, as the case may be.  
(3) The Institute may enter into agreements with international organisations, institutions and 
universities to broaden the scope of the youth work and to facilitate knowledge development and 
participatory learning.  
8. Institute to be open to all races, creeds, gender and classes .—(1) The Institute shall be open to 
persons of either sex and of whatever race, creed, caste or cla ss, physical ability, and no test or condition 
shall be imposed as to religious belief or profession in admitting students, appointing teachers or 
employees or in any other connection whatsoever.  
(2) No bequest, donation or transfer of any property shall be accepted by the Institute which in the 
opinion of the Executive Council involves conditions or obligations opposed to the spirit and object of 
this section.  
9. Teaching at Institute. —All teaching and other academic activities at the Institute shall be 
conducted by or in the name of the Institute in accordance with the Statutes and Ordinances made in this 
behalf.  
10. Visitor. —(1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the Institute:  
 Provided that the President may, by order, nominate any person to be the Visitor and such person so 
nominated shall hold office for such term, not exceeding five years as may be specified in the order and 
the person so nominated shall exercise the powers and discharge duties of the Visitor.  
 (2) The Visitor may, from time to time, appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress 
of the Institute and to hold inquiries into the affairs thereof and to report thereon in such manner as the 
Visitor ma y direct.  
(3) Upon receipt of any such report, the Visitor may take such action and issue such directions as he 
considers necessary in respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report and the Institute shall be 
bound to comply with such directions w ithin reasonable time.  
CHAPTER III  
AUTHORITIES OF THE INSTITUTE  
11. Authorities of Institute. —The Institute shall consist of the following authorities, namely: — 
(a) the Executive Council;  
(b) the Academic Council; and  
(c) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the Institute.  
12. Establishment of Executive Council. —(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established for the purpose of this 
Act, a central body to be called as the Executive Council.  
(2) The Executive Council shall consist of  the following members, namely: — 
 (a) an eminent person of academic repute to be nominated by the Visitor —Chairperson;  7 
 (b) an eminent person in the field of Youth Development to b e nominated by the Visitor —Vice -
Chairperson;  
(c) Secretary, Department of Youth Affairs, Minist ry of Youth Affairs and Sports —ex officio 
Member ; 
(d) Joint Secretary, Department of Youth Affairs, Minist ry of Youth Affairs and Sports —ex 
officio Member ;  
(e) Director, Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development —ex officio Member;   
(f) Professor from Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development on rotation —Member;  
(g) one eminent sports personality to be nominated by the Central Government —Member;  
(h) one Head from an Academic Institution to be nominated by the Central Government —
Member;  
(i) one representative from the industry to be nominated by the Central Government from the 
Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industry or Confederation of Indian Industry by the 
Central Government —Member;  
(j) the Reg istrar, Rajiv Gandhi National  Institute of Youth Developmen t—Member -Secretary.  
(3) While nominating the members of the Executive Council under sub -section ( 2) due representation 
shall be given to women, different regions of the country, and weaker sections  of the community and 
differently abled persons.  
13. Terms of office of, vacancies among, and allowances payable to members of Executive 
Council.—(1) The term of office of every member of the Executive Council shall be for a period of three 
years from the date of his nomination:  
Provided that the term of office of an ex officio  member shall continue so long as he holds the office 
by virtue of which he is a member.  
(2) The term of office of a member nominated to fill a casual vacancy shall be for the remainder of 
the term of the member in whose place he has been nominated.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, an out -going member shall, unless the Central 
Government otherwise directs, continue in office until another person is nominated as a member in his 
place or until the expiry of one year, whichever is earli er.  
(4) The members of the Executive Council, other than ex officio members, shall be paid such 
travelling and other allowances as may be provided by the Statutes.  
14. Meetings of Executive Council. —(1) The Chairperson shall ordinarily preside at the meet ings of 
the Executive Council and at the Convocation of the Institute:  
 Provided that, in his absence, the Vice -Chairperson of the Executive Council shall preside at the 
meetings of the Executive Council.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Chairperson to ens ure that the decisions taken by the Executive Council 
are implemented.  
(3) The Chairperson shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as are assigned to 
him by this Act.  
(4) The Executive Council shall meet at least four times in a ye ar and follow such procedure, in its 
meetings (including quorum at such meetings) as may be provided by the Statutes.  
15. Powers and functions of Executive Council. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the 
Executive Council shall be responsible for the general superintendence, direction and control of the 
affairs of the Institute and shall also exercise the powers of the Institute not otherwise provided for by this  
Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, and shall have the power to review the acts of the Academic Council 
and Finance Committee.  8 
  (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Executive Council shall — 
 (a) take decisions on questions of policy relating to the administration and working of the 
Institute;  
(b) lay down policy regarding the duration of the courses, nomenclature of the degrees and other 
distinctions to  be conferred by the Institute;  
(c) institute courses of study and lay down standards of proficiency and other academic 
distinctions in respect of the courses offered by the Institute;  
(d) lay down, with prior approval of the Central Government, the policy regarding the cadre 
structure, qualification, the method of recruitment an d conditions of service of the teaching and 
research faculty as well as other employees of the Institute;  
(e) guide resource mobililsation  of the Institute and to lay down policies for utilisation;  
(f) consider and approve proposals for taking loans for purposes of the Institute with or without 
the security of the property of the Institute;  
 (g) make Statutes and to alter, modify or rescind the same;  
 (h) consider and pass resolutions on annual report, annual accounts and the budget estimates of 
the Insti tutes for the next financial year as it thinks fit together with a statement of its development 
plans; and  
(i) do all such things, not specifically covered under clauses ( a) to ( h), as may be necessary, 
incidental or conductive to the attainment of all or  any of the powers under this section.  
(3) The Executive Council shall have the power to appoint such committees as it considers necessary 
for the exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties under this Act.  
(4) The Executive Council may, by a specific resolution to this effect, delegate any of its powers and 
duties to the Chairperson, Director, any officer or any authority of the Institute subject to reserving the 
right to review the action that may be taken und er such delegated authority.  
16. Academic Council. —(1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the 
Institute and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, co -ordinate and 
exercise general supervisio n over the academic policies of the Institute.  
(2) The Academic Council shall co nsist of the following, namely: — 
 (a) Director -Chairman ex officio ; 
(b) one head of an academic institution of national importance to be nominated by the 
Chairperson;  
(c) one Director from any of the Indian Institute of Technology or the Indian Institute of 
Management to be nominated by the Chairperson;  
(d) Member in -charge of Youth Affairs in the Planning Commission of India  ex officio ; 
 (e) one person from any international non -governmental organisation working in India in the 
field of youth work to be nominated by the Chairperson;  
(f) two representatives from the non -governmental industrial sector to b e nominated by the 
Chairperson ; 
(g) one Professor from the I nstitute, on rotation basis;  
(h) Director of the Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration, Mussorie,                       
ex officio;  
 (i) two persons from non -governmental organisations working in the field of youth and 
adolescent developm ent out of whom one person shall be from the north -eastern region, to be 
nominated by the Chairperson;  9 
 (j) two students of the Institute out of whom one student shall be female;  
(k) three eminent academicians from among the fields of Social Science, Healt h Science, 
Agricultural Science, Skill Development, Management and Law to be nominated by the Chairperson;  
 (l) one woman representative from the International Development Organisation to be nominated 
by the Chairperson;  
(m) an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India dealing with the 
affairs of the Institute in the Union Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, ex officio .  
(3) The term of office of members of the Academic Council and its powers shall be such as may be 
provide d by the Statutes.  
 (4) While nominating the members of the Academic Council due representation shall be given to 
women (by including at least four women), from different regions of the country, weaker sections of the 
community and differently abled person s. 
17. Functions of Academic Council. —Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the 
Ordinances, the Academic Council shall have the control and general regulation, and be responsible for 
the framing of the Ordinances, maintenance of standards  of instruction, education and examination in the 
Institute and shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or 
imposed upon it by the Statutes.  
18. Finance Committee. —(1) There shall be a Finance Committee of the Inst itute which shall be the 
principal financial body of the Institute .  
(2) The Finance Committee shall co nsist of the following, namely: — 
(a) Director -Presiding Officer of the Finance Committee;  
(b) Joint Secretary and Financial Adviser in the Union Ministr y of Youth Affairs and Sports;  
(c) Registrar of the Institute;  
(d) one Professor of the Institute on rotation basis, as may be nominated by the Chairperson;  
(e) one Member from the Executive Council to be nominated by the Chairperson;  
(f) Joint Secretar y in the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports dealing with the affairs of the 
Institute;  
(g) the Finance Officer of the Institute —Member -Secretary.  
(3) The term of office of members of the Finance Committee and its powers shall be such as may be 
provided by the Statutes.  
(4) While nominating the members of the Academic Council due representation shall be given to 
women, different regions of the country , weaker sections of the community and differently abled persons.  
19. Functions of Finance Committee. —The Finance Committee shall perform the  following 
functions, namely: — 
(a) to scrutinise the accounts and budget estimates of the Institute and to make recommendations 
to the Executive Council;  
(b) to scrutinise the proposals for new expenditure on account of major works on purchases;  
(c) to scrutinise re -appropriation statem ents and audit notes and make recommendations thereon 
to the Executive Council;  
(d) to review the finances of the Institute from time to time and have concurrent audit conducted 
whenever necessary; and  
(e) to give advice and make recommendations to the E xecutive Council on any financial 
questions affecting the affairs of the Institute.  10 
 20. Other authorities .—The constitution, powers and functions of the other authorities, as may be 
declared by the Statutes to be authorities of the Institute, shall be such  as may be provided by the Statutes.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
OFFICERS OF THE INSTITUTE  
21. Officers of Institute. —The Institute shall consist of the following officers, namely: — 
 (a) the Director;  
 (b) the Registrar; and  
 (c) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be the officers of the Institute.  
22. Director. —(1) The Director of the Institute shall be appointed by the Visitor for a period of three 
years in the manner specified in sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) on such terms and conditions of service as may 
be provided by the Statutes:  
Provided that the first Director shall be appointed by the Central Government on such terms and 
conditions as it deems fit, for a period not exceeding six months from the appointed day.  
(2) The Director shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of three persons with outstanding 
academic qualifications as recommended by a Search Committee constituted by the Central Government 
for that purpose.  
(3) The Search Committee referred to in sub -section (2) shall consist of thr ee members, one each to 
be nominated by the Executive Council, the Central Government and the Visitor.  
(4) The Director shall be the principal academic and executive officer of the Institute and shall be 
responsible for the proper administration and acade mic performance of the Institute and for imparting of 
instruction and maintenance of discipline therein.  
 (5) The Director shall submit annual report and audited accounts of the Institute to the Executive 
Council and the Central Government and the Central Government shall thereupon cause the same to be 
laid before each House of Parliament.  
 (6) The Director shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be assigned 
to him by the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances.  
23. Registrar .—(1) The Registrar of the Institute shall be appointed in such manner and on such 
terms and conditions as may be provided by the Statutes and shall be the custodian of records, common 
seal, the funds of the Institute and such other property of the Institute as  the Executive Council shall 
commit to his charge.  
(2) The Registrar shall act as the Member -Secretary of the Executive Council, the Academic Council 
and such committees as may be provided by the Statutes.  
 (3) The Registrar shall be responsible to the Director for the proper discharge of his functions.  
 (4) The Registrar shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be assigned 
to him by this Act, the Statutes or by the Director.  
24. Other officers .—The manner of appointment, emoluments, powers and duties of the other 
officers of the Institute shall be such as may be provided by the Statutes.  
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
25. Grants by Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due appropriation made 
by Parli ament by law in this behalf, pay to the Institute in each financial year such sums of money and in 
such manner as it may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.  
 11 
 26. Fund of Instit ute.—(1) The Institute shall maintain a Fund to which sha ll be credited — 
 (a) all monies provided by the Central Government;  
(b) all fees and other charges levied and collected by the Institute;  
(c) all monies received by the Institute by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests 
or transfers; and  
(d) all monies received by the Institute in any other manner or from any other source.  
(2) All monies credited to the Fund shall be deposited in such banks or invested in such manner as 
may be decided by the Executive Council.  
(3) The Fund shall be appl ied towards meeting the expenses of the Institute including expenses 
incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its duties under this Act.  
27. Endowment or other funds. —Without prejudice to the provisions contained in s ection 26, the 
Institute  may,— 
 (a) set up an endowment fund with an amount of one hundred crore rupees to be maintained in 
the Public Account and any other fund for a specified purpose; and  
 (b) transfer  moni es from its fund to the endowment fund or any other fund.  
28. Accounts and audit. —(1) The Institute shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the balance sheet, in such form as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptrolle r and Auditor -General of India.  
 (2) The accounts of the Institute shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of 
India and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Institute 
to the Comptroller and A uditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Institute shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India has in connection with the 
audit of the Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the offices of the 
Institute.  
(4) The accounts of the Institute as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or 
any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Cent ral Government and the Central Government shall cause the same to be laid before 
each House of Parliament.  
29. Pension and provident fund. —(1) The Institute shall constitute for the benefits of its employees, 
including the Director, such pension, insurance  and provident fund scheme as it may deem fit, in such 
manner and subject to such conditions as may be provided by the Statutes.  
(2) Where any such provident fund has been so constituted, the Central Government may declare that 
the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925) shall apply to such fund as if it were a 
Government Provident Fund.  
30. App ointment of staff of Ins titute.—All appointments of the staff of the Institute, except that of 
the Director, shall be made with the prior approval of the Central Government and in accordance with the 
proced ure laid down in the Statutes, — 
(a) by the Executive Council, if the appointment is made on the academic staff in the post of 
Assistant Professor or above or if the appointment is made on the non -academic staff in any cadre, the 
maximum of the pay -scale for which is the same or higher than that of an Assistant Professor; and  
(b) by the Director, in any other case.  
  12 
 31. Power to make Statutes. —Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all 
or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the formation of departments of  teaching and other academic units;  
(b) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes;  
(c) the classification of posts, terms of office, method of appointment, powers and duties and 
other terms and conditions of service of t he officers of the Institute including the Chairperson, the 
Director, the Registrar and such other officers as may be declared as officers of the Institute by the 
Statutes;  
(d) the constitution, powers and duties of the authorities of the Institute referr ed in clause ( c) of 
section 11;  
(e) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the Institute;  
(f) the code of conduct, disciplinary actions thereto for misconduct including removal from 
service of employees on account of misconduct and the procedure for appeal against the actions of an 
officer or authority of the Institute;  
(g) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(h) the establishment and maintenance of  halls, residences and hostels;  
(i) the authentication of the orders and decision s of the Executive Council;  
(j) any other matter which by this Act is to be, or may be, provided by the Statutes.  
32. Statutes how to be made. —(1) The first Statutes of the Institute shall be framed by the Central 
Government with the approval of the Visitor, and a copy of the same shall be laid as soon as may be, after 
it is made, b efore each House of Parliament.  
(2)Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the Executive Council may, from 
time to time, make new or additional St atutes or may amend or repeal the Statutes in the manner hereafter 
in this section provided.  
(3) A new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require the 
previous approval of the Visitor who may assent thereto or  withhold such assent or remit it to the 
Executive Council for consideration.  
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless 
it has been assented to by the Visitor.  
33. Power to make Ordinances. —Subje ct to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the 
Ordinances of the Institute may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of the students to the Institute;  
(b) the reservation in admission to various courses or prog rammes of the Institute for the 
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes a nd other categories of persons;  
(c) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certifi cates awarded by the 
Institute;  
(d) the conditions under which students sh all be admitted to the degree, diploma and certificate 
courses and to the examinations of the Institute and the eligibility conditions for awarding the same;  
(e) the conditions of award of fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes;  
(f) the conditions and manner of appointment and duties of examining bo dies, examiners and 
moderators;  
(g) the conduct of examinations;  
(h) the maintenance of discipline among the students of the Institute;  13 
 (i) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the Institute and for admission to the 
examinations of degrees of the Institute;  
(j) the conditions of residence of students of the Institute and the levying of the fees for residence 
in the halls and hostel s and of other charges; and  
(k) any other matter which by this Act or the Statute is to be, or may be, provided by the 
Ordinances.  
34. Ordinances how to be made.—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, Ordinances shall 
be made by the Academic Counc il. 
(2) All Ordinances made by the Academic Council shall have effect from such date as it may direct, 
but every Ordinance so made shall be submitted, as soon as may be, to the Executive Council and shall be 
considered by the Executive Council at its next succeeding meeting.  
(3) The Executive Council shall have power by resolution to modify or cancel any such Ordinance 
and such Ordinance shall from the date of such resolution stand modified accordingly or cancelled, as the 
case may be.  
35. Conduct of busine ss by authorities of Institute. —The authorities of the Institute may have their 
own rules of procedure, consistent with the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the 
conduct of their own business and that of the committees, if any, ap pointed by them and not provided for 
by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
36. Tribunal of Arbitration .—(1) Any dispute arising out of a contract between the Institute and any 
of its employees shall, at the request of the employee concerned or at the instance of the Institute, be 
referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by the I nstitute, one member 
nominated by the employee, and an umpire appointed by the Visitor.  
(2) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final and shall not be questioned in any court.  
(3) No suit or proceeding shall lie in any court in respect of any matter, w hich is required by                  
sub-section ( 1) to be referred to the Tribunal of Arbitration.  
 (4) The Tribunal of Arbitration shall have power to regulate its own procedure.  
(5) Nothing contained in any law for the time being in force relating to a rbitration shall apply to 
arbitrations under this section.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
37. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies .—No act of the Institute or Executive 
Council or Academic Council or any other body set up under this Act or the  Statutes, shall  be invalid 
merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution thereof; or  
(b) any defect in the election,  nomination or appointment, of a person acting as member thereof; 
or 
(c) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the me rits of the case.  
38. Grant of degrees, etc., by Institute. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the University 
Grants Commission Act,  1956 (3 of 1956) or any other law for the time being in force, the Institute shall 
have power to grant d egrees and other academic distinctions and titles under this Act:  
Provided that the nomenclature of any degree to be granted by the Institute shall be notified by the 
University Grants Commission with the prior approval of the Central Government.  
39. Spon sored schemes. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, whenever the Institute 
receives funds from any Government, the University Grants Commission or any other agency including 14 
 industry sponsoring a research scheme, a consultancy assignment, a teac hing programme or a chaired 
professorship or a scholarship, to be execut ed or endowed at the Institute, — 
 (a) the amount received shall be kept by the Institute separately from the fund of the Institute and 
utilised only for the purpose of the scheme:  
Provided that any money remaining unutilised under this clause shall be transferred to the 
endowment fund set up under section 27; and  
 (b) the staff required to execute the same shall be recruited in accordance with the terms and 
conditions stipulated by the sponsoring organisation with prior approval of the Central Government:  
Provided that the principles laid down in the General Financial Rules, 2005 shall be followed for 
approval of sponsored schemes funded by the Central Government.  
40. Meetings of Ac ademic Council and Finance Committee. —The Academic Council and the 
Finance Committee shall meet at such times and follow such procedure, in its meetings (including 
quorum at such meetings) as may be provided by the Statutes.  
41. Power of Central Government  to give directions to Institute. —(1) The Central Government 
may give such directions, as it may deem necessary, to the Institute for the effective administration of this 
Act and the Institute shall comply with such directions.  
(2) In case of dispute between the Institute and the Central Government, in connection with the 
exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions by the Institute under this Act, the decision of the 
Central Government on that dispute, shall be final.  
42. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
any officer or employee of the Institute for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the S tatutes or the Ordinances.  
43. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry 
out the provisions of this Act.  
 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provi de for all or any of  the following matters, namely: —  
 (a) the form and manner in which the books of account of the Institute shall be maintained under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 28;  
(b) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
44. Statutes, Ordinances and notifications to be published in Official Gazette and to be laid 
before Parliament .—(1) Every rule made by the Central Government and every Statute and every 
Ordinance made or notification issued under this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government, every Statute and every Ordinance made or 
notification issued under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session , for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making an y modification in the Statute, 
Ordinance or notification or both Houses agree that the Statute, Ordinance or notification should not be 
made or issued, the Statute, Ordinance or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that Statute, Ordinance or notification.  
(3) The power to make the Statutes, Ordinances or not ifications shall include the power to give 
retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the Statutes, 
Ordinances, notifications or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any Statute, 
Ordinanc e or notification so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such Statute, 
Ordinance or notification may be applicable.  15 
 45. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, th e Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
or give such directions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears it to be necessary or 
expedient for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no o rder shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
46. Transitional pro visions .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, — 
(a) the Advisory Board and the Executive Council of the existing Institute functioning as such 
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall continue to so function until an Executive 
Council is constituted for the Institute under this Act, but on the  constitution of a new Executive 
Council under this Act, the members of the Advisory Board and Executive Council holding office 
before such constitution shall cease to hold office; and  
(b) until the first Statutes and the Ordinances are made under this Act , the Statutes and the 
Ordinances of the existing Institute, or notification as in force, immediately before the 
commencement of this Act, shall continue to apply to the Institute in so far as they are not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act . 
