--------------------------The Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014--------------------------
1 
 THE ANDHRA PRADESH REORGANISATION ACT, 2014  
_______________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______________  
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Definitions . 
 
PART II  
REORGANISATION OF THE STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH  
3. Formation of Telangana State . 
4. State of Andhra  Pradesh and territorial divisions thereof . 
5. Hyderabad to be common capital for States of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh . 
6. Expert Committee for setting up of a capital for Andhra Pradesh . 
7. Governor of existing State of Andhra Pradesh to be common Governor . 
8. Resp onsibility of Governor to protect residents of common capital of Hyderabad . 
9. Assistance of police forces from Central Government to successor States, etc . 
10. Amendment of First Schedule to Constitution . 
11. Saving powers of State Governments . 
 
PART III  
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
12. Amendment of Fourth Schedule to Constitution . 
13. Allocation of sitting members . 
14. Representation in House of the People . 
15. Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies . 
16. Provision as to sitting members . 
17. Provisions as to Legislative Assemblies . 
18. Representation of Anglo -Indian community . 
19. Allocation of sitting members . 
20. Duration of Legislative Assemblies . 
21. Speaker, Deputy Speaker and rules of procedure . 
22. Legislative Council for successor States . 
23. Provisions as to Legislative Councils . 
24. Amendment of Delimitation of Council Constituencies Order . 
25. Chairman , Deputy Chairman and rules of procedure . 
26. Delimitation of constituencies . 
27. Power of Election Commission to maintain Delimitation Orders up -to date . 
28. Amendment of Scheduled Castes Or der. 
29. Amendment of Scheduled Tribes Order . 
PART IV  
HIGH COURT  
30. High Court of Judicature at Hyderabad to be common High Court till establishment of High Court 
of Andhra Pradesh . 2 
 SECTIONS  
31. High Court of Andhra Pradesh . 
32. Judges of Andhra Pradesh High Court . 
33. Jurisdiction of Andhra Pradesh High Court . 
34. Special provision relating to Bar Council and advocates . 
35. Practice and procedure in Andhra Pradesh High Court . 
36. Custody of seal of Andhra Pradesh High Court . 
37. Form of writs and other processes . 
38. Powers of Judges . 
39. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court . 
40. Transfer of proceedings from Hyderabad High Court to Andhra Pradesh High Court . 
41. Right to appear or to act in proceedings transferred to Andhra Pradesh High Court . 
42. Interpretation . 
43. Savings . 
 
PART V  
AUTHORISATION OF E XPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES  
44. Authorisation of expenditure of Telangana State . 
45. Reports relating to accounts of Andhra Pradesh State . 
46. Distribution of revenue . 
 
PART VI  
APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
47. Application of Part . 
48. Land and goods . 
49. Treasury and bank balances . 
50. Arrears of taxes . 
51. Right to recover loans and advances . 
52. Investments and credits in certain funds . 
53. Assets and liabilities of State undertakings . 
54. Public Debt . 
55. Floating Debt . 
56. Refund of taxes collected in excess . 
57. Deposits, etc . 
58. Provident Fund . 
59. Pensions . 
60. Contracts . 
61. Liability in respect of actionable wrong.  
62. Liability as guarantor.  
63. Items in suspense.  
64. Residuary provision.  
65. Apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreement.  
66. Power of Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases.  
67. Certain expenditure to be charged on Consolidated Fund.  
 
  3 
 PART VII  
PROVISIONS AS TO CERTAIN CORPORATIONS  
SECTIONS  
68. Provisions for various companies and corporations.  
69. Continuance of arrangements in regard to generation and supply of electric power and supply of 
water.  
70. Provisions as to Andhra Pradesh State Financial Corporation.  
71. Certain provisions for companies.  
72. Temporary provisions as to continuance of certain existing road transport permits.  
73. Special provisions relating to, retrenchment compensation in certain cases.  
74. Special provision as to income -tax. 
75. Continuance of facilities  in certain State institutions.  
 
PART VIII  
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES  
76. Provisions relating to All -India Services.  
77. Provisions relating to other services . 
78. Other provisions relating to services . 
79. Provisions as to continuance of officers in same post . 
80. Advisory committees . 
81. Power of Central Government to give directions . 
82. Provision for employees of Public Sector Undertakings, etc . 
83. Provisions as to State Public Service Commission . 
 
PART IX  
MANAGEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT OF WATER RESOURCES  
84. Apex Council for Godavari and Krishna river water resources and their Management Boards . 
85. Constitution and functions of River Management Board . 
86. Staff of the Management Board . 
87. Jurisdiction of Board . 
88.  Power of Board to make regulations . 
89. Allocation of water resources . 
90. Polavaram Irrigation Project to be a national project . 
91. Arrangements on Tungabhadra Board . 
 
PART X  
INFRASTRUCTURE AND SPECIAL ECONOMIC MEASURES  
92. Successor States to follow principles, guidelines, etc., issued by Central Government . 
93. Measures for progress and development of successor States . 
94. Fiscal measures including tax incentives . 
 
PART XI  
ACCESS TO HIGHER EDUCATION  
95. Equal opportunities for quality higher education to all students . 
 
  4 
 PART XII  
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
SECTIONS  
96. Amendment of article 168 of the Constitution . 
97. Amendment of article 371D of the Constitution . 
98. Amendment of section 15A of Act 43 of 1951 . 
99. Amendment of section 15 of Act 37 of 1956 . 
100. Territorial extent of laws . 
101. Power to adapt laws . 
102. Power to construe laws . 
103. Power to name authorities, etc., for exercising statutory functions . 
104. Legal proceedings . 
105. Transfer of pending proceedings . 
106. Right of pleaders to practise in certain cases . 
107. Effect of prov isions of the Act inconsistent with other laws . 
108. Power to  remove difficulties.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
THE THIRD  SCHEDULE  
THE FOURTH  SCHEDULE  
THE FIFTH  SCHEDULE  
THE SIXTH  SCHEDULE  
THE SEVENTH  SCHEDULE  
THE EIGHTH  SCHEDULE  
THE NINTH  SCHEDULE  
THE TENTH  SCHEDULE  
THE ELEVENTH  SCHEDULE  
THE TWELFTH  SCHEDULE  
THE THIRT EENTH  SCHEDULE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 
  
THE ANDHRA PRADESH REORGANISATION ACT, 2014  
ACT NO. 6 OF 2014  
[1st March , 2014.]  
An Act to provide for the reorganisation of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh  and for matters 
connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title.—This Act may be called the And hra Pradesh Reorganisation  Act, 2014.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) ―appointed day‖ means the day1 which the Central Government may, by  notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint;  
(b) ―article‖ means an article of the Constitution;  
(c) ―assembly  constituency‖, ―council constituency‖ and ―parliamentary  constituency‖ have the 
same meanings as in the Representation of the People  Act, 1950  (43 of 1950);  
(d) ―Election Commission‖ means the Election Commission appointed by the  President under 
article 3 24; 
(e) ―existing State of Andhra Pradesh‖ means the State of Andhra Pradesh as  existing  
immediately before the appointed day;  
(f) ―law‖ includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, bye -law, rule,  scheme, notification 
or other instrument having, immediately before the appointed  day, the force of law in the whole or in 
any part of the existing State of  Andhra Pradesh;  
(g) ―notified order‖ means an order published in the Official Gazette;  
(h) ―population ratio‖, in relation to the States of Andhra P radesh and Telangana,  means the ratio 
of 58.32 : 41.68 as per 2011 Census;  
(i) ―sitting member‖, in relation to either House of Parliament or of the Legislature  of the existing 
State of Andhra Pradesh, means a person who immediately before the  appointed da y, is a member of 
that House;  
(j) ―successor State‖, in relation to the existing State of Andhra Pradesh, means  the State of 
Andhra Pradesh or the State of Telangana, as the case may be;  
(k) ―transferred territory‖ means the territory which on the appointe d day is  transferred from the 
existing State of Andhra Pradesh to the State of Telangana;  
 (l) ―treasury‖ includes a sub -treasury; and  
(m) any reference to a district, mandal, tehsil, taluk or other territorial division of  the existing 
State of Andhra Pradesh shall be construed as a reference to the area  comprised within that territorial 
division on the appointed day.  
  
                                                           
1. 2nd June, 2014, vide notification No. S.O. 655 (E), dated 4th March, 2014, see Gazette of Indi a, Extraordinary, Part II,                   
sec. 3(ii). 6 
 PART II  
REORGANISATION  OF THE STATE  OF ANDHRA  PRADESH  
3. Formation of Telangana  State .—On and from th e appointed day, there shall be  formed a new 
State to be known as  the State of Telangana comprising the following territories of the existing State of  
Andhra Pradesh, namely: — 
Adilabad, Karimnagar, Medak, Nizamabad, Warangal, Ranga  Reddy, Nalgonda,   
Mahbubnagar, 1[Khammam  (but excluding  the Mandals of  Kukunoor, Velairpadu and Bhurgampadu 
but not including its revenue villages of Pinapaka, Morampalli Banzar, Bhurgampad, Nagineniprolu, 
Krishnasagar, Tekula, Sarapaka, Iravendi, Mothepattinagar, Uppusaka, Sompalli and Nakripeta under 
the Palvancha Revenue Division, and the Mandal s of Chintoor, Kunavaram, Vararamachandrapuram 
and Bhadrach alam but not including the revenue village of Bhadrachalam under the Bhadrachalam 
Revenue Division )] and Hyderabad districts,   
and thereupon the said terri tories shall cease to form part of the existing State of  Andhra Pradesh.  
4. State of Andhra Pradesh and territorial divisions thereof .––On and from the appointed day, the 
State of Andhra Pradesh shall comprise  the territories of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh other than 
those specified in  section 3.  
5. Hyderabad to be common capital for  States of  Telangana and  Andhra  Pradesh .––(1) On and 
from the appointed day, Hyderabad in the existing State of  Andhra Pradesh, shall be the common capital 
of the State of Telangana and the State of  Andhra Pradesh for such period not exceeding ten years.  
(2) After expiry of the period referred to in sub -section ( 1), Hyderabad shall be the  capital of the State 
of Telangana and there shall be a new capital for the State of  Andhra Pradesh.  
Explanation. ––In this Part, the common capital includes the existing area notified as  the Greater 
Hyderabad Municipal Corporation under the Hyderabad Municipal Corporation  Act, 1955  (Hyderabad 
Act No. 2 of 1956).  
6. Expert Committe e for setting up of a capital for Andhra Pradesh .—The Central Government 
shall constitute an expert committee to study various  alternatives regarding the new capital for the 
successor State of Andhra Pradesh and make  appropriate recommendations in a period  not exceeding six 
months from the date of enactment  of the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014.  
7. Governor of existing State of Andhra Pradesh to be common Governor. —On and from the 
appointed day, the Governor of the existing State of Andhra  Pradesh shall be the Governor for both the 
successor States of Andhra Pradesh and  Telangana for such period as may be determined by the President.  
8. Responsibility of Governor to protect residents of common capital of Hyderabad. —(1) On and 
from the appointed day,  for the purposes of administration of the  common capital area, the Governor shall 
have special responsibility for the security of life,  liberty and property of all those who reside in such area.  
(2) In particular, the responsibility of the Governor shall extend to matters such as law  and order, 
internal security and security of vital installations, and management and allocation  of Government 
buildings in the common capital area.  
(3) In discharge of the functions, the Governor shall, after consulting the Co uncil of  Ministers of the 
State of Telangana, exercise his individual judgment as to the action to be  taken:  
Provided that if any question arises whether any matter is or is not a matter as  respects which the 
Governor is under this sub -section required to act in the exercise of his  individual judgment, the decision 
of the Governor in his discretion shall be final, and the  validity of anything done by the Governor shall 
not be called in question on the ground that  he ought or ought not to have acted in the e xercise of his 
individual judgment.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 2014, s.  2, for certain words (w.e.f. 29 -5-2014).  7 
 (4) The Governor shall be assisted by two advisors to be appointed by the Central  Government.  
9. Assistance of police forces from Central Government to successor States, etc. —(1) The Central 
Government shall assist the successor States of Andhra Pradesh  and Telangana to raise additional police 
forces.  
(2) The Central Government shall, for a period of three years, on and from the appointed  day, 
maintain and administer the Greyhound Training Centre in Hyderabad which shall  function as a common 
training centre for the successor States and, at the expiry of the said  period, the existing Greyhound 
Training Centre in Hyderabad shall become the training  centre of the State of Telangana.  
(3) The Central Government shall assist the successor State of Andhra Pradesh to set  up a similar 
state-of the -art training centre at such place as the State Government of  Andhra Pradesh may by order 
notify.  
(4) The Central Government shall provide financial  assistance to the successor States  in setting up 
new operational hubs for Greyhounds at such locations as the successor  States may by order notify.  
(5) The Greyhound and OCTOPUS forces of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh  shall be distributed 
between t he successor States after seeking options from the personnel  and, each of these forces, on or 
after the appointed day shall function under the respective  Director General of Police of the successor 
States.  
10. Amendment of First Schedule to Constitution. —On and from the appointed day, in the First 
Schedule to the Constitution, under  the heading ―I. THE STATES’’, –– 
(a) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of Andhra Pradesh,  after the words, 
brackets and figures ―Second Schedule to the A ndhra Pradesh and  Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) 
Act, 1959  (56 of 1959) ‖, the following shall be inserted,  namely: — 
―and the territories specified in section 3 of the Andhra Pradesh  Reorganisation Act, 2014‖;  
(b) after  entry 28, the following entry shall be inserted, namely: —  
―29. Telangana: The territories specified in section 3 of the Andhra Pradesh  Reorganisation 
Act, 2014.‖.  
11. Saving powers of State Governments. —Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall be 
deemed to affect the  power of the Government of Andhra Pradesh or the Government of Telangana to 
alter, after  the appointed day, the name, area or boundaries of any district or other territorial division in  
the State.  
PART III  
REPRESENTATION  IN THE LEGISLATURES  
The Council of States  
 12. Amendment of F ourth Schedule to Constitution .—On and from the appointed day, in the 
Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, in the  Table, — 
(a) in entry 1, for the figures ―18‖, the figures ―11‖ shall be substituted;  
(b) entries 2 to 30 shall be renumbered as entries 3 to 31, respectively;  
(c) after entry 1, the following entry shall be inserted, namely: — 
―2. Telangana .............................................. 7‖.  
13. Allocation of sitting members .—(1) On and from the appointed day, eighteen sitting members of 
the Council of  States representing the existing State of Andhra Pradesh shall be deemed to have been  
elected to fill the seats allotted to the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, as specified  in the F irst 
Schedule to this Act.  
(2) The term of office of such sitting members shall remain unaltered.  8 
 The House of the People  
14. Representation in House of the People .—On and from the appointed day, there shall be 
allocated 25 seats to the successor  State of Andhra Pradesh, and 17 seats to the successor State of 
Telangana, in the House of  the People, and the First Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 
1950  (43 of 1950)  shall be  deemed to be amended accordingly.  
15. Delimitation of Parliamentary and  Assembly Constituencies .—(1) On and from the appointed 
day, the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly  Constituencies Order, 2008, shall stand amended as 
directed in the Second Schedule to this  Act. 
(2) The Election Commission may conduct the elections to the House of the People  and the 
Legislative Assemblies of the successor States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana  as per the allocation of 
seats specified in the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly  Constituencies Order, 2008 as 
amended by this Act.  
16. Provision as to sitting members .—(1) Every sitting member of the House of the People 
representing a constituency  which, on the appointed day by virtue of the provisions of section 14, stands 
allotted, with  or without alteration of boundaries,  to the successor States of Andhra Pradesh or Telangana,  
shall be deemed to have been elected to the House of the People by that constituency as so  allotted.  
(2) The term of office of such sitting members shall remain unaltered.  
The Legislative Assembly  
17. Provisions as to Legislative Assemblies .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the 
number of seats in the  Legislative Assemblies of the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, on and 
from the  appointed day, shall be 175 and 119, respectively.  
 (2) In the Second Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950  (43 of 1950) , under the  
heading ―I. STATES‖ :— 
(a) for entry 1, the following entry shall be substituted, namely: — 
 
1                                                              2               3            4                  5                            6                    7 
―1. Andhra Pradesh                                   294            39           15                175                       29                   7‖;   
(b) entries 25 to 28 shall be renumbered as entries 26 to 29, respectively;  
(c) after entry 24, the following entry shall be inserted, namely: —  
 
1                                                               2               3            4                   5                          6                    7 
―25. Telangana                                             —             —           —              119                        19                  12‖.   
18. Representation of Anglo -Indian  community .— Notwithstanding anything  in sub-section ( 1) of 
section 17  the Governor of the State may  nominate one member each to the Legislative Assemblies of the 
successor States to give  representation to the Anglo -Indian community in accordance with article 333 of 
the Constitution.  
19. Allocation of sitting members .— (1) Every si tting member of the Legislative  Assembly of the 
existing State of  Andhra Pradesh elected to fill a seat in that Assembly from a constituency which on the  
appointed day by virtue of the provisions of section 17 stands allotted, with or without  alteration of 
boundaries, to the State of Telangana shall, on and from that day, cease to be  a member of the Legislative 
Assembly of Andhra Pradesh and shall be deemed to have been  elected to fill a seat in the Legislative 
Assembly of Telangana from that constituency as so  allotted.  
(2) All other sitting members of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of  Andhra Pradesh 
shall continue to be members of the Legislative Assembly o f that State and  any such sitting member 9 
 representing a constituency, the extent or the name of which are  altered by virtue of the provisions of 
section 17, shall be deemed to have been elected to the  Legislative Assembly of Andhra Pradesh by that 
constituency as so altered.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,  the Legislative 
Assemblies of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana shall be deemed to be duly  constituted on the appointed 
day. 
20. Duration of Legisla tive Assemblies .—The peri od of five years referred to in  clause ( 1) of article 
172 shall, in the case of  the Legislative Assembly of the State of Andhra Pradesh and of the Legislative 
Assembly  of the State of Telangana, be deemed to have commenced on the date on which it actually  
commenced in the case of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh.  
21. Speaker, Deputy Speaker and rules of procedure .—(1) The person who  immediately before the 
appointed day is the Speaker of the  Legislative Assembly of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh shall 
continue to be the  Speaker of that Assembly on and from that day and the members of that Assembly shall  
choose from amongst the members of the Assembly, a member to be the Deputy Speaker of  that 
Assembly.  
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Deputy Speaker of the  Legislative Assembly of the 
existing State of Andhra Pradesh shall become the  Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the 
successor State of Telangana and until  the Speaker is chosen by that Assembly, the duties of the office of 
the Speaker shall be  performed by the Deputy Speaker so appointed.  
(3) The rules of procedure and conduct of business of the Legislative Assembly of  Andhra Pradesh as 
in force immediately before the appointed day shall, until rules are made  under clause ( 1) of article 208, 
be the rules of procedure and conduct of business of the  Legislative Assembly of Telangana, subject to 
such modifications and adaptations as may  be made therein by the sp eaker thereof.  
The Legislative Councils  
22. Legislative Council for successor States .—  (1) There shall be constituted a Legislative Council 
for each of the successor  States consisting of not more than  1[58 members  in the Legislative Council of 
Andhra Pradesh ] and 40 members in the Legislative Council of Telangana in accordance with the 
provisions  contained in article 169 of the Constitution.  
(2) The existing Legislative Council of the State of Andhra Pradesh shall,  on and  from  the appointed 
day, be deemed to have been constituted as two Legislative Councils of the  successor States and the 
existing members shall be allotted to the Councils as specified in  the Fourth Schedule.  
23. Provisions as to Legislative Councils .— (1) On and from the appointed day,  there shall be 2[58 
seats in the Legislative  Council of Andhra Pradesh ] and 40 seats in the  Legislative Council of Telangana, 
respectively.  
(2) In the Representation of the People Act , 1950  (43 of 1950) ,–– 
(i) in the Third Schedule, –– 
 3[(a) for the existing entry 1, the following entry shall be substituted,  namely: –– 
 
   1                                            2          3          4            5                 6                      7 
                          ―1. Andhra Pradesh                  58          20        5            5                 20                   8‖;] 
 
(b) after entry 7, the following entry shall be inserted, namely: — 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6  7 
―7A. Telangana  40 14 3 3 14  6‖; 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 2015, s. 2, for ―50 members in the Legislative Council of Andhra Pradesh‖  (w.e.f. 29 -4-2015).  
2. Subs. by s.3, ibid., for  ―50 seats in the Legislative Council of Andhra Pradesh‖ (w.e.f. 29 -4-2015).  
3. Subs. by s.3, ibid., for entry 1 (w.e.f. 29 -4-2015).  
 10 
 (ii) in the Fourth Schedule, after the heading ―Tamil Nadu‖ and the entries  relating thereunder,  
the following heading and the entries shall be inserted, namely: — 
―TELANGANA  
1. Municipal Corporations.  
2. Municipalities.  
3. Nagar Panchayats.  
4. Cantonment Boards.  
5. Zila Praja Parishads.  
6. Mandal Praja Parishads.‖.  
24. Amendment of Delimitation of Council Constituencies Order .—(1) On and  from the appointed 
day, the Delimitation of Council Constituencies  (Andhra Pradesh) Order,  2006 shall stand amended as 
directed in Part I of the Third Schedule.  
(2) On and from the appointed day, the Delimitation of Council Constituencies  (Telangana) Order, 
2014, as specified in Part II of the Third Schedule shall apply to the  successor State of Telangana.  
(3) The Central Governmen t may, in consultation with the successor States of  Andhra Pradesh, or as 
the case may be, Telangana, by notification in the Official Gazette  amend the Third Schedule.  
25. Chairman , Deputy Chairman and rules of procedure. —(1) The person who  immediately 
before the appointed day is the Chairman of the  Legislative Council of the existing State of Andhra 
Pradesh shall continue to be the Chairman  of that Council on and from that day and the members of that 
Council shall choose from  amongst the members of the Council, a member to be the Deputy Chairman of 
that Council.  
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative  Council of the 
existing State of Andhra Pradesh shall become the Deputy Chairman of the  Legislative Council of the 
successor State of Telangana and until the Chairman is chosen  by that Council, the duties of the office of 
Chairman shall be performed by the Deputy  Chairman so appointed.  
(3) The rules of procedure and conduct of business of the Legislative Council  of Andhra  Pradesh as in 
force immediately before the appointed day shall, until rules are made  under clause (1) of article 208, be 
the rules of procedure and conduct of business of the  Legislative Council of Telangana, subject to such 
modifications and ad aptations as may be  made therein by the Chairman thereof.  
Delimitation of constituencies  
26. Delimitation  of constituencies. —(1) Subject to the provisions contained in article 170 of the 
Constitution and  without prejudice to section 15 of this Act, the number of seats in the Legislative 
Assembly  of the successor States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana shall be increased from 175 and  119 
to 225 and 153, respectively, and delimitation of the constituencies may be determined  by the Election 
Commission in the  manner hereinafter provided — 
(a) the number of seats to be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the  Scheduled  Tribes in the 
Legislative Assemblies of the States of Andhra Pradesh and  Telangana, respectively, having regard to 
the relevant provisions of th e Constitution;  
(b) the assembly constituencies into which each State referred to in clause ( a) shall be divided, 
the extent of each of such constituencies and in which of them seats  shall be reserved for the 
Scheduled Castes or for the Scheduled Tribes; and 
(c) the adjustments in the boundaries and description of the extent of the  parliamentary  
constituencies in each State referred to in clause ( a) that may be  necessary or expedient.  11 
  (2) In determining the matters referred to in clauses ( b) and ( c) of su b-section ( 1), the  Election 
Commission shall have regard to th e following provisions, namely:  –– 
(a) all the constituencies shall be single -member constituencies;  
(b) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be geographically compact  areas,  and in 
delimiting them, regard shall be had to physical features, existing  boundaries of  administrative units, 
facilities of communication and conveniences to  the public; and  
  (c) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the  Schedu led Tribes 
shall, as far as practicable, be located in areas where the proportion  of their population to the total 
population is the largest.  
(3) The Election Commission shall, for the purpose of assisting it in the performance  of its functions 
under sub -section ( 1), associate with itself as associate members, five  persons as the Central Government 
may by order specify, being persons who are the members  of the Legislative Assembly of the State or of 
the House of the People representing the  State:  
Provided that none of the associate members shall have a right to vote or to sign any  decision of the 
Election Commission.  
(4) If, owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate member falls vacant, it  shall be filled as 
far as practicable, in accordance  with the provisions of sub -section ( 3). 
(5) The Election Commission shall ––  
(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies together with the  dissenting 
proposals, if any, of any associate member who desires publication thereof  in the Of ficial Gazette and 
in such other manner as the Commission may consider fit,  together with a notice inviting objections 
and suggestions in relation to the proposals  and specifying a date on or after which the proposals will 
be further considered by it;  
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by  it before the date so 
specified; and  
(c) after considering all objections and suggestions which may have been  received by it before the 
date so specified, determine by one or more orders the  delimitation of constituencies and cause such 
order or orders to be published in the  Official Gazette,  
 and upon such publication, the order or orders shall have the full force of law and shall not  be called in 
question in any court.  
(6) As soon as may be after such publication, every such order relating to assembly  constituencies 
shall be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the concerned State.  
27. Power of Election Commission to maintain Delimitation Orders up -to date.––(1) The 
Election Commission may, from time to time, by notification in the Official  Gazette, — 
(a) correct any printing mistakes in any order made under section 26 or any  error  arising therein 
from inadvertent slip or omission; and  
(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division mentioned in any  such order or orders 
is or are altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be  necessary or expedient for bringing such 
order up -to-date.  
(2) Every notification under this section relating to an assembly constituency shall be  laid, as soon 
as may be after it is issued, before the concerned Legislative Assembly.  
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes  
28. Amendment of Scheduled Castes Order .––On and from the appointed day, the  Constitution 
(Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950  (C.O. 19) , shall stand amended as directed in the Fifth  Schedule to this 
Act. 12 
 29. Amendment of Scheduled Tribes Order .––On and from the appointed day, the  Constitution 
(Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950  (C.O. 22) , shall stand amended as directed in  the Sixth Schedule to this 
Act. 
PART IV  
HIGH COURT  
30. High Court of Judicature at Hyderabad to be common High Court till  establishment of High 
Court of Andhra Pradesh .––(1) On and from the appointed day, –– 
(a) the High Court of Judicature at Hyderabad shall be the common High Court  for the State of 
Telangana and the State of Andhra Pradesh till a separate High Court  for the State  of Andhra Pradesh 
is constituted under article 214 of the Constitution  read with section 31 of this Act;  
(b) the Judges of the High Court at Hyderabad for the existing State of  Andhra  Pradesh holding 
office immediately before the appointed day shall become  on that day the Judges of the common High 
Court.  
(2) The expenditure in respect of salaries and allowances of t he Judges of the common  High Court 
shall be allocated amongst the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana on the  basis of population ratio.  
31. High Court of Andhra Pradesh .––(1) Subject to the provisions of section 30,  there shall be a 
separate High Court for the State of Andhra Pradesh (hereinafter referred to as  the High Court of Andhra 
Pradesh)  and the High Court of Judicature at Hyderabad shall become  the High Court for the State of  
Telangana (hereinafter referred to as the High Court at  Hyderabad).  
(2) The principal seat of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh shall be at such place as  the President 
may, by notified order, appoint.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the Judges and division  courts of the High 
Court of Andhra Pradesh m ay sit at such other place or places in the State  of Andhra Pradesh other than its 
principal seat as the Chief Justice may, with the approval  of the Governor of Andhra Pradesh, appoint.  
32. Judges of Andhra Pradesh High Court .––(1) Such of the Judges of the High  Court at  
Hyderabad holding office immediately  before the date of establishment of the High  Court of  Andhra 
Pradesh as may be determined  by the President, shall, from that date cease to  be Judges of the High Court 
at Hyderabad  and become, Judges of  the High Court of Andhra  Pradesh.  
(2) The persons who by virtue of sub -section ( 1) become Judges of the High Court of  Andhra Pradesh 
shall, except in the case where any such person is appointed to be the  Chief  Justice of that High Court, rank 
in that Cour t according to the priority of their respective  appointments as Judges of the High Court at 
Hyderabad.  
33. Jurisdiction of Andhra Pradesh High Court .––The High Court of Andhra Pradesh shall  have, 
in respect of any part of the  territories included in the State of Andhra Pradesh, all such  jurisdiction, 
powers and authority  as, under the law in force immediately before the date  referred to in sub -section ( 1) 
of section 30, are exercisable in respect of that part of the said territories by the High Court at  Hyderabad.  
34. Special provision relating to Bar Council and advocates .––(1) On and from the  date referred to 
in sub -section ( 1) of section 30, in the  Advocates Act, 1961  (25 of 1961) , in section 3, in sub -section ( 1), in 
clause ( a), for the words ―Rajasthan,  Uttar Pradesh‖, the words ―Rajasthan,  Telangana, Uttar Pradesh‖ 
shall be substituted.  
(2) Any person who immediately before the date referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 30 is an 
advocate on the roll of the Bar Council of the existing Stat e of Andhra Pradesh and  practising as an 
advocate in the High Court at Hyderabad, may give  his option in writing, within  one year from that date to 
the Bar Council of such existing State,  to transfer his name on the roll of the Bar Council of Telangana and  
notwithstanding  anything contained in the Advocates  Act, 1961 (25 of 1961) and the rules made 
thereunder, on such  option so given his name shall be deemed to have been transferred on the roll of the 13 
 Bar Council of Telangana with effect from the date of th e option so given for the purposes of the  said Act, 
and the rules made thereunder.  
(3) The persons other than the advocates who are entitled immediately before the  date referred  to in 
sub-section ( 1) of section 30, to practise in the High Court at Hyderaba d or any  subordinate court thereof 
shall, on and after that date, be recognised as such persons  entitled  also to practise in the High Court of 
Andhra Pradesh or any subordinate court  thereof, as the case may be.  
(4) The right of audience in the High Court of Andhra Pradesh shall be regulated in  accordance with 
the like principles as immediately before the date referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section  30, are in force 
with respect to the right of audience in the High Court at  Hyderabad.  
35. Practice and procedure in Andhra Pradesh High Court .––Subject to the provisions  of this 
Part, the law in force immediately before the date  referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section  30 with respect 
to practice and procedure in the  High Court at Hyderabad shall, with the  necessary modifications, apply in 
relation to the  High Court of Andhra Pradesh, and  accordingly, the High Court of Andhra Pradesh shall  
have all such powers to make rules and orders with respect to practice and procedure as are  immediately 
before that date exercisable by the High Court at Hyderabad:  
Provided that any rules or orders which are in force immediately before the date  referred to in sub -
section ( 1) of section 30 with respect to practice and procedure in the  High  Court at  Hyderabad shall, unti l 
varied or revoked by rules or orders made by the  High Court of Andhra Pradesh, apply with the necessary 
modifications in relation to practice  and procedure in the High Court of Andhra Pradesh as if made by that 
Court.  
36. Custody of seal of Andhra Prades h High Court .––The law in force  immediately before the  date 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 30 with respect to the  custody of the seal of the  High Court at 
Hyderabad shall, with  the necessary modifications,  apply with respect to the  custody of the seal of the 
High Court  of Andhra Pradesh.  
37. Form of writs and other processes .––The law in force immediately before the  date referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) of section 30 with respect to the form of writs and other  processes used,  issued or awarded 
by the High Court at Hyderabad shall, with the necessary  modifications,  apply with respect  to the form of 
writs and other processes used, issued or  awarded by the High Court of  Andhra Pradesh.  
38. Powers of Judges .––The law in force immediately bef ore the date referred to in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 30  relating to the powers of the Chief Justice, single Judges and  division  courts of  the High Court 
at Hyderabad and with respect to all matters ancillary to the exercise of those  powers shall, with the 
necess ary modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of  Andhra Pradesh.  
39. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court .–– The law in force immediately  before the  date 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 30 relating to appeals to the Supreme  Court from  the High Court at 
Hyderabad and  the Judges and division courts thereof shall, with  the necessary modifications, apply in  
relation to the High Court of Andhra Pradesh.  
40. Transfer of proceedings from Hyderabad High Court to Andhra Pradesh  High Court .––(1) 
Except as hereinafter provided, the High Court at Hyderabad shall, as from  the date referred to in sub -
section ( 1) of section 30, have no jurisdiction in respect of the State  of Andhra Pradesh.  
(2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court at Hyderabad immediately before the  date referred to 
in sub -section ( 1) of section 30 as are certified, whether before or after that  day, by the Chief Justice of that 
High Court, having regard to the place of accrual of the  cause of  action and other circumsta nces, to be 
proceedings which ought to be heard and  decided by the  High  Court of Andhra Pradesh shall, as soon as 
may be after such certification,  be transferred to the  High Court of Andhra Pradesh.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of this section or  in section  33, but 
save as hereinafter provided, the High Court at Hyderabad shall have, and  the High  Court of Andhra 
Pradesh shall not have, jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose  of appeals,  applications for leave to the 
Supreme Court, applications for review and other  proceedings  where any such proceedings seek any relief 14 
 in respect of any order passed by  the High Court at Hyderabad before the date referred to in sub -section ( 1) 
of section 30:  
Provided that if after any such proceedings have been entertained by the High Court  at Hyderabad, it 
appears to the Chief Justice of that High Court that they ought to be  transferred to the High Court of 
Andhra Pradesh, he shall order that they shall be so  transferred, and such  proceedings shall thereupon be 
transferred accordingly.  
(4) Any order made by the High Court at Hyderabad –– 
(a) before the date referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 30, in any  proceedings  transferred to 
the High Court of Andhra Pradesh by virtue of sub-section ( 2), or 
(b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court at Hyderabad  retains jurisdiction by 
virtue of sub -section ( 3),  
shall for all purposes have effect, not only as an order of the High Court at Hyderabad, but  also as an 
order m ade by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh.  
41. Right to appear or to act in proceedings transferred to Andhra Pradesh High Court .––Any 
person who, immediately before the date referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 30, is an advocate 
entitled to practise or any other persons entitled to practise in the  High Court at Hyderabad and was 
authorised to appear in any proceedings transferred from  that High Court to the High Court of Andhra 
Pradesh under section 40, shall have the right  to appear in the High Court  of Andhra Pradesh in relation to 
those proceedings.  
42. Interpretation .––For the purposes of section 40, –– 
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in a court until that court has  disposed of all issues 
between the parties, including any issues with respect to the  taxation of the costs of the proceedings 
and shall include appeals, applications for  leave to appeal to the  Supreme Court, applications for 
review, petitions for revision  and petitions for writs; and  
(b) references to a High Court shall be construed as including references to a  Judge or division 
court thereof, and references to an order made by a court or a Judge  shall be construed as  including 
references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed  or made by that court or Judge.  
43. Savings .––Nothing in this Part shall affect the application to the High Court of  Andhra  Pradesh of 
any provisions of the Constitution, and this Part shall have effect  subject to any  provision that may be 
made on or after the date referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 30 with respect to that High Court by 
any Legislature or other authority having  power to make such  provision.  
PART V  
AUTHORISATION  OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES  
44. Authorisation of expenditure of Telangana State .––The Governor of existing State of Andhra 
Pradesh may, at any time before the  appointed day, authorise such expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of the State of  Telangana as he deems necessary for any period not more than six months beginning 
with the appointed day pendi ng the sanction of such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly  of the State 
of Telangana:  
Provided that the Governor of Telangana may, after the appointed day, authorise such  further 
expenditure as he deems necessary from the Consolidated Fund of the Stat e of Telangana for any period 
not extending beyond the said period of six months.  
45. Reports relating to accounts of Andhra Pradesh State .––(1) The reports of  the Comptroller 
and Auditor -General of India referred to in  clause (2) of article 151 relating to the accounts of the existing 
State of Andhra Pradesh in  respect of any period prior to the  appointed day shall be submitted to the 
Governor of each  of the successor States of Andhra  Pradesh and Telangana who shall cause them to be 
laid before the Legisl ature of that State.  15 
 (2) The President may by order –– 
(a) declare any expenditure incurred out of the Consolidated Fund of  Andhra Pradesh on any 
service in respect of any period prior to the appointed day  during the financial  year or in respect of 
any earl ier financial year in excess of the  amount granted for that service and for that year as 
disclosed in the reports referred to  in sub -section ( 1) to have been duly  authorised; and  
(b) provide for any action to be taken on any matter arising out of the said  reports.  
46. Distribution of revenue .––(1)The award made by the Thirteenth Finance  Commission to the 
existing State of  Andhra Pradesh shall be apportioned between the successor States by the Central  
Government on the basis of population ratio and other parameters:  
Provided that on the appointed day, the President shall make a reference to the  Fourteenth  Finance 
Commission to take into account the resources available to the successor  States and make separate awards 
for each of the successor States.  
(2) No twithstanding anything in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may, having  regard to the 
resources available to the successor State of Andhra Pradesh, make appropriate  grants and  also ensure that 
adequate benefits and incentives in the form of special  development package  are given to the backward 
areas of that State.  
(3) The Central Government shall, while considering the special development  package  for the 
successor State of Andhra Pradesh, provide adequate incentives, in particular for  Rayalaseema and  north 
coastal regions of that State.  
PART VI  
APPORTIONMENT  OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
47. Application of Part. ––(1) The provisions of this Part shall apply in relation to the  apportionment 
of the  assets and liabilities of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh  immediately before the appointed  day. 
(2) The successor States shall be entitled to receive benefits arising out of the  decisions  taken by the 
existing State of Andhra Pradesh and the successor States shall be liable to  bear the financial liabiliti es 
arising out of the decisions taken by the existing State of  Andhra Pradesh.  
(3) The apportionment of assets and liabilities shall be subject to such financial  adjustment as may be 
necessary to secure just, reasonable and equitable apportionment of  the a ssets and liabilities amongst the 
successor States.  
(4) Any dispute regarding the amount of financial assets and liabilities shall be settled  through mutual 
agreement, failing which by order by the Central Government on the advice  of the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General of India.  
48. Land and goods. ––(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Part, all land and  all stores, articles 
and other goods belonging to the existing State of Andhra Pradesh shall, — 
 (a) if within the transferred territory, pass to t he State of Telangana; or  
(b) in any other case, remain the property of the State of Andhra Pradesh:  
Provided that in case of properties situated outside the existing State of  Andhra  Pradesh, such 
properties shall be apportioned between the successor States on  the basis of population ratio:  
Provided further that where the Central Government is of opinion that any goods or  class of goods 
should be distributed among the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana,  otherwise than according to the 
situation of the goods, the Central Government may issue  such directions as it thinks fit for a just and 
equitable distribution of the goods and the  goods shall pass to the successor States accordingly:  
Provided also that in case of any dispute relating to the distribu tion of any goods or  class of goods 
under this sub -section, the Central Government shall endeavour to settle  such dispute through mutual 
agreement arrived at between the Governments of the successor  States for that purpose, failing which the 16 
 Central Govern ment may, on request by any of the  Governments of the successor States, after consulting 
the Governments of the successor  States, issue such direction as it may deem fit for the distribution of 
such goods or class of  goods, as the case may be, under this s ub-section.  
(2) Stores held for specific purposes, such as use or utilisation in particular  institutions,  workshops or 
undertakings or on particular works under construction, shall pass to  the successor States in whose 
territories such institutions, workshops, undertakings or works  are located.  
(3) Stores relating to the Secretariat and offices of Heads of Departments having  jurisdiction over the 
whole of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh shall be divided between  the successor States on the basis 
of population ratio.  
(4) In this section, the expression ―land‖ includes immovable property of every kind  and any rights in 
or over such property, and the expression ―goods‖ does not include  coins, bank notes and currency notes.  
49. Treasury and bank balanc es.––The total of the cash balances in all treasuries  of the existing 
State of  Andhra Pradesh and the credit balances of the existing State of Andhra  Pradesh with the  Reserve 
Bank of India, the State Bank of India or any other bank immediately before the  appointed day shall be 
divided between the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana on  the basis of population ratio:  
Provided that for the purposes of such division, there shall be no transfer of cash  balances from any 
treasury to any other treasury and the  apportionment shall be effected  by adjusting the  credit balances of 
the two States in the books of the Reserve Bank of India  on the appointed d ay: 
Provided further that if the State of Telangana has no account on the appointed day  with the Reserve 
Bank of  India, the adjustment shall be made in such manner as the Central  Government may, by order, 
direct.  
50. Arrears of taxes .––The right to recover arrears of the tax or duty on property,  including  arrears of  
land revenue, shall belong to the successor State in which the property is  situated, and the  right to recover 
arrears of any other tax or duty shall belong to the successor  State in whose  territories the place of 
assessment of that tax or duty is included on the appointed day.  
51. Right to recover loans a nd advances .––(1) The right of the existing State of  Andhra  Pradesh to 
recover any loans or  advances made before the appointed day to any local body,  society, agriculturist or 
other  person in an area within that State shall belong to the  successor State in  which that area is  included 
on that day.  
(2) The right of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh to recover any loans or advances  made before 
the appointed day to any person or institution outside that State shall belong  to the State of Andhra 
Pradesh:  
Prov ided that any sum recovered in respect of any such loan or advance shall be  divided  between the 
States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana on the basis of population  ratio.  
52. Investments and credits in certain funds .––(1) The securities held in respect  of the investments 
made from Cash Balances  Investment Account or from any Fund in the  Public  Account of the existing 
State of Andhra  Pradesh as specified in the Seventh Schedule  shall be apportioned on the basis of 
population  ratio of the successor States:  
Provided that the securities held in investments made from the Calamity Relief Fund  of the  existing 
State of Andhra Pradesh shall be divided in the ratio of the area of the  territories  occupied by the 
successor States.  
(2) The investments of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh immediately before the  appointed day in 
any special fund, the objects of which are confined to a local area, shall  belong to the State in which that 
area is included on the appointed day:  
Provided that the investments in such specia l funds on multiple entities situated in  different  parts of 
the existing State, and such parts fall within the territories of the States of  Andhra  Pradesh and Telangana, 
shall be apportioned between the successor States on the  basis of  population ratio.  17 
 (3) The investments of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh immediately before the  appointed day in 
any private, commercial or industrial undertaking, the objects of which are  confined to a local area, shall 
belong to the successor State in which such area i s included  on the appointed day:  
Provided that investments in such entities, having multiple units situated in different  parts of the 
existing State, and such parts fall within the territories of the States of Andhra  Pradesh and Telangana, 
shall be apporti oned between the successor States on the basis of  population ratio.  
(4) Where any body corporate constituted under a Central Act, State Act or  Provincial  Act for the 
existing State of Andhra Pradesh or any part thereof has, by virtue of the  provisions of P art II, become an 
inter-State body corporate, the investments in, or loans or  advances to, any such body corporate by the 
existing State of Andhra Pradesh made before  the appointed day shall, save as otherwise expressly 
provided by or under this Act, be  divided  between the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana in the 
same proportion in  which the assets of the body corporate are divided under the provisions of this Part.  
53. Assets and liabilities of State undertakings .––(1) The assets and liabilities  relating to any 
commercial or industrial undertaking  of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh,  where such  undertaking or 
part thereof is exclusively  located in, or its operations are confined to, a local area, shall pass to the State 
in which that  area is i ncluded on the appointed day,  irrespective of the location of its headquarters:  
Provided that where the operation of such undertaking becomes inter -State by virtue  of the provisions 
of Part II, the assets and liabilities of –– 
(a) the operational units of the undertaking shall be apportioned between the  two successor States 
on location basis; and  
(b) the headquarters of such undertaking shall be apportioned between the two  successor States on 
the basis of population ratio.  
(2) Upon app ortionment of the assets and liabilities, such assets and liabilities shall  be transferred in 
physical form on mutual agreement or by making payment or adjustment  through any other mode as may 
be agreed to by the successor States.  
54. Public Debt .––(1) All  liabilities on account of Public Debt and Public Account  of the  existing  
State of Andhra Pradesh outstanding immediately before the appointed day shall  be apportioned on the 
basis of population ratio of the successor States unless a different  mode of apportionment is provided 
under the provisions of this Act.  
(2) The individual items of liabilities to be allocated to the successor States and the  amount of 
contribution required to be made by one successor State to another shall be such  as may be ordered  by the 
Central Government on the advice of the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India:  
Provided that till such orders are issued, the liabilities on account of Public Debt and  Public Account 
of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh shall continue to be t he liabilities of  the successor State of Andhra 
Pradesh.  
(3) The liability on account of loan raised from any source and re -lent by the existing  State of Andhra 
Pradesh to such entities as may be specified by the Central Government  and whose area of operat ion is 
confined to either of the successor States shall devolve on  the respective States as specified in  
sub-section ( 4). 
(4) The public debt of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh attributable to loan taken  from any source 
for the express purpose of re-lending the same to a specific institution and  outstanding immediately before 
the appointed day shall, — 
(a) if re -lent to any local body, body corporate or other institution in any  local  area, be the debt of 
the State in which the local area is included  on the appointed day;  or 
(b) if re -lent to any other corporation or institution which becomes an inter - State corporation or 
institution on the appointed day, be divided between the States  of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana in 18 
 the same proportion in which th e assets of such  body corporate or  institution are divided under the 
provisions of Part VII.  
(5) Where a sinking fund or a depreciation fund is maintained by the existing State of  Andhra Pradesh 
for repayment of any loan raised by it, the securities held in respect  of investments made from that fund 
shall be divided between the successor States of  Andhra  Pradesh and Telangana in the same proportion in 
which the total public debt is  divided between the two States under this section.  
(6) In this section, the  expression ―Government security‖ means a security created  and issued by a 
State Government for the purpose of raising a public loan and having any  of the forms spe cified in, or 
prescribed under , clause ( 2) of section 2 of the Public Debt  Act, 1944  (18 of 1944) . 
55. Floating Debt .—All liabilities of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh in respect of any  floating  
loan to provide short term finance to any local body, body corporate or other institution,  shall be 
determined on the following basis, name ly:–– 
(a) if, the purposes of the floating loan are, on and from the appointed day,  exclusive purposes of 
either of the successor States, then, of that State;  
(b) in any other case, it shall be divided on the basis of population ratio.  
56. Refund of taxes collected in excess .—(1) The liability of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh to 
refund any tax or duty  on property, including land revenue, collected in  excess shall be the liability of the 
successor  State in whose territories the property is situated,  and the  liability of the existing State of  
Andhra Pradesh to refund any other tax or duty collected in  excess shall be apportioned  between the 
Successor States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana on  the basis of population  ratio and the State 
discharging the liability shall be entitled to receive from the other State  its share of the liability, if any.  
(2) The liability of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh to refund any other tax or duty  collected in 
excess on the appointed day shall be the liability of the  successor State in  whose territories the place of 
assessment of such tax or duty is included, and the liability of  the existing State of Andhra Pradesh to 
refund any other tax or duty collected in excess shall  be apportioned between the Successor States o f 
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana on the  basis of population ratio and the State discharging the liability shall 
be entitled to receive  from the other State its share of the liability, if any.  
57. Deposits, etc .—(1) The liability of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh in  respect of any  civil 
deposit or local fund deposit shall, as from the appointed day, be the liability of the  successor  State in 
whose area the deposit has been made.  
(2) The liability of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh in respect of any charitable  or other 
endowment shall, as from the appointed day, be the liability of the successor State in  whose area the 
institution entitled to the benefit of the endowment is located or of the  successor State to which the 
objects of the endowment, u nder the terms thereof, are confined:  
Provided that any civil deposits or loan funds or charitable or other endowment fund  maintained by 
the existing State of Andhra Pradesh before the appointed day having  jurisdiction over the entire State 
shall be apport ioned between the successor States on the  basis of population ratio.  
58. Provident Fund .—The liability of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh in  respect of the 
Provident  Fund account of a Government servant in service on the appointed day shall, as from that day, 
be the liability of the successor State to which that Government servant is permanently  allotted.  
59. Pensions .—The liability of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh in respect of pensions shall  pass 
to, or be apportioned between, the successor S tates of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana  in accordance with 
the provisions contained in the Eighth Schedule to this Act.  
60. Contracts .—(1) Where, before the appointed day, the existing State of Andhra Pradesh has  made 
any contract in the exercise of its executive power for any purposes of the  State, that  contract shall, –– 
(a) if the purposes of the contract are, on and from the appointed day, exclusive  purposes of 
either of the successor States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, then it  shall be  deemed to h ave been 19 
 made in exercise of the executive power of that State  and the liability shall be discharged by that 
State; and  
(b) in any other case, all rights and liabilities which have accrued or may accrue  under any such 
contract shall be apportioned between the successor States on the  basis of  population ratio or in any 
other manner as may be agreed to by the successor  States.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, there shall be deemed to be included in the  liabilities which have 
accrued or may accrue under a ny contract –– 
(a) any liability to satisfy an order or award made by any court or other tribunal  in proceedings 
relating to the contract; and   
(b) any liability in respect of expenses incurred in or in connection with any  such proceedings.  
 (3) This sectio n shall have effect subject to the other provisions of this Part relating  to the 
apportionment of liabilities in respect of loans, guarantees and other financial  obligations;  and the 
bank balances and securities shall, notwithstanding that they partake  of the nature of  contractual 
rights, be dealt with under those provisions.  
61. Liability in respect of actionable wrong .—Where, immediately before the appointed day, the 
existing State of Andhra Pradesh  is subject to any liability in respect of any actionable  wrong other than 
breach of contract,  that liability shall, –– 
(a) if the cause of action arose wholly within the territories which, as from that  day, are the 
territories of either of the successor States of Andhra Pradesh or Telangana,  be the liability of that 
State; and  
(b) in any other case, be apportioned between the successor States on the basis of population ratio 
or in any other manner as may be agreed to by the successor States.  
62. Liability as guarantor .—Where, immediately before the appointed day,  the existing State of 
Andhra Pradesh  is liable as guarantor in respect of any liability of a registered co -operative society or 
other  person, that liability shall, — 
(a) if the area of operations of such society or persons is confined to the  territories which, as from 
that day, are the territories of either of the States of Andhra  Pradesh or Telangana, be a liability of that 
State; and  
(b) in any other case, be apportioned between the successor States on the  basis of population  ratio 
or in any other manne r as may be agreed to by the successor  States.  
 63. Items in suspense .—If any item in suspense is ultimately found to affect an asset or liability of 
the nature referred to in any of the foregoing provisions of this Part, it shall be dealt with in  accordance 
with that provision.  
64. Residuary provision .—The benefit or burden of any asset or liability of the existing State of 
Andhra  Pradesh not dealt with in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall pass to the State of  Andhra 
Pradesh in the first instance, subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed  upon between the 
States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana or, in default of such agreement,  as the Central Government 
may, by order, direct.  
65. Apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreeme nt.—Where the successor States of Andhra 
Pradesh and Telangana agree that the  benefit or burden of any particular asset or liability should be 
apportioned between them in  a manner other than that provided for in the foregoing provisions of this 
Part, notwithstanding  anything contained therein, the benefit or burden of that asset or liability shall be 
apportioned  in the manner agreed upon.  
66. Power of Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases .—Where, 
by virtue of any of the provisions of this Part, either of the successor  States of Andhra  Pradesh and 
Telangana becomes entitled to any property or obtains any  benefits or becomes subject to any liability, 
and the Central Government is of opinion, on a  reference made within a per iod of three years from the 20 
 appointed day by either of the States,  that it is just and equitable that such property or those benefits 
should be transferred to, or  shared with, the other successor State, or that a contribution towards that 
liability should  be made by the other successor State, the said property or benefits shall be allocated in  
such manner between the two States, or the other State shall make to the State subject to the  liability such 
contribution in respect thereof, as the Central Government may, after  consultation with the two State 
Governments, by order, determine.  
67. Certain  expenditure to be charged on Consolidated Fund .—All sums  payable by the State of 
Andhra Pradesh or by the State of Telangana, as  the case may be, to the oth er State, or by the Central 
Government to the successor States,  by virtue of the provisions of this Act, shall be charged on the 
Consolidated Fund of the  State by which such sums are payable or, as the case may be, the Consolidated 
Fund of  India.  
PART VII  
PROVISIONS  AS TO CERTAIN CORPORATIONS  
68. Provisions for various companies and corporations .—(1) The companies and corporations 
specified in the Ninth Schedule constituted  for the existing State of Andhra Pradesh shall, on and from the 
appointed day, conti nue to  function in those areas in respect of which they were functioning immediately 
before that  day, subject to the provisions of this section.  
(2) The assets, rights and liabilities of the companies and corporations referred to in  sub-section ( 1) 
shall be apportioned between the successor States in the manner provided  in section 53.  
69. Continuance  of arrangements  in regard to  generation  and supply of  electric  power  and 
supply of  water .—If it appears to the Central Government that the  arrangement in regard to the  
generation or supply of electric power or the supply of water for any area or in regard to the  execution of 
any project for such generation or supply has been or is likely to be modified  to the disadvantage of that 
area by reason of the fact that it is, by virtue of the provisions  of Part II, outside the State in which the 
power stations and other installations for the  generation and supply of such power, or the catchment area, 
reservoirs and other works for  the supply of water, as the case ma y be, are located, the Central 
Government may, after  consultation with the Governments of the successor States wherever necessary, 
give such  directions as it deems proper to the State Government or other authority concerned for the  
maintenance, so far as p racticable, of the previous arrangement and the State to which such  directions are 
given shall comply with them.  
70. Provisions as to Andhra Pradesh State Financial Corporation .—(1) The Andhra  Pradesh State 
Financial Corporation established under the State  Financial Corporations  Act, 195 1 (63 of 1951)   shall, on 
and from the appointed day, continue to function  in those areas in respect of which it was functioning 
immediately before that day, subject to  the provisions of this section  and to such directions a s may, from 
time to time, be issued by  the Central Government.  
(2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) in respect  of the 
Corporation may include a direction that the said Act, in its application to the  Corporation, shall h ave 
effect subject to such exceptions and modifications as may be  specified in the direction.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the  Board of Directors 
of the Corporation may, with the previous approval of the Central  Government and  shall, if so required by 
the Central Government, convene at any time after  the appointed day a  meeting for the consideration of a 
scheme for the reconstitution or  reorganisation or dissolution, as the case may be, of the Corporation,  
including proposals  regarding the formation of new  Corporations, and the transfer thereto of the assets, 
rights  and liabilities of the existing  Corporation, and if such a scheme is approved at the general  meeting 
by a resolution passed by  a majority of th e shareholders present and voting, the  scheme shall be submitted 
to the Central Government for its sanction.  
(4) If the scheme is sanctioned by the Central Government either without modifications  or with 
modifications which are approved at a general meetin g, the Central Government  shall certify the scheme, 
and upon such certification, the scheme shall, notwithstanding  anything to the contrary contained in any 21 
 law for the time being in force, be binding on the  Corporations affected by the scheme as well as t he 
shareholders and creditors thereof.  
(5) If the scheme is not so approved or sanctioned, the Central Government may refer  the scheme to 
such Judge of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh or the High Court of  Telangana as may be nominated in 
this behalf by th e Chief Justice thereof, and the decision  of the Judge in  regard to the scheme shall be final 
and shall be binding on the Corporations  affected by the  scheme as well as the shareholders and creditors 
thereof.  
(6) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this  section shall be construed as  preventing  the 
Government of the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana from constituting, at any  time on or after the 
appointed day, a State Financial Corporation for that State under the  State Financial Corporations Act , 
1951  (63 of 1951) . 
71. Certain provisions for companies .—Notwithstanding anything in this Part, the Central  
Government may, for each of  the companies specified in the Ninth Schedule to this Act, issue direc tions – 
(a) regarding  the division of the interests and shares of the existing State of  Andhra Pradesh in the 
Company between the successor States;  
(b) requiring the reconstitution of the Board of Directors of the Company so as  to give adequate 
representation to the successor States.  
72. Temporary provisions as to continuance of certain existing road transport permits .—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 88 of the Motor Vehicles  Act, 1988  (59 of 1988) , a 
permit granted by the State Transport Authority of the existing State of Andhra  Pradesh or any Regional 
Transport Authority in that State shall, if such permit was,  immediately before the appointed day, valid 
and effective in any area in the transferred  territory, be deemed to  continue to be valid and effectiv e in 
that area after that day till its  period of validity subject to  the provisions of that Act as for the time being 
in force in that  area; and it shall not be necessary for any such permit to be countersigned by the State  
Transport Authority of Telangana  or any Regional Transport Authority therein for the  purpose of 
validating it for use in such area:  
Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the successor  State  Government or 
Governments concerned add to amend or vary the condition s attached  to the permit by the Authority by 
which the permit was granted.  
(2) No tolls, entrance fees or other charges of a like nature shall be levied after the  appointed  day in 
respect of any transport vehicle for its operations in any of the successor  States under any such permit, if 
such vehicle was, immediately before that day, exempt from  the payment of any such toll, entrance fees 
or other charges for its operations in the  transferred territory:  
Provided that the Central Government may, after consul tation with the State  Government or  
Governments concerned, authorise the levy of any such toll, entrance fees  or other charges, as the case 
may be:  
Provided further that the provisions of this sub -section shall not be applicable  where  any such tolls, 
entrance fees or other charges of a like nature are leviable for the use of any  road or bridge which is 
constructed or developed for commercial purpose by the State  Government, an undertaking of the State 
Government, a joint undertaking in which the State  Government is a shareholder or the private sector.  
73. Special provisions relating to, retrenchment compensation in certain cases .—Where on 
account of the reorganisation of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh  under this  Act, any  body corporate 
constituted  under a Central Act, State Act or Provincial  Act, any co -operative society registered under 
any law relating to co -operative societies or  any commercial  or industrial undertaking of that State is 
reconstituted or reorganised in any  manner whatsoever or is  amalgamated with any other body corporate, 
co-operative society  or undertaking, or is  dissolved, and in consequence of such reconstitution, 
reorganisation,  amalgamation or  dissolution, any workman employed by such body corporate or in any  
such co-operative society  or undertaking, is transferred to, or re -employed by, any other  body corporate, 
or in any other  co-operative society or undertaking, then, notwithstanding  anything contained in section 22 
 25F or section 25FF or section 25FFF of the Indust rial Disputes  Act, 1947  (14 of 1947) , such transfer or 
re-employment shall not entitle him to any compensation under  that section:  
Provided that — 
(a) the terms and conditions of service applicable to the workman after such  transfer or re -
employment are not  less favourable to the workman than those applicable  to him immediately before 
the transfer or re -employment;  
(b) the employer in relation to the body corporate, the co -operative society or  the undertaking 
where the workman transferred or re -employed is, by agreement or  otherwise, legally liable to pay to 
the workman, in the event of his retrenchment,  compensation under  section 25F or  section 25FF or 
section 25FFF of the Industrial  Disputes Act , 1947  (14 of 1947)  on the basis that his service has been 
continuous and has not  been interrupted by the transfer or re -employment.  
74. Special provision as to income -tax.—Where the assets, rights and liabilities of any body 
corporate carrying on business  are, under the provisions of this Part, transferred to any other  bodies 
corporate which after  the transfer carry on the same business, the losses or profits or gains sustained by 
the body  corporate first -mentioned which, but for such transfer, would have been allowed to be  carried 
forward and set off in accordance  with the provisions of Chapter VI of the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 
1961) ,  shall be apportioned amongst the transferee  bodies corporate in accordance  with the rules to be 
made by the Central Government in this behalf and, upon such  apportionment, the sh are of loss allotted to 
each transferee body corporate shall be dealt  with in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VI of the 
said Act, as if the transferee  body corporate had itself sustained such loss in a business carried on by it in 
the years in  which those losses were sustained.  
75. Continuance of facilities in certain State institutions .—(1) The  Government of the State of 
Andhra Pradesh or the State of Telangana, as  the case may be, shall, in respect of the institutions specified 
in the Tenth Sc hedule to this  Act, located in that State,  continue to provide facilities to the people of the 
other State  which shall not, in any respect, be less favourable to such people than what were being  
provided to them before the appointed day, for such period an d upon such terms and  conditions as may be 
agreed upon between the two State Governments within a period of  one year from the appointed day or, if 
no agreement is reached within the said period, as  may be fixed by order of the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Government may, at any time within one year from the appointed day,  by notification 
in the Official Gazette, specify in the Tenth Schedule referred to in  sub-section  (1) any other institution 
existing on the appointed day in the States of Andhra  Pradesh and Telangana and, on the issue of such 
notification, such Schedule shall be  deemed to be amended by the inclusion of the said institution therein.  
PART VIII  
PROVISIONS  AS TO SERVICES  
76. Provisions relating to All -India Services .—(1) In this section, the expression ―State  cadre‖ –– 
(a) in relation to the Indian Administrative Service, has the meaning assigned to  it in the Indian 
Administrative Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954;  
(b) in relation to the Indian Police Service, has the meaning assigned to it in the  Indian Police 
Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954; and  
(c) in relation to the Indian Forest Service, has the meaning assigned to it in the  Indian Forest 
Service (Cadre) Rules, 1966.  
(2) In place of the cadres of the Indian Administrative Service, Indian Police Service  and Indian 
Forest Service for the existing State of Andhra Pradesh, there shall, on and from  the appointed day, be 
two separate cadres, one for the State of Andhra Pradesh a nd the  other for the State of Telangana in 
respect of each of these services.  23 
 (3) The provisional strength, composition and allocation of officers to the State  cadres referred to in 
sub-section ( 2) shall be such as the Central Government may, by order,  determine on or after the 
appointed day.  
(4) The members of each of the said services borne on the Andhra Pradesh cadre  immediately before 
the appointed day shall be allocated to the successor State cadres of the  same service constituted under 
sub-section (2) in such manner and with effect from such  date or dates as the Central Government may, 
by order, specify.  
(5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the operation, on or after the  appointed day, of 
the All -India Services Act , 1951  (61 of 1951 ), or the rules made thereunder.  
77. Provisions relating to other services .—(1) Every person who immediately before the appointed 
day is serving on  substantive basis in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh  
shall, on and from that day provisionally continue to serve in connection with the affairs of  the State of 
Andhra Pradesh unless he is required, by general or special order of the Central  Government to serve 
provisionally in connection with the affairs of the State of Telang ana: 
Provided that every direction under this sub -section issued after the expiry of a  period of one  year 
from the appointed day shall be issued with the consultation of the  Governments of the successor States.  
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Central Government shall, by  general or special 
order, determine the successor State to which every person referred to in  sub-section ( 1) shall be finally 
allotted for service, after consideration of option received by  seeking option from the empl oyees, and the 
date with effect from which such allotment shall  take effect or be deemed to have taken effect:  
Provided that even after the allocation has been made, the Central Government  may,  in order to meet 
any deficiency in the service, depute officer s of other State services from  one successor State to the 
other:  
Provided further that as far as local, district, zonal and multi -zonal cadres are  concerned,  the 
employees shall continue to serve, on or after the appointed day, in that cadre:  
Provided also  that the employees of local, district, zonal and multi -zonal cadres which  fall entirely in 
one of the successor States, shall be deemed to be allotted to that successor  State:  
Provided also that if a particular zone or multi -zone falls in both the success or States,  then the 
employees of such zonal or multi -zonal cadre shall be finally allotted to one or the  other successor States 
in terms of the provisions of this sub -section.  
(3) Every person who is finally allotted under the provisions of sub -section ( 2) to a successor State 
shall, if he is not already serving therein, be made available for serving in  the successor State from such 
date as may be agreed upon between the Governments of the  successor States or, in default of such 
agreement, as may be determi ned by the Central  Government:  
Provided that the Central Government shall have the power to review any of its orders  issued under 
this section.  
78. Other provisions relating to services .—(1) Nothing in this section or in  section 77 shall be 
deemed to affect, on or after the  appointed day, the operation of the  provisions of Chapter I of  Part XIV of 
the Constitution  in relation to determination of the  conditions of service of persons serving in connection  
with the affairs of the Union or any State:  
Provi ded that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the  appointed  day in the case of 
any person deemed to have been allocated to the State of Andhra Pradesh  or to the State of Telangana 
under section 77 shall not be varied to his disadvantage except  with the previous approval of the Central 
Government.  
 (2) All services prior to the appointed day rendered by a person, — 
(a) if he is deemed to have been allocated to any State under section 77,  shall be  deemed to have 
been rendered in connection w ith the affairs of that State;  24 
 (b) if he is deemed to have been allocated to the Union in connection with the  administration of 
the successor State of Telangana, shall be deemed to have been  rendered in connection with the 
affairs of the Union,  for the pur poses of the rules regulating his conditions of service.  
(3) The provisions of section 77 shall not apply in relation to members of any  All-India Service.  
79. Provisions as to continuance of officers in same post .—Every person who, immediately before 
the appointed day, is holding or discharging  the duties of any post or office in connection with the affairs 
of the existing State of Andhra  Pradesh in any area which on that day falls  within one of the successor 
States shall continue  to hold the same post or office in that  successor State, and shall be deemed, on and 
from  that day, to have been duly appointed to the post or office by the Government of, or other  
appropriate authority in, that successor State:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a competent  authority,  on and from 
the appointed day, from passing in relation to such person any order  affecting  the continuance in such post 
or office.  
80. Advisory committees .—(1) The Central Government may, by order, establish one or more 
Advisory  Committees, within a period of thirty days from the date of enactment of the Andhra Pradesh  
Reorganisation Act, 2014, for the purpose of assisting it in regard to –– 
(a) the discharge of any of its functions under this Part; and  
(b) the  ensuring of fair and equitable treatment to all persons affected by the  provisions of this 
Part and the proper consideration of any representations made by  such persons.  
(2) The allocation guidelines shall be issued by the Central Government on or after  the date of 
enactment of the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014 and the actual  allocation of individual 
employees shall be made by the Central Government on the  recommendations of the Advisory 
Committee:  
Provided that in case of disagreement or confli ct of opinion, the decision of the Central  Government 
shall be final:  
Provided further that necessary guidelines as and when required shall be framed by  the Central 
Government or as the case may be, by the State Advisory Committee which shall  be approved b y the 
Central Government before such guidelines are issued.  
81. Power of Central Government to give directions .—The Central  Government may give such 
directions to the State Government of  Andhra Pradesh and the State Government of Telangana as may 
appear to  it to be necessary  for the purpose of giving effect to the foregoing provisions of this Part and the 
State  Governments shall comply with such  directions.  
82. Provision for employees of Public Sector Undertakings, etc .—On and from the appointed day, 
the em ployees of State Public Sector Undertakings,  corporations and other autonomous bodies shall 
continue to function in such undertaking,  corporation or  autonomous bodies for a period of one year and 
during this period the  corporate body concerned shall determ ine the modalities for distributing the 
personnel  between the two successor States.  
83. Provisions as to State Public Service Commission .—(1) The Public  Service Commission for the 
existing State of Andhra Pradesh shall,  on and from the appointed day, be the Public Service Commission 
for the State of Andhra  Pradesh.  
(2) There shall be constituted a Public Service Commission in accordance with  article 315 of the 
Constitution by the successor State of Telangana, and until such Commission  is constituted, the Union 
Public Service Commission may, with the approval of the President,  agree to serve the needs of the State 
of Telangana in terms  of clause (4) of that article.  
(3) The persons holding office immediately before the appointed day as the Chairman  or othe r 
member of the Public Service Commission for the existing State of Andhra Pradesh  shall, as from the 25 
 appointed day, be the Chairman or, as the case may be, the other member  of the Public Service 
Commission for the State of Andhra Pradesh.  
(4) Every person  who becomes the Chairman or other member of the Public Service  Commission for 
the State of Andhra Pradesh on the appointed day under sub -section ( 3) shall –– 
(a) be entitled to receive from the Government of the State of Andhra  Pradesh  conditions of 
service not less favourable than those to which he was entitled under  the provisions applicable to him;  
(b) subject to the proviso to clause (2) of article 316, hold office or  continue to  hold office until 
the expiration of his term of office as determined  under the provisions  applicable to him immediately 
before the appointed day.  
(5) The report of the Andhra Pradesh Public Service Commission as to the work  done  by the 
Commission in respect of any period prior to the appointed day shall be presented  under clause (2) of 
article 323 to the Governors of the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana  and the Governor of the State 
of Andhra Pradesh shall, on receipt of such report, cause a  copy thereof together with a memorandum 
explaining as far as possible, as res pects the  cases, if any, where the advice of the Commission was not 
accepted, the reasons for such  non-acceptance to be laid before the Legislature of the State of Andhra 
Pradesh and it shall  not be necessary to cause such report or any such memorandum to be laid before the  
Legislative Assembly of the State of Telangana.  
PART IX  
MANAGEMENT  AND DEVELOPMENT  OF WATER  RESOURCES  
84. Apex Council for Godavari and Krishna river water resources and their Management 
Boards .—(1) The Central Government shall, on and from the appointed day, constitute an  Apex Cou ncil 
for the supervision of the  functioning of the Godavari River  Management  Board and Krishna River 
Management Board.  
(2) The Apex Council shall consist of ––– 
(a) Minister of Water Resources, Government of Ind ia—Chairperson;  
(b) Chief Minister of State of Andhra Pradesh —Member;  
(c) Chief Minister of State of Telangana —Member.  
(3) The functions of the Apex Council shall include –– 
(i) supervision of the functioning of the Godavari River Management  Board  and Krishna River 
Management Board;  
(ii) planning and approval of proposals for construction of new projects, if any,  based on 
Godavari or Krishna river water, after getting the proposal appraised and  recommended by the River 
Management Boards and by the Centr al Water Commission,  wherever required;  
(iii) resolution of any dispute amicably arising out of the sharing of river waters  through 
negotiations and mutual agreement between the successor States;  
(iv) reference  of any disputes not covered under Krishna Water Disputes  Tribunal, to a Tribunal 
to be constituted under the Inter -State River Water Disputes  Act, 1956  (33 of 1956) . 
85. Constitution and functions of River Management Board .—(1) The Central Government shall 
constitute two separate Boards to be called the  Godavari River Management Board and Krishna River 
Management Board (to be known as  the Board), within a period of sixty days from the appointed day, for 
the administration,  regulation, maintenance and o peration of such projects, as may be notified by the 
Central  Government from time to time.  
(2) The headquarters of Godavari River Management Board shall be located in the  successor State of 
Telangana and of the Krishna River Management Board shall be locat ed in the successor State of Andhra 
Pradesh.  26 
 (3) The Godavari River Management Board and Krishna River Management Board  shall be 
autonomous bodies under the administrative control of the Central Government,  and shall comply with 
such directions as may, fro m time to time, be given to them by the  Central Government.  
(4) Each Board shall consist of the following Chairperson and Members,  namely: –– 
` (a) a Chairperson not below the rank or level of Secretary or Additional  Secretary  to the 
Government of India to be appointed by the Central Government;   
(b) two members, to be nominated by each of the successor States, of which  one shall be the 
technical member not below the rank of Chief Engineer and the other  administrative member to 
represent the concerned States ; 
(c) one expert to be nominated by the Central Government.  
(5) Each Board shall have a full -time Member Secretary, not below the rank of Chief  Engineer in the 
Central Water Commission, to be appointed by the Central Government.  
(6) The Central Government shall create such number of posts of the rank of  Chief  Engineer in the 
Central Water Commission, as it considers necessary.  
(7) Each Board shall be assisted in the day to day management of reservoirs by the  Central Industrial 
Security Force constituted und er the Central Industrial Security Force  Act, 1968  (50 of 1968 ), on such 
terms and conditions as the Central Government may specify.  
(8) The functions of each Board shall include –– 
(a) the regulation of supply of water from the projects to the successor  States having regard to –– 
(i) awards granted by the Tribunals constituted under the Inter -State  River Water Disputes 
Act, 1956  (33 of 1956 ); 
(ii) any agreement entered into or arrangement made covering the  Government of existing 
State of Andhra Pradesh and any other State or Union  territory;  
(b) the regulation of supply of power generated to the authority in -charge of  the distribution of 
power having regard to any agreement entered into or arrangement  made covering the Government of 
the existing State of And hra Pradesh and any other  State or Union territory;  
(c) the construction of such of the remaining on -going or new works  connected  with the 
development of the water resources projects relating to the rivers or their  tributaries through the 
successor States as the Central Government may specify by  notification in the Official Gazette;  
(d) making an appraisal of any proposal for construction of new projects on  Godavari or Krishna 
rivers and giving technical clearance, after satisfying that such  projects do not  negatively impact the 
availability of water as per the awards of the  Tribunals constituted  under the Inter -State River Water 
Disputes Act, 1956  (33 of 1956 ) for the  projects already completed or taken up before the appointed 
day; and  
(e) such other functi ons as the Central Government may entrust to it on the  basis of the principles 
specified in the Eleventh Schedule.  
86. Staff of the Management Board .––(1) The Board shall employ such staff as it may consider 
necessary for the efficient  discharge of its functions under this Act and such staff shall, at the first 
instance, be  appointed on deputation from the successor States in equal  proportion and absorbed  
permanently in the Board.  
(2) The Government of the successor States shall at all times provide the  necessary  funds to the Board 
to meet all expenses (including the salaries and allowances of the staff)  required for the discharge of its 
functions and such amounts shall be apportioned between  the States concerned in such proportion as the 
Central Governme nt may, having regard to  the benefits to each of the said States, specify.  27 
 (3) The Board may delegate such of its powers, functions and duties as it may deem  fit to the 
Chairman of the said Board or to any officer subordinate to the Board.  
(4) The Central Government may, for the purpose of enabling the Board to  function  efficiently, issue 
such directions to the State Governments concerned, or any other authority,  and the State Governments, or 
the other authority, shall comply with such directions.  
87. Jurisdiction of Board .––(1) The Board shall ordinarily exercise  jurisdiction on Godavari and 
Krishna rivers  in regard to any of the projects over headworks (barrages, dams, reservoirs, regulating  
structures), part of canal network and transmission lines ne cessary to deliver water or  power to the States 
concerned, as may be notified by the Central Government, having  regard to the awards, if any, made by 
the Tribunals constituted under the Inter -State River  Water Disputes Act, 1956 (33 of 1956 ). 
(2) If any qu estion arises as to whether the Board has jurisdiction under  sub-section ( 1) over any 
project referred thereto, the same shall be referred to the Central  Government for decision thereon.  
88. Power of Board to make regulations .––The Board may make regulations consistent with the Act 
and the rules made  thereunder, to provide for — 
(a) regulating the time and place of meetings of the Board and the  procedure to  be followed for 
the transaction of business at such meetings;  
(b) delegation  of powers and duties of the Chairman or any officer of the  Board;  
(c) the appointment and regulation of the conditions of service of the officers  and other staff of 
the Board;  
(d) any other matter for which regulations are considered necessary by the  Board.  
89. Allocation of water resources .––The term of the Krishna Water Disputes Tribunal shall be 
extended with the  following terms of reference, namely: –– 
(a) shall make project -wise specific allocation, if such allocation have not been  made by a 
Tribunal constituted under the Inter -State  River Water Disputes Act, 1956  (33 of 1956 ); 
(b) shall determine an operational protocol for project -wise release of water in  the event of deficit 
flows.  
Explanation. ––For the purposes of this section, it is clari fied that the project  specific  awards already 
made by the Tribunal on or before the appointed day shall be binding on the  successor States.  
90. Polavaram Irrigation Project to be a national project .––(1) The  Polavaram Irrigation Project is 
hereby declared to be a national project.  
(2) It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest that the Union should  take under its 
control the regulation and development of the Polavaram Irrigation Project for  the purposes of irrigation.  
(3) The consent for Polavaram Irrigation Project shall be deemed to have been given  by the successor 
State of Telangana.  
(4) The Central Government shall execute the project and obtain all requisite clearances  including 
environmental, forests, and rehabilitation and resettlement norms.  
91. Arrangements on Tungabhadra Board .––(1) The Governments of the successor States of 
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana  shall replace the existing State of Andhra Pradesh on the Tungabhadra 
Board.  
(2) The Tungabhadra Board shall continue to  monitor the release of water to High  Level Canal, Low 
Level Canal and Rajolibanda Diversion Scheme.  
  28 
 PART X  
INFRASTRUCTURE  AND SPECIAL  ECONOMIC  MEASURES  
92. Successor States to follow principles, guidelines, etc., issued by Central Government .––The 
principles, guidelines, directions and orders issued by the Central  Government,  on and from the 
appointed day, on matters relating to coal, oil and natural gas, and power  generation, transmission and 
distribution as enumerated in the Twelfth Schedule shall  be implemented by the successor States.  
93. Measures for progress and development of successor States .––The Central Government shall 
take all necessary measures as enumerated in the  Thirteenth Schedule for the progress and sustainable 
development of the successor States  within a period of ten years from the a ppointed day.  
94. Fiscal measures including tax incentives .––(1) The Central Government shall take appropriate 
fiscal measures, including  offer of tax incentives, to the successor  States, to promote industrialisation and 
economic  growth in both the States.  
(2) The Central Government shall support the programmes for the  development of  backward areas in 
the successor States, including expansion of physical and social  infrastructure.  
(3) The Central Gove rnment shall provide special financial support for the creation  of essential 
facilities in the new capital of the successor State of Andhra Pradesh including  the Raj Bhawan, High 
Court, Government Secretariat, Legislative Assembly, Legislative  Council, and  such other essential 
infrastructure.  
(4) The Central Government shall facilitate the creation of a new capital for the successor  State of 
Andhra Pradesh, if considered necessary, by denotifying degraded forest land.  
PART XI  
ACCESS  TO HIGHER EDUCATION  
95. Equal opportunities for quality higher education to all students .––In order to ensure equal 
opportunities for quality higher education to all students  in the successor States, the existing admission 
quotas in all government or private, aided or  unaided, in stitutions of higher, technical and medical 
education in so far as it is provided  under article 371D of the Constitution, shall continue as such for a 
period of ten years  during which the existing common admission process shall continue.  
PART XII  
LEGAL  AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
96. Amendment of article 168 of the Constitution .––In sub -clause ( a) of clause ( 1) of article 168 of 
the Constitution, for the word  ―Tamil Nadu‖, the words ―Tamil Nadu, Telangana‖ shall be substituted.  
97. Amendment of article 371D of the Constitution .––On and from the appointed day, in article 
371D of the Constitution, –– 
(a) in the marginal heading, for the words ―the State of Andhra Pradesh‖,  the words ―the State of 
Andhra Pradesh or the State of Telangana‖ shall be  substitute d; 
(b) for clause ( 1), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: –– 
―(1) The President may by order made with respect to the State of Andhra  Pradesh or the 
State of Telangana, provide, having regard to the requirement of  each State, for equitable 
opportunities and facilities for the people belonging to  different parts of such State, in the matter 
of public employment and in the  matter of education, and different provisions may be made for 
various parts of  the States.‖;  
(c) in clause ( 3), for the wo rds ―the State of Andhra Pradesh‖, the words ―the  State of Andhra 
Pradesh and for the State of Telangana‖ shall be substituted.  
98. Amendment of section 15A of Act 43 of 1951 .––In section 15A of the Representation of the 
People Act, 1951, after the words and figures ―under the Tamil Nadu Legislative Council Act , 2010  29 
 (16 of 2010 )‖, the words and figures ―and  constituting the Legislative Council of the State of Telangana 
under the Andhra Pradesh  Reorganisation Act, 2014‖ shall be inserted.  
99. Amendment of section 15 of Act 37 of 1956 .––On and from the  appointed day, in section 15 of 
the States Reorganisation Act,  1956, in clause ( e), for the words ―Andhra Pradesh‖, the words ―Andhra 
Pradesh and  Telangana‖ shall be substituted.  
100. Territorial extent of laws .––The provisions of Part II shall not be deemed to have affected any 
change in the  territories to which the Andhra Pradesh Land Reforms (Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings)  
Act, 1973  (Andhra Pradesh Act No . 1 of 1973 ) and any other law in force immediately before the  
appointed day extends or  applies, and territorial references in any such law to the State of Andhra Pradesh 
shall, until  otherwise provided by a competent Legislature or other competent authority be constr ued as 
meaning the territories within the existing State of Andhra Pradesh before the appointed  day. 
101. Power to adapt laws .––For the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to the State of 
Andhra  Pradesh or the State of Telangana of any law made before the appointed day, the appropriate  
Government may, before the expiration of two years from that day, by order, make such  adaptations and 
modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may  be necessary or expedient, and 
thereupon every such law shall have effect subject to the  adaptations and modifications so made until 
altered, repealed or amended by a competent  Legislature or other competent authority.  
Explanation .––In this section, the expression ―appropriate Governmen t‖ means as  respects any law 
relating to a matter enumerated in the Union List, the Central Government,  and as respects any other law 
in its application to a State, the State Government.  
102. Power to construe laws .––Notwithstanding that no provision or in sufficient provision has been 
made  under section 10 1 for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any court,  tribunal or 
authority, required or empowered to enforce such law may, for the purpose of  facilitating its application in 
relation to the State of Andhra Pradesh or the State of Telangana,  construe the law in such manner, 
without affecting the substance, as may be necessary or  proper in regard to the matter before the court, 
tribunal or authority.  
103. Power to name authorities, etc., fo r exercising statutory functions .––The Government of the 
State of Telangana, as respects the transferred territory  may, by notification in the  Official Gazette, 
specify the authority, officer or person who, on  or after the appointed day, shall be competent  to exercise 
such functions exercisable under  any law in force on that day as may be mentioned in that notification and 
such law shall  have effect accordingly.  
104. Legal proceedings .––Where, immediately before the appointed day, the existing State of 
Andhra  Pradesh is a party to any legal proceedings with respect to any property, rights or liabilities  
subject to apportionment between the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana under this  Act, the State of 
Andhra Pradesh or the State of Telangana which s ucceeds to, or acquires  a share in, that property or those 
rights or liabilities by virtue of any provision of this Act  shall be deemed to be substituted for the existing 
State of Andhra Pradesh or added as a  party to those proceedings, and the proceedings  may continue 
accordingly.  
105. Transfer of pending proceedings .––(1) Every proceeding pending immediately before the 
appointed day before a  court (other than High Court), tribunal,  authority or officer in any area which on 
that day  falls within the State of Andhra Pradesh shall, if it is a  proceeding relating exclusively to the  
territory, which as from that day are the territories of the State of Telangana, stand transferred  to the 
corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer of that State.  
(2) If a ny question arises as to whether any proceeding should stand  transferred  under sub -section ( 1) 
it shall be referred to the High Court at Hyderabad and the decision of  that High Court shall be final.  
(3) In this section –– 
(a) ―proceeding‖ includes any suit,  case or appeal; and  
 30 
 (b) ―corresponding court, tribunal authority or officer‖ in the State of  Telangana  means –– 
(i) the court, tribunal, authority or officer in which, or before  whom, the  proceeding would 
have laid if it had been instituted after the appo inted day; or   
(ii) in case of doubt, such court, tribunal, authority, or officer in that  State, as may be 
determined after the appointed day by the Government of that  State or the Central Government, as 
the case may be, or before the appointed  day by the Government of the existing State of Andhra 
Pradesh to be the  corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer.  
106. Right of pleaders to practise in certain cases .––Any person who,  immediately before the 
appointed day, is enrolled as a pleader  entitled to practise in any  subordinate court in the existing State of 
Andhra Pradesh shall,  for a period of one year from that day, continue to be entitled to practise in those 
courts,  notwithstanding that the whole or any part of the  territories within the jurisdiction of those  courts 
has been transferred to the State of Telangana.  
107. Effect of provisions of the Act inconsistent with other laws .––The provisions of this Act shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent  therewith  contained in any o ther law.  
108. Power to remove difficulties .––(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the  President may, by order do anything not inconsistent with such provisions which appears  to 
him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years  from the 
appointed day.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each House of Parliament.  
  31 
 THE FIRST SCHEDUL E 
(See section 13)  
(i) Of the five sitting members whose term of office will expire on 9th April, 2014,  namely, Shri T. 
Subbarami Reddy, Shri Nandi Yellaiah, Shri Mohammed Ali Khan,  Smt. T. Ratna Bai and Shri K.V.P. 
Ramachandra Rao, such two as the Chairman of the Council  of States may determine by drawing lots 
shall be deemed to have been elected to fill two of  the seven seats allotted to the State of Telangana and 
the other three sitting members shall  be deemed to have been elected to fill three of  the eleven seats 
allotted to the State of  Andhra Pradesh.  
(ii) Of the six sitting members whose term of office will expire on 21st June, 2016,  namely, Shri 
Jesudasu Seelam, Shri Jairam Ramesh, Shri N. Janardhana Reddy,  Shri V. Hanumantha Rao, Smt. Gundu 
Sudharani and Shri Y.S. Chowdary, such two as the  Chairman of the Council of States may determine by 
drawing lots shall be deemed to have  been elected to fill two of the seats allotted to the State of Telangana 
and the other four  sitting members shall be de emed to have been elected to fill four of the seats allotted to 
the State of Andhra Pradesh.  
(iii) Of the six sitting m embers representing the State of Andhra Pradesh whose term  of office will 
expire on 2nd April, 2018, namely, Shri Ananda Baskar Rapolu, S hri K. Chiranjeevi,  Shri Palvai 
Govardhana Reddy, Smt. Renuka Chowdhury, Shri T. Devender Goud and  Shri C.M. Ramesh, such three 
as the Chairman of the Council of States may determine by  drawing lots shall be deemed to have been 
elected to fill three of the  seats allotted to the  State of Telangana and the other three sitting members shall 
be deemed to have been  elected to fill the three of the seats allotted to the State of Andhra Pradesh.  
(iv) The term of one seat which is to expire on 9th April, 2014 and h as become vacant  due to 
resignation of Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna on 22nd August, 2013 , shall be allotted to  the State of Andhra 
Pradesh.   32 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 15 ) 
AMENDMENTS TO THE DELIMITATION OF PARLIAMENTARY AND ASSEMBLY  
CONSTITUENCIES ORDER, 2008  
In the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituency Order, 2008, ––  
1. In Schedule I, –– 
(i) for serial number 1 relating to Andhra Pradesh and the entries relating  thereto, the following 
shall be substituted, namely: –– 
Serial Number  
and Name of  
the  State/Union  
Territory        
 
 Number of seats in the  
House as constituted on  
the basis of the Delimitation  
of  Parliamentary and  
Assembly Constituencies  
Order, 1976 as amended from  
time to time  Number of seats in the House  
as subsequentl y constituted as  
per the Delimitation of  
Parliamentary and Assembly  
Constituencies Order, 2008  
Total  Reserved  
 for the 
Scheduled 
Castes  Reserved for 
the 
Scheduled 
Tribes  Total  Reserved for 
the Scheduled 
Castes  Reserved  
for the Scheduled 
Tribes  
         1                              2                  3                           4                      5                    6                       7 
―1. Andhra                      42                 6                           2                      25                  4                       1‖; 
      Pradesh  
(ii) after serial number 24 relating to Tamil Nadu and the entries relating thereto,   the following 
shall be inserted, namely: –– 
1                            2                 3                          4                        5                    6                      7 
―25. Telangana              -                  -                           -                       17                   3                      2‖; 
 (iii) serial numbers 25 to 28 shall be renumbered as serial numbers 26 to 29,  respectively.   
 2. In Schedule II, –– 
(iv) for serial number 1 relating to Andhra Pradesh and the entries relating  thereto, the following 
shall be substituted, namely: –– 
Serial Number  
and Name of  
the  State/Union  
Territory       
 
 Number of seats in the  
House as constituted on  
the basis of the Delimitation  
of  Parliamentary and  
Assembly Constituencies  
Order, 1976 as amended from  
time to time  Number of seats in the House  
as subsequentl y constituted as  
per the Delimitation of  
Parliamentary and Assembly  
Constituencies Order, 2008  
Total  Reserved  
 for the 
Scheduled 
Castes  Reserved for 
the 
Scheduled 
Tribes  Total  Reserved for 
the Scheduled 
Castes  Reserved  
for the Scheduled 
Tribes  
         1                              2                   3                          4                       5                    6                        7 
―1. Andhra                     294                 39                       15                     175                29                       7‖; 
      Pradesh  
 
 33 
  (v) after serial number 24 relating to Tamil Nadu and the entries relating thereto,  the following 
shall be inserted, namely: –– 
1                           2                  3                        4                           5                       6                    7 
―25. Telangana             -                   -                         -                          119                    19                  12‖; 
 (vi) serial numbers 25 to 28 shall be renumbered as serial numbers 26 to 29,  respectively.  
3. For Schedule III, the following shall be substituted, namely: –– 
―SCHEDULE – III 
ANDHRA PRADESH  
TABLE A – ASSEMBLY CONSTITUENCIES  
Sl.No. & Name                                       Extent of Assembly Constituencies  
                  1                                                                                 2 
1—DISTRICT: SRIKAKULAM  
 
         1. Ichchapuram                 Kanchili, Ichchapuram, Kaviti and Sompeta  Mandals.  
 2. Palasa                              Palasa, Mandasa and Vajrapukothuru Mandals.  
 3. Tekkali                            Nandigam, Tekkali, Santhabommali and Kotabommali  Mandals.  
 4. Pathapatnam  Pathapatnam, Meliaputti, L.N. Pet, Kothur and  Hiramandalam  
  Mandals . 
 5. Srikakulam                      Gara and Srikakulam Mandals.  
 6. Amadalavalasa                Amadalavalasa, Ponduru, Sarubujjili and Burja Mandals.  
 7. Etcherla                           G. Sigadam, Laveru, Ranastalam and Etcherla Mandals.  
 8. Narasannapeta                Jalumuru, Narasannapeta, Saravakota and Polaki Mandals.  
 9. Rajam (SC)                     Vangara, Regidi Amadalavalasa, Rajam and Santhakaviti  Mandals.  
 10. Palakonda (ST)             Seethampeta, Bhamin i, Palakonda and Veeraghattam  Mandals.  
 
  2—DISTRICT: VIZIANAGARAM  
 
 11. Kurupam  (ST)   Kurupam, Gummalakshmipuram, Jiyyammavalasa,  Komarada and  
   Garugubilli Mandals.  
 12. Parvathipuram (SC)   Parvathipuram, Seethanagaram and Balijipeta Mandals.  
 13. Salur  (ST)   Salur, Pachipenta, Mentada and Makkuva Mandals.  
 14. Bobbili   Bobbili, Ramabhadrapuram, Badangi and Therlam Mandals.  
 15. Cheepurupalli   Merakamudidam, Garividi, Cheepurupalli and Gurla  Mandals.   
16. Gajapathinagaram   Gajapathinagaram, Bondapalli, Gantyada and Dattirajeru  Mandals;  and 
Vizinigiri,  Thandrangi,  Jannivalasa,  Venne,  Sasanapalli,  Attada,  
Bheemasingi,  Somayajulapalem,  Lotlapalli,  MokhasaKothavalasa,  
Kumaram and  Annamrajupeta villages of Jami Mandal.  
 17. Nellimarla  Nellimarla, Pusapatirega, Denkada and Bhogapuram  Mandals.  
18. Vizianagaram   Vizianagaram Mandal.  
19. Srungavarapukota  Srungavarapukota, Vepada, Lakkavarapukota and  Kothavalasa 
Mandals; and Jami Mandal (Except 12 village s i.e. Vizinigiri,  
Thandrangi, Jannivalasa, Venne, Sasanapalli,  Attada, Bheemasingi,  
Somayajulapalem, Lotlapalli,  Mokhasa Kothavalasa, Kumaram  and 
Annamrajupeta).  
 
  34 
                   1                                                                                 2  
3—DISTRICT : VISAKHAPATNAM  
 
 20. Bhimili                                          Anandapuram,  Padmanabham, Bheemunipatnam and  Visakhapatnam 
Rural Mandals.  
 21. Visakhapatnam East    Visakhapatnam (Urban) Mandal (Part) Visakhapatnam  (M Corp.) —
Ward No. 1 to 11 and 53 to 55.  
 
 22. Visakhapatnam South    Visakhapatnam (Urban) Mandal (Part) Visakhapatnam  (M Corp.) —
Ward  No. 12 to 34, 42 to 43 and 46 to 48.  
 23. Visakhapatnam North   Visakhapatnam (Urban) Mandal (Part) Visakhapatnam  (M Corp.) —
Ward No.  36 to 41, 44 to 45 and 49 to 52.  
 
 24. Visakhapatnam West   Visakhapatnam (Urban) Mandal (Part) Visakhapatnam  (M Corp.) —
Ward No.  35 and 56 to 71.  
  
 25. Gajuwaka   Gajuwaka Mandal (Including Gajuwaka Municipality).  
  
 26. Chodavaram   Chodavaram, Butchayyapeta, Ravikamatham and  Rolugunta Mandals.  
 27. Madugula    Madugula, Cheedikada, Devarapalle and K. Kotapadu  Mandals.  
 28. Araku Valley (ST)  Munchingiputtu, Pedabayalu, Dumbriguda, Araku Valley,   
Hukumpeta  and Ananthagiri Mandals.   
 29. Paderu (ST)  Paderu, G. Madugula, Chintapalle, Gudem  Kotha Veedhi  and Koyyuru 
Mandals.  
 30. Anakapalle  Kasimkota and Anakapalle Mandals.  
 31. Pendurthi  Pedagantyada (excluding areas included in Gajuwaka  Municip ality), 
Paravada, Sabbavaram Pendurthi  Mandals.  
 32. Yelamanchili  Rambilli, Munagapaka, Atchutapuram and Yelamanchili  Mandals.  
 33. Payakaraopet (SC)  Kotauratla, Nakkapalle, Payakaraopeta and S. Rayavaram  Mandals.  
 34. Narsipatnam  Nathavaram, Golugonda, Narsipatnam and Makavarapalem  Mandals.  
 
4—DISTRICT:  EAST GODAVARI  
 
35. Tuni     Thondangi, Kotananduru and Tuni Mandals.  
36. Prathipadu  Sankhavaram, Prathipadu, Yeleswaram and Rowthulapudi  Mandals.  
37. Pithapura m   Gollaprolu, Pithapuram and Kothapalle Mandals.  
38. Kakinada Rural   Karapa and Kakinada Rural Mandals.  
  Kakinada  Urban  Mandal  (Part)  
  Kakinada  Urban  (M) (Part)   
  Kakinada (M) — Ward No.66 to 70.  
39. Peddapuram   Samalkota and Peddapuram Mandals.  
40. Anaparthy   Pedapudi, Biccavolu, Rangampeta and Anaparthy  Mandals.  
41. Kakinada Cit y Kakinada Urban Mandal (Part)  
  Kakinada Urban (M) (Part)  Kakinada  
  (M)—Ward No.1 to 65.  
42. Ramachandrapuram  Kajuluru, Ramachandrapuram and Pamarru Mandals.  
43. Mummidivaram  Polavaram, Mummidivaram, Thallarevu and Katrenikona  Mandals.  
44. Amalapuram (SC)  Uppalaguptam, Allavaram and Amalapuram Mandals.  
45. Razole (SC)  Razole,  Malikipuram and Sakhinetipalle Mandals.   
  Mamidikuduru Mandal (Part)  Mamidikuduru, Geddada,  
  Edarada, Komarada, Magatapalle and Gogannamatham  
Villages.  
46. Gannavaram (SC)   P.Gannavaram, Ambajipeta and Ainavilli Mandals.  
Mamidikuduru Mandal (Part)  
Pedapatnam, Appanapalle, Botlakurru Doddavaram,  
Pasarlapudi, Pedapatnam, Nagaram, Mogalikuduru,  
Makanapalem, Lutukurru, Pasarlapudilanka and Adurru  Villages.  
 35 
                   1                                                                                 2  
47. Kothapeta    Ravulapalem, Kothapeta, Atreyapuram and Alamuru  Mandals.  
48. Mandapeta    Mandapeta, Rayavaram and Kapileswarapuram Mandals.  
49. Rajanaga ram   Rajanagaram, Seethanagaram and Korukonda Mandals.  
50. Rajahmundry City   Rajahmundry Urban Mandal (Part)   
Rajahmundry (M Corp.) (Part)   
Rajahmundry (M Corp.) - Ward No. 7 to 35 and 42 to 89.  
51. Rajahmundry Rural   Kadiam and Rajahmundry Rural Mandals.   
Rajahmundry Urban Mandal (Part)  
      Rajahmundry (M Corp.) (Part)   
Rajahmundry (M Corp.) - Ward No.1 to 6, 36 to 41 and 90.  
52. Jaggampeta    Gokavaram, Jaggampeta, Gandepalle and Kirlampudi  Mandals.  
1[53. Rampachodavaram (ST)  Maredumilli, Devipatnam, Y. Ramavaram, Addateegala,   
 Gangavaram, Rampachodavaram, Rajavommangi , Kunavaram,                              
Chintoor, Vararamachandrapuram, and Nellipaka Mandals. ] 
 
5—DISTRICT : WEST GODAVARI  
 
54. Kovvur (SC)    Kovvur, Chagallu and Tallapudi Mandals.  
55. Nidadavole    Nidadavole, Undrajavaram and Peravali Mandals.  
56. Achanta  Penugonda, Achanta and Penumantra Mandals.   
Poduru Mandal (Part)  
Kavitam, Jagannadhapuram, Pandithavilluru,   
Miniminchilipadu, Poduru, Pemmarajupolavaram and  
Gummaluru Villages.  
57. Palacole    Palacole and Yelamanchili Mandals.  
Poduru Mandal (Part)  
Kommuchikkala, Vedangi, Jinnuru, Mattaparru,  
Penumadam, Ravipadu and Vaddiparru Villages.  
 58. Narasapuram    Mogalthur and Narasapuram Mandals.  
 59. Bhimavaram    Veeravasaram and Bhimavaram Mandals.   
      Bhimavaram (M+OG)   
      Bhimavaram (M) - Ward No. 1 to 27   
      China -Amiram (OG) (Part) - Ward No. 28   
      Rayalam (R) (OG) (Part) - Ward No. 29.  
 60. Undi     Kalla, Palacoderu, Undi and Akividu Mandals.  
 61. Tanuku    Tanuku, Attili and Iragavaram Mandals.  
 62. Tadepalligudem   Tadepalligudem and Pentapadu Mandals.  
 63. Unguturu    Unguturu, Bhimadole, Nidamarru and Ganapavaram  Mandals.  
 64. Denduluru    Pedavegi, Pedapadu and Denduluru Mandals.  
      Eluru Mandal (Part).  
Malkapuram, Chataparru, Jalipudi, Katlampudi, Madepalli,  
Manuru, Sreeparru, Kalakurru, Komatilanka,  
Gudivakalanka, Kokkirailanka, Pydichintapadu and  
Prathikolla lanka Villages.  
65. Eluru     Eluru Mandal (Part)  
Eluru (M) (Part)   
Eluru (M) - Ward No. 1 to 28   
Eluru Mandal (Part)   
Eluru Mandal (OG) (Part)   
Satrampadu (OG) - Ward No.29  
Gavaravaram (OG) - Ward No.30   
Tangellamudi (R) (OG) - Ward No.31   
Komadavolu (OG) (Part) - Ward No.32  
Eluru (R) (OG) (Part) - Ward No.33   
                                                                        Eluru Mandal (Part)  
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 311(E), dated 23 -4-2015 . 36 
                   1                                                                                 2  
Chodimella, Sanivarapupeta, Eluru (Rural), Komadavole   
(Rural)  and Ponangi Villages.  
 
66. Gopalapuram (SC)  Dwaraka Tirumala, Nallajerla, Devarapalli and Gopalapuram  Mandals.  
1[67. Polavaram (ST)   Polavaram, Buttayagudem, Jeelugumilli, Koyyalagudem ,  
T. Narasapuram , Kukunoor and Velairpadu  Mandals. ] 
 
68. Chintalapudi (SC)  Chintalapudi, Lingapalem, Kamavarapukota and  Jangareddigudem  
Mandals.  
 
 6—DISTRICT : KRISHNA  
 
69. Tiruvuru (SC)   Vissannapet, Gampalagudem, Tiruvuru and A.Konduru  
  Mandals.  
70. Nuzvid   Agiripalli, Chatrai, Musunuru and Nuzvid Mandals.  
 
71. Gannavaram   Bapulapadu, Gannavaram and Unguturu Mandals  
Vijayawada (Rural) Mandal (Part) Ambapuram, Phiryadi  
Nainavaram, Pathapadu, Nunna, Enikepadu, Nidamanuru,  
Done Atkuru, Gudavalli, Prasadampadu and  
Ramavarappadu Villages.  
72. Gudivada    Gudlavalleru, Gudivada and Nandivada Mandals.  
73. Kaikalur     Mandavalli, Kaikalur, Kalidindi and Mudinepalle Mandals.  
74. Pedana    Gudur, Pedana, Bantumilli and Kruthivennu Mandals.  
75. Machilipatnam   Machilipatnam Mandal.  
76. Avanigadda    Challapalli, Mopidevi, Avanigadda, Nagayalanka, Koduru  
and Ghantasala Mandals.  
77. Pamarru (SC)   Pamarru, Thotlavalluru, Pamidimukkala, Movva and  
Pedaparupudi Mandals.  
78. Penamaluru    Kankipadu, Vuyyuru and Penamaluru Mandals.  
79. Vijayawada West   Vijayawada Urban Mandal (Part)  
Vijayawada Urban (M.Corp) (Part)  
Vijayawada (M Corp.) - Ward No.1 to 13, 15 to 19, 75 and  
76. 
80. Vijayawada Central    Vijayawada Urban Mandal (Part)  
Vijayawada Urban (M.Corp) (Part)  
Vijayawada (M Corp.) —Ward No.14, 20 to 31,  33 to 35,  
42 to 44, 49, 77 and 78.  
81. Vijayawada East   Vijayawada Urban Mandal (Part)  
Vijayawada Urban (M.Corp) (Part)  
Vijayawada (M Corp.) —Ward No. 32, 36 to 41, 45 to 48  
and 50 to 74.  
82. Mylavaram    Ibrahimpatnam, G.Konduru, Mylavaram and Reddigudem  
Mandals.  
Vijayawada (Rural) Mandal (Part)  
Kotturu, Tadepalle, Vemavaram, Shabada, Paidurupadu,  
Rayanapadu, Gollapudi and Jakkampudi Villages.  
83. Nandigama (SC)   Kanchikacherla, Chandarlapadu and Veerullapadu  
Mandals.  
Nandigama Mandal (Part)  
Pedavaram, Thakkellapadu, Munagacherla, Latchapalem,  
Lingalapadu, Adiviravulapadu, Chandapuram,  
Kethaveeruni Padu, Kanchela, Ithavaram, Ambarupeta,  
Nandigama, Satyavaram, Pallagiri and Raghavapuram  
                                                                        Villages.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 311(E), dated 23 -4-2015 . 37 
                   1                                                                                 2  
 
84. Jaggayyapeta   Vatsavai, Jaggayyapeta and Penuganchiprolu Mandals  
Nandigama Mandal (Part) Magallu, Konduru,  
Ramireddipalle, Jonnalagadda, Konathamatmakuru,  
Torragudipadu, Damuluru, Somavaram, Rudravaram and  
Gollamudi Villages.  
 
7 – DISTRICT : GUNTUR  
 
85. Pedakurapadu   Bellamkonda, Atchampet, Krosuru, Amaravathi and  
Pedakurapadu Mandals.  
86. Tadikonda (SC)   Tulluru, Tadikonda,  Phirangipuram and Medikonduru  
Mandals.  
87. Mangalagiri    Tadepalli, Mangalagiri and Duggirala Mandals.  
 
88. Ponnuru    Ponnuru, Chebrolu and Pedakakani Mandals.  
89. Vemuru (SC)   Vemuru, Kolluru, Tsunduru, Bhattiprolu and Amarthaluru  
Mandals.  
90. Repalle     Nizampatnam, Nagaram, Cherukupalli and Repalle  
Mandals.  
91. Tenali    Kollipara and Tenali Mandals.  
92. Bapatla    Bapatla, Pittalavanipalem and Karlapalem Mandals.  
93. Prathipadu (SC)   Guntur Mandal (except M.Corp.)  
Vatticherukuru, Prathipadu, Pedanandipadu and  
Kakumanu Mandals.  
94. Guntur West   Guntur Mandal (Part)  
Guntur (M. Corp) (Part)  
Guntur (M Corp.) —Ward No.1 to 6 and 24 to 28.  
95. Guntur East    Guntur Mandal (Part)  
Guntur (M. Corp) (Part)  
Guntur (M Corp.) —Ward No.7 to 23.  
 
96. Chilakaluripet   Nadendla, Chilakaluripet and Edlapadu Mandals.  
97. Narasaraopet   Rompicherla and Narasaraopet Mandals.  
98. Sattenapalle    Sattenapalli, Rajupalem, Nekarikallu and Muppalla  Mandals.  
99. Vinukonda    Bollapalli, Vinukonda, Nuzendla, Sa valyapuram and Ipur  Mandals.  
100. Gurajala    Gurajala, Dachepalli, Piduguralla and Machavaram  Mandals.  
101. Macherla  Macherla, Veldurthi, Durgi, Rentachintala and Karempudi  Mandals.  
 
 8 – DISTRICT:  PRAKASAM  
 
 102. Yerragondapalem  (SC)  Yarragondapalem and Pedda Araveedu, Pullalacheruvu,  
Tripuranthakam, Dornala and Peda Araveedu Mandals.  
 103. Darsi   Donakonda, Kurichedu, Mundlamuru, Darsi and Thallur  Mandals.  
 104. Parchur   Yeddanapudi, Parchur, Karamchedu, Inkollu, Chinaganjam  and Martur 
Mandals.  
 105. Addanki   J. Panguluru, Addan ki, Santhamaguluru, Ballikurava and Korisapadu 
Mandals.  
 106. Chirala   Chirala and Vetapalem Mandals.  
 107. Santhanuthalapadu (SC)  Naguluppalapadu, Maddipadu,  Chimakurthi and  Santhanuthalapadu 
Mandals.  
 108. Ongole   Ongole and Kothapatnam Mandals.  
 109. Kandukur   Kandukur, Lingasamudram, Gudluru, Ulavapadu and  
Volivetivaripalem Mandals.  
 110. Kondapi (SC)   Singarayakonda, Kondapi, Tangutur, Jarugumalli,  Ponnaluru and 
Marripudi Mandals.  
 
 38 
                    1                                                                                 2  
 111. Markapuram   Konakanamitla, Podili, Markapur and Tarlupadu Mandals.  
 112. Giddalur   Bestavaripeta, Racherla, Giddalur, Komarolu, Cumbum and  
Ardhave edu Mandals.  
 113. Kanigiri   Hanumanthunipadu, Chandrasekharapuram, Pamur,  Veligandla, 
Pedacherlopalle and Kanigiri Mandals.  
 
  9 – DISTRICT:  NELLORE  
 
 114. Kavali   Kavali, Bogole, Allur and Dagadarthi Mandals.  
 115. Atmakur   Chejerla, Atmakur, Anumasamudrampeta, Marripadu,  Sangam and 
Ananthasagaram Mandals.  
 
 116. Kovur   Vidavalur, Kodavalur, Kovur, Buchireddipalem and  Indukurpet 
Mandals.  
 117. Nellore City   Nellore Mandal (Part)  
   Nellore Mandal (M+OG) (Part)  
   Nellore (M) —Ward No.1 to 15, 27, 28 and 31 to 44.  
 118. Nellore Rural   Nellore Mandal (Part)  
   Golla Kandukur, Sajjapuram, Vellanti, Kandamur, Upputur,  
   South Mopur, Mogallapalem, Mattempadu, Amancherla,  
   Mannavarappadu, Mulumudi, Devarapalem, Pottepalem,  
   Akkacheruvupadu, Ogurupadu, Ambapuram, Donthali, Buja,  
   Buja Nellore (Rural), Kallurpalle (Rural), Kanuparthipadu,  
   Allipuram (Rural), Gudipallipadu, Pedda, Cherukur,  
   Chintareddipalem, Visavaviletipadu, Gundlapalem,  
   Kakupalle -I, Kakupalle -II (Madaraja Gudur) and  
   Penubarthi Villages.  
   Nellore Mandal (M+OG) (Part)  
   Nellore (M) —Ward No. 16 to 26, 29 and 30  
   Allipuram (OG) (Part) —Ward No. 45  
   Kallurpalle (OG) (Part) —Ward No. 46  
   Buja Buja Nellore (OG) (Part) —Ward No. 47  
   Nellore (Bit.1) (OG) —Ward No. 48 . 
 119. Sarvepalli   Podalakur, Thotapalligudur, Muthukur, Venkatachalam and  Manubolu 
Mandals.  
 120. Gudur (SC)   Gudur, Chillakur, Kota, Vakadu and Chittamur Mandals.  
 121. Sullurpeta (SC)   Ojili, Naidupet, Pellakur, Doravarisatram, Sullurpeta and  Tada 
Mandals.  
 122. Venkatagiri   Kaluvoya, Rapur, Sydapuram, Dakkili, Venkatagiri and  Balayapalle 
Mandals.  
 123. Udayagiri   Jaladanki, Seetharamapuram, Udayagiri, Varikuntapadu,  Vinjamur, 
Duttalur, Kaligiri and Kondapuram Mandals.  
 
10 – DISTRICT:  KADAPA  
 
124. Badvel (SC)  Kalasapadu, B.Kodur, Sri Avadhutha Kasinayana,  Porumamilla, 
Badvel, Gopavaram and Atlur Mandals.  
125. Rajampet  Sidhout, Vontimitta, Nandalur, Rajampet, Veeraballe and  T Sundupalle 
Mandals.  
126. Kadapa  Kadapa Mandal.  
127. Kodur (SC)  Penagalur, Chitvel, Pullampeta, Obulavaripalle and Kodur  Mandals.  
128. Rayachoti  Sambepalle, Chinnamandem, Rayachoti, Galiveedu,  Lakkireddipalli 
and Ramapuram Mandals.  
129. Pulivend ula  Simhadripuram, Lingala, Thondur, Pulivend ula, Vemula,  Vempalle and 
Chakrayapet Mandals.  
 
 39 
                   1                                                                                 2  
130. Kamalapuram         Pendlimarri, Chinthakommadinne, Kamalapuram, Vallur , 
Veerapunayunipalle and Chennur Mandals.  
131. Jammalamadugu  Peddamudium, Mylavaram, Kondapuram,  Jammalamadugu, Muddanur 
and Yerraguntla Mandals.   
132. Proddatur  Rajupalem and Proddatur Mandals.  
133. Mydukur  Duvvur, S.Mydukur, Khajipet, Brahmamgarimattam and  Chapad 
Mandals.  
 
 11 – DISTRICT:  KURNOOL  
 
134. Allagadda   Sirvel, Allagadda, Dornipadu, Uyyalawada, Chagalamarri  and 
Rudravaram Mandals.  
135. Srisailam   Srisailam, Atmakur, Velgode, Bandi Atmakur and  Mahanandi Mandals.  
136. Nandikotkur (SC)   Nandikotkur, Pagidyala, J. Bungalow, Kothapalle,  Pamulapadu and 
Midthur Mandals.  
137. Kurnool   Kurnool Mandal (Part)  
  Kurnool (M Corp.) (Part)  
  Kurnool (M Corp.) —Ward No.1 to 69.  
138. Panyam   Kallur, Orvakal, Panyam and Gadivemula Mandals.  
139. Nandyal   Nandyal and Gospadu Mandals.  
140. Banaganapalle   Banaganapalle, Owk, Koilkuntla, Sanjamala and  Kolimigundla 
Mandals.  
141. Dhone   Bethamcherla, Dhone and Peapally Mandals.  
142. Pattikonda   Krishnagiri, Veldurthi, Pattikonda, Maddikera and Tuggali  Mandals.  
143. Kodumur (SC)   C.Belagal, Gudur and Kodumur Mandals.  
  Kurnool Mandal (Part) R.Kanthalapadu, Sunkesula,  
  Remata, Ulchala, Basavapuram, Edurur, G. Singavaram,  
  Nidzur, Munagalapadu, Mamidalapadu, Panchalingala,  
  E.Thandrapadu.  
  Gondiparla, Dinnedevarapadu, B.Thandrapadu, Pasupul a, 
  Rudravaram, Noothanapalle, Devamada, Pudur,  
  Gargeyapuram and Diguvapadu Villages.  
144. Yemmiganur   Nandavaram, Yemmiganur and Gonegandla Mandals.  
145. Mantralayam   Peda Kadubur, Mantralayam, Kosigi and Kowthalam  Mandals.  
146. Adoni   Adoni Mandal.  
147. Alur   Devanakonda, Holagunda, Halaharvi, Alur, Aspari and  Chippagiri 
Mandals.  
 
 12—DISTRICT:  ANANTAPUR  
 
148. Rayadurg   D.Hirehal, Rayadurg, Kanekal, Bommanahal and  Gummagatta 
Mandals.   
149. Uravakonda   Vidapanakal, Vajrakarur, Uravakonda, Beluguppa and  Kudair Mandals.  
150. Guntakal   Guntakal, Gooty and Pamidi Mandals.  
151. Tadpatri   Peddavadugur, Yadiki, Tadpatri and Peddapappur  Mandals.  
152. Singanamala (SC)   Garladinne, Singanamala, Putlur, Yellanur, Narpala and  B.K. 
Samudram Mandals.  
153. Anantapur Urban   Anantapur Mandal (Part)  
  Anantapur (M+OG) (Part)  
  Anantapur (M) —Ward No.1 to 28  
  Narayanapuram (OG) —Ward No. 29  
  Kakkalapalle (R) (OG) (Part) —Ward No. 30  
  Anantapur (R) (OG) —Ward No. 31.  
154. Kalyandurg   Brahmasamudram, Kalyandurg, Settur, Kundurpi and  Kambadur 
Mandals.  
 40 
                   1                                                                                 2  
 
155. Raptadu   Atmakur, Raptadu, Kanaganapalli, C. K. Palli and Ramagiri  
  Mandals, Anantapur Mandal  (Part) Kodimi, Thaticherla,  
  Somanadoddi, Rachanapalle, Sajjalakalva, Kurugunta,  
  Gollapalle, Kamarupalle, Alamuru, Katiganikalva,  
  Kakkalapalle (Rural), Upparapalle, Itikalapalle, Jangalapalle,  
  Kandakur, Chiyyedu, Mannila and Papampet (CT) Villages.  
156. Madakasira (SC)   Madakasira, Amarapuram, Gudibanda, Rolla and Agali  Mandals.  
157. Hindupur   Hindupur, Lepakshi and Chilamathur Mandals.  
158. Penukonda   Parigi, Penukonda, Gorantla, Somandepalle and Roddam  Mandals.  
159. Puttaparthi   Nallamada, Bukkapatnam, Kothacheruvu, Puttaparthi,  O. D. Cheruvu 
and Amadagur Mandals.  
 
160. Dharmavaram   Dharmavaram, Bathalapalle, Tadimarri and Mudigubba  Mandals.  
161. Kadiri   Talupula, Nambulipulikunta, Gandlapenta, Kadiri,  Nallacheruvu and 
Tanakal Mandals.  
 
 13—DISTRICT:  CHITTOOR  
 
162. Thamballapalle   Mulakalacheruvu, Thamballapalle, Peddamandyam,  
  Kurabalakota, Peddathippasamudram and B.Kothakota  Mandals.  
163. Pileru   Gurramkonda, Kalakada, K. V. Palle, Pileru, Kalikiri and  
Valmikipuram Mandals.  
164. Madanapalle    Madanapalle, Nimmanapalle and Ramasamudram Mandals.  
165. Punganur   Sodam, Somala, Chowdepalle, Punganur, Pulicherla and  Rompicherla 
Mandals.  
166. Chandragiri   Tirupati (Rural), Chandragiri, Pakala, Ramachandrapuram,  
Chinnagottigallu and Yerravaripalem Mandals.  
  Tirupati (Urban) Mandal (Part) Konkachennaiahgunta,  
  Mangalam and Chennayyagunta Villages.  
167. Tirupati   Tirupati (Urban) Mandal (Part)  
  Tirumala (CT)  
  Tirupati (NMA) (CT)  
  Akkarampalle (CT)  
  Tirupati (M+OG) (Part).  
168. Srikalahasti   Renigunta, Yerpedu, Srikalahasti and Thottambedu  Mandals.  
169. Satyavedu (SC)   Narayanavanam, B. N. Kandriga, Varadaiahpalem,  K.V.B.Puram, 
Pitchatur, Satyavedu and Nagalapuram  Mandals.  
170. Nagari   Nindra, Vijayapuram, Nagari, Puttur and Vadamalapeta  Mandals.  
171. Gangadhara Nellore (SC)  Vedurukuppam, Karvetinagar, Penumuru, S. R. Puram,  G.D. Nellore 
and Palasamudram Mandals.  
172. Chittoor   Chittoor and Gudipala Mandals.  
173. Puthalapattu (SC)   Puthalapattu, Irala, Thavanampalle, Ba ngarupalem and  Yadamari 
Mandals.  
174. Palamaner   Gangavaram, Palamaner, Baireddipalle, V. Kota and  Peddapanjani 
Mandals.  
175. Kuppam   Santipuram, Gudupalle, Kuppam and Ramakuppam  Mandals.  
   41 
 TABLE B – PARLIAMENTARY CONSTITUENCIES  
Sl.No. and Name                                                                       Extent of Parliamentary Constituencies  
                  1                                                                                                               2 
1. ARAKU (ST)    10-Palakonda (ST), 11 -Kurupam (ST), 12 -Parvathipuram  
(SC), 13 -Salur (ST), 28 -Araku Valley (ST), 29 -Paderu (ST)  
and 53 -Rampachodovaram (ST).  
2. SRIKAKULAM   1-Ichchapuram, 2 -Palasa, 3 -Tekkali, 4 -Pathapatnam,  
5-Srikakulam, 6 -Amadalavalasa and 8-Narasannapeta.  
 
3. VIZIANAGARAM    7-Etcherla, 9 -Rajam (SC), 14 -Bobbili, 15 -Cheepurupalli,  
16-Gajapathinagaram, 17 -Nellimarla and 18 -Vizianagaram.  
 
4. VISAKHAPATNAM   19-Srungavarapukota, 20 -Bhimli, 21 -Visakhapatnam East,  
  22-Visakhapatnam South, 23-Visakhapatnam North,  
  24-Visakhapatnam West and 25 -Gajuwaka.  
 
5. ANAKAPALLE   26-Chodavaram, 27 -Madugula, 30 -Anakapalle,  31-Pendurthi, 
32-Yelamanchili, 33 -Payakaraopet (SC) and  34-Narsipatnam.  
 
6. KAKINADA   35-Tuni, 36 -Prathipadu, 37 -Pithapuram, 38-Kakinada Rural,  
39-Peddapuram, 41 -Kakinada City and 52 -Jaggampeta.  
7. AMALAPURAM (SC)   42-Ramachandrapuram, 43 -Mummidivaram,     
44-Amalapuram (SC), 45 -Razole (SC), 46 -Gannavaram (SC),  
47-Kothapeta and 48 -Mandapeta.  
8. RAJAHMUNDRY   40-Anaparthy, 49-Rajanagaram, 50 -Rajahmundry City,  
51-Rajahmundry Rural, 54 -Kovvur (SC), 55 -Nidadavole and  
66-Gopalapuram (SC).  
9. NARSAPURAM  56-Achanta, 57 -Palacole, 58 -Narsapuram, 59 -Bhimavaram,  
60-Undi, 61 -Tanuku and 62 -Tadepalligudem.  
10. ELURU  63-Unguturu, 64 -Denduluru, 65 -Eluru, 67 -Polavaram (ST),  
68-Chintalapudi (SC), 70 -Nuzvid and 73 -Kaikalur.  
11. MACHILIPATNAM  71-Gannavaram,  72-Gudivada, 74 -Pedana,  
75-Machilipatnam, 76 -Avanigadda, 77 -Pamarru (SC) and  
78-Penamaluru.  
12. VIJAYAWADA  69-Tiruvuru (SC), 79-Vijayawada West, 80 -Vijayawada  
Central, 81 -Vijayawada East, 82 -Mylavaram, 83 -Nandigama  
(SC) and 84 -Jaggayyapeta.  
13. GUNTUR  86-Tadikonda (SC), 87 -Mangalagiri, 88 -Ponnuru, 91 -Tenali,  
93-Prathipadu (SC), 94 -Guntur West and 95 -Guntur East.  
14. NARASARAOPET    85-Pedakurapadu, 96 -Chilakaluripet, 97 -Narasaraopet,  
98-Sattenapalli, 99 -Vinukonda, 100 -Gurajala and  
101-Macherla.  
15. BAPATLA (SC)    89-Vemuru (SC), 90 -Repalle, 92 -Bapatla, 104 -Parchur,  
105-Addanki, 106 -Chirala and 107 -Santhanuthalapa du (SC).  
16. ONGOLE     102-Yerragondapalem (SC), 103 -Darsi, 108 -Ongole,  
110- Kondapi (SC), 111 -Markapuram, 112 -Giddalur and  
113- Kanigiri.  
17. NANDYAL     134-Allagadda, 135 -Srisailam, 136 -Nandikotkur (SC),  
138-Panyam, 139 -Nandyal, 140 -Banaganapalle and  
141-Dhone.  
18. KURNOOL     137-Kurnool, 142 -Pattikonda, 143 -Kodumur (SC),  
144-Yemmiganur, 145 -Mantralayam, 146 -Adoni and  
147-Alur.  
 
  42 
  
                  1                                                                                 2  
 
19. ANANTAPUR    148-Rayadurg, 149 -Uravakonda, 150 -Guntakal,  
151-Tadpatri, 152 -Singanamala (SC) , 153 -Anantapur Urban  
and 154 -Kalyandurg.  
20. HINDUPUR     155-Raptadu, 156 -Madakasira (SC), 157 -Hindupur,  
158- Penukonda, 159 -Puttaparthi, 160 -Dharmavaram and  
161-Kadiri.  
21. KADAPA     124-Badvel (SC), 126 -Kadapa, 129 -Pulivend ula, 
130-Kamalapuram, 131 -Jammalamadugu, 132 -Proddatur  
and 133 -Mydukur.  
22. NELLORE     109-Kandukur, 114 -Kavali, 115 -Atmakur, 116 -Kovur,  
117-Nellore City, 118 -Nellore Rural and 123 -Udayagiri.  
23. TIR UPATI (SC)    119-Sarvepalli, 120 -Gudur (SC), 121 -Sullurpeta (SC),  
122-Venkatagiri, 167 -Tirupati, 168 -Srikalahasti and  
169-Satyavedu (SC).  
24. RAJAMPET    125-Rajampet, 127 -Kodur (SC), 128 -Rayachoti,  
162-Thamballapalle, 163 -Pileru, 164 -Madanapalle and  
165-Punganur.  
25. CHITTOOR (SC)  166-Chandragiri, 170 -Nagari, 171 -Gangadhara Nellore (SC),  
172- Chittoor, 173 -Puthalapattu (SC), 174 -Palamaner and  
175-Kuppam.  
NOTE: Any reference in Table A to a CT, OG, Mandal and Villages or other territorial division 
shall be taken to mean the area comprised within that CT, OG, Mandal and Villages or 
other territorial  division as on the 15th day of February, 2004. Further, any reference in 
Table – A, to wards in  municipal areas shall be taken to mean the areas as defined in the 
Census of India 2001  Report.‖.  
4. After Schedule XXVI, the following shall be inserted, namely: — 
―SCHEDULE - XXVII  
TELANGANA  
TABLE A – ASSEMBLY CONSTITUENCIES  
Sl.No. and Name                                                                       Extent of Parliamentary Constituencies  
            1                                                                                                               2 
1—DISTRICT: ADILABAD  
 
 1. Sirpur  Kouthala, Bejjur, Kagaznagar, Sirpur (T) and Dahegaon  Mandals.  
 2. Chennur (SC)  Jaipur, Chennur, Kotapalli and Mandamarri Mandals.  
 3. Bellampalli (SC)  Kasipet, Tandur, Bellampalli, Bhimini, Nennal and  Vemanpalli  
Mandals.  
 4. Mancherial  Luxettipet, Mancherial and Dandepalli Mandals.  
 5. Asifabad (ST)  Kerameri, Wankdi, Sirpur (U), Asifabad, Jainoor, Narnoor,  
  Tiryani and Rebbana Mandals.  
 6. Khanapur (ST)  Jannaram, Utnoor, Kaddam (Peddur), Khanapur and  Indervelly 
Mandals.  
 7. Adilabad  Adilabad, Jainath and Bela Mandals.  
 8. Boath (ST)  Tamsi, Talamad ugu, Gudihathnoor, Ichoda, Bazarhathnoor,  
  Boath and Neradigonda Mandals.  
 9. Nirmal  Dilawarpur, Nirmal, Laxmanchanda, Mamda and  
  Sarangapur Mandals.  
 10. Mudhole  Kuntala, Kubeer, Bhainsa, Tanoor, Mudhole and  
  Lokeswaram Mandals.  
  43 
                   1                                                                                 2  
2—DISTRICT:  NIZAMABAD  
 
 11. Armur   Nandipet, Armur and Makloor Mandals.  
 12. Bodhan   Ranjal, Navipet, Yedpalle and Bodhan Mandals.  
 13. Jukkal (SC)   Madnoor, Jukkal, Bichkunda, Pitlam and Nizamsagar  Mandals.  
 14. Banswada   Birkoor, Varni, Banswada and Kotgiri Mandals.  
 
 15. Yellareddy   Yellareddy , Nagareddipet, Lingampet, Tadwai, Gandhari  
   and Sadasivanagar Mandals.  
 16. Kamareddy    Kamareddy , Machareddy, Domakonda Kamareddy and Bhiknoor  
Mandals.  
 17. Nizamabad   Nizamabad (M).  
  (Urban)  
 18. Nizamabad   Jakranpalle and Sirkonda Mandals, Nizamabad Mandal  
  (Rural)   (Part), Nizamabad [except Nizamabad (M)], Dichpalle and  Dharpalle   
Mandals.  
 19. Balkonda   Balkonda, Mortad, Kammarpalle, Bheemgal and Velpur  Mandals.  
 
 3—DISTRICT:  KARIMNAGAR  
 
 20. Koratla   Ibrahimpatnam, Mallapur, Koratla and Metpalle Mandals.  
 21. Jagtial   Raikal, Sarangapur and Jagtial Mandals.  
 22. Dharmapuri (SC)   Dharmapuri, Dharmaram, Gollapalle, Velgatoor and   
   Pegadapalle Mandals.  
 23. Ramagundam   Ramagundam Mandal.  
 
 24. Manthani   Kamanpur, Manthani, Kataram, Mahadevpur, Mutharam  
   (Mahadevapur), Malharrao and Mutharam (Manthani)  
   Mandals.  
  25. Peddapalle   Peddapalle, Julapalle, Eligaid, Sultanabad, Odela and  
   Srirampur Mandals.  
 26. Karimnagar   Karimnagar Mandal.  
 27. Choppadandi (SC)   Gangadhara, Ramadugu, Choppadandi, Mallial, Kodimial  
   and Boinpalle Mandals.  
 28. Vemulawada   Vemulawada, Konaraopeta, Chandurthi, Kathlapur and  Medipalle 
Mandals.  
 29. Sircilla   Yellareddipet, Gambhiraopet, Mustabad and Sircilla  Mandals.  
 30. Manakondur (SC)   Manakondur, Ellanthakunta, Bejjanki, Timmapur (LMD  Colony) and 
Shankarapatnam Mandals.  
 31. Huzurabad   Veenavanka, Jammikunta, Huzurabad and Kamalapur  Mandals.  
 32. Husnabad   Chigurumamidi, Koheda, Husnabad, Saidapur,  Bheemadevarpalle 
and Elkathurthi Mandals.  
 
  4—DISTRICT: MEDAK  
 
 33. Siddipet   Siddipet, Chinnakodur and Nangnoor Mandals.  
 34. Medak   Medak, Papannapet, Ramayampet and Shankarampet - R Mandals.  
 35. Narayankhed   Kangti, Manoor, Narayankhed, Kalher and Shankarampet - A 
Mandals.  
 36. Andole (SC)   Tekmal, Alladurgh, Regode, Raikode, Andole, Pulkal and  Munpalle 
Mandals.   
 37. Narsapur   Kowdipalle, Kulcharam, Narsapur, Hathnoora, Yeldurthy  and 
Shivampet Mandals.  
 38. Zahirabad (SC)   Zahirabad, Kohir, Nyalkal and Jharasangam Mandals.  
 39. Sangareddy   Sadasivpet, Kondapur and Sangareddy Mandals.  
 40. Patancheru   Jinnaram, Patancheru and Ramachandrapuram Mandals.  
 44 
                     1                                                                                 2  
 41. Dubbak   Mirdoddi, Doultabad, Chegunta, Dubbak and Toguta  Mandals.  
 42. Gajwel   Tupran, Kondapak, Gajwel, Jagdevpur, Wargal and Mulug  Mandals.  
 
  5—DISTRICT: RANGA  REDD Y 
 
 43. Medchal   Medchal, Shamirpet, Ghatkesar and Keesara (Rural)  Mandals.  
 44. Malkajgiri   Malkajgiri Mandal.   
 45. Quthbullapur   Quthbullapur Mandal.  
 46. Kukatpalle   Hyderabad (M  Corp.) (Part)  
   Hyderabad (M Corp.) —Ward No.24 (Part)  
   (Area in Balanagar Mandal)  
   Kukatpalle (M) (Part)  
   Kukatpalle (M) —Ward No. 5 to 16.  
 47. Uppal   Uppal Municipality, Kapra Municipality.  
 48. Ibrahimpatnam   Hayathnagar, Ibrahimpatnam, Manchal  and Yacharam  Mandals.  
 49. Lal Bahadur Nagar   Saroornagar Mandal (Part)  
   Gaddiannaram (CT),  
   Lal Bahadur Nagar (M+OG) (Part)  
   Lal Bahadur Nagar (M) —Ward No. 1 to 10.   
 50. Maheswaram   Maheswaram and Kandukur Mandals.  
   Saroornagar Mandal (Part)  
   Medbowli, Almasguda, Badangpet, Chintalakunta,  
   Jalpalle, Mamidipalle, Kurmalguda and Nadargul (Rural)  Mandals.  
   Hyderabad (OG) (Part)  
   Balapur (OG) —Ward No. 36  
   Kothapet (OG) —Ward No. 37  
   Venkatapur (OG) —Ward No. 39  
   Mallapur (OG) —Ward No. 4 0 
   Lal Bahadur Nagar (M+OG) (Part)  
   Lal Bahadur Nagar (M) —Ward No. 11  
   Nadargul (OG) (Part) —Ward No. 12  
   Jillalguda (OG) —Ward No. 15  
   Meerpet (CT).  
 51. Rajendranagar   Rajendranagar and Shamshabad Mandals.  
 52. Serilingampally   Serilingampally Mandal  
   Balanagar Mandal (Part)  
   Kukatpally (M) (Part)  
   Kukatpally (M) —Ward No. 1 to 4.  
 53. Chevella (SC)   Nawabpet, Shankarpalle, Moinabad, Chevella and Shabad  Mandals.  
 54. Pargi   Doma, Gandeed, Kulkacherla, Pargi and Pudur Mandals.  
 55. Vicarabad (SC)   Marpalle, Mominpet, Vikarabad, Dharur and Bantwaram  Mandals.  
 56. Tandur   Peddemul, Tandur, Basheerabad and Yalal Mandals.  
 
  6—DISTRICT:  HYDERABAD  
 
 57. Musheerabad   Hyderabad (M Corp.+OG) (Part)  
   Hyderabad (M Corp.) (Part)  
   Ward No.1  
 58. Malakpet   Hyderabad (M Corp.+OG) (Part)  
   Hyderabad (M Corp.) (Part)  
   Ward No.16  
   Ward No.17 (Part)  
   Block No. 8 and 9.  
 
  45 
                   1                                                                                 2  
 59. Amberpet   Hyderabad (M Corp.+OG) (Part)  
   Hyderabad (M Corp.) (Part)  
   Ward No. 2  
   Ward No. 3 (Part)  
   Block No. 1 to 4.  
 60. Khairatabad   Hyderabad (M Corp.+OG) (Part)  
   Hyderabad (M Corp.) (Part)  
   Ward No.  6 
   Ward No. 3 (Part)  
   Block No. 5 and 6  
   Ward No.  8 (Part)  
   Block No. 2. 
   Ward No.  5 (Part)  
   Block No. 10. 
 61. Jubilee Hills   Hyderabad (M Corp.+OG) (Part)  
   Hyderabad (M Corp.) (Part)  
   Ward No. 8 (Part)  
   Block No. 1, 3 and 4.   
 62. Sanathnagar   Hyderabad (M Corp.+OG)  (Part)  
   Hyderabad (M Corp.) (Part)  
   Ward No.7, 24 (excluding the area in AC —46 Kukatpalle)  
   and 25 to 30.  
 63. Nampally   Hyderabad (M Corp.+OG) (Part)  
   Hyderabad (M Corp.) (Part)  
   Ward No. 10 to 12.  
 64. Karwan   Hyderabad (M Corp.+OG) (Part)  
   Hyderabad (M Corp.) (Part)  
   Ward No. 9  
   Ward No. 13 (Part)  
   Block No. 3 to 6.  
 65. Goshamahal   Hyderabad (M Corp.+OG) (Part)  
   Hyderabad (M Corp.) (Part)  
   Ward No. 4, 14 and 15  
   Ward No. 5 (Part)  
   Block No. 1 to 9  
   Ward No. 13 (Part)  
   Block No. 1 and 2.  
 66. Charminar   Hyderabad (M Corp.+OG) (Part)  
   Hyderabad (M Corp.) (Part)  
   Ward No. 20 to 23.  
 67. Chandrayangutta   Hyderabad (M Corp.+OG) (Part)  
   Hyderabad (M Corp.) (Part)  
   Ward No.18 (Part)  
   Block No. 1 to 3 and 8 to 14.  
 68. Yakutpura   Hyderabad (M Corp.+OG) (Part)  
   Hyderabad (M Corp.) (Part)  
   Ward No.17 (Part)  
   Block No. 1 to 7  
   Ward No.18 (Part)  
   Block No. 6 and 7.  
 69. Bahadurpura   Hyderabad (M Corp.+OG) (Part)  
   Hyderabad (M Corp.) (Part)  
   Ward No.18 (Part)  
   Block No. 4 and 5  
   Ward No.19.  
 46 
                   1                                                                                 2  
 70. Secunderabad   Hyderabad (M Corp.+OG) (Part)  
   Hyderabad (M Corp.) (Part)  
   Ward No. 33 (Part)  
   Block No. 4 to 7  
   Ward No. 34 and 35  
   Osmania University Area.  
 71. Secunderabad   Hyderabad (M Corp.+OG) (Part)  
 Cantt. (SC)   Hyderabad (M Corp.) (Part)  
   Ward No. 31 and 32  
   Ward No. 33 (Part)  
   Block No.1 to 3  
   Secunderabad Cantonment Board.  
 
  7—DISTRICT:  MAHBUBNAGAR  
 
 72. Kodangal     Kodangal, Bomraspet, Kosgi, Doulathabad and Maddur  
  Mandals.  
 73. Narayanpet     Koilkonda, Narayanpet, Damaragidda and Dhanwada  Mandals.  
 74. Mahbubnagar     Hanwada and Mahbubnagar Mandals.  
 75. Jadcherla   Jadcherla, Nawabpet, Balanagar and Midjil Mandals.  
 76. Devarkadra     Bhoothpur, Addakal, Devarkadra, Chinna Chinta Kunta  and  
Kothakota Mandals.  
 77. Makthal   Makthal, Maganoor, Atmakur, Narva and Utkoor Mandals.  
 78. Wanaparthy   Wanaparthy, Pebbair, Gopalpeta, Peddamandadi and  Ghanpur 
Mandals.  
 79. Gadwal   Gadwal, Dharur, Maldakal and Ghattu Mandals.  
 80. Alampur (SC)   Ieez, Itikyal, Waddepalle, Manopad and Alampur Mandals.  
 81. Nagarkurnool   Nagarkurnool, Bijinapalle, Thimmajipet, Tadoor and  Telkapalle 
Mandals.  
 82. Achampet (SC)   Balmoor, Lingal, Amrabad, Achampet, Uppununthala and  Vangoor 
Mandals.  
 83. Kalwakurthy   Veldanda, Kalwakurthy, Talakondapalle, Amangal and  Madgul 
Mandals.  
 84. Shadnagar   Kondurg, Farooqnagar, Kothur and Keshampet  Mandals.  
 85. Kollapur   Veepangandla, Kollapur, Peddakothapalle, Kodair and  Pangal 
Mandals.  
 
  8—DISTRICT: NALGONDA  
 
 86. Devarakonda (ST)   Chintapalle, Gundlapalle, Chandampet, Devarakonda and  Pedda 
Adisarlapalle Mandals.  
 87. Nagarjuna Sagar   Gurramp ode, Nidamanur, Peddavoora, Anumula and  Thripuraram 
Mandals.  
 88. Miryalaguda   Vemulapalle, Miryalaguda and Damercherla Mandals.  
 89. Huzurnagar   Neredcherla, Garidepalle, Huzurnagar, Mattampalli and  Mellachervu 
Mandals.  
 90. Kodad   Mothey, Nadigudem, Munagala, Chilkur and Kodad  Mandals.  
 91. Suryapet   Atmakur (S), Suryapet, Chivvemla and Penpahad Mandals.  
 92. Nalgonda   Thipparthi, Nalgonda and Kangal Mandals.  
 93. Munugode   Munugode, Narayanapur, Marriguda, Nampalle, Chandur  and 
Choutuppal Mandals.  
 94. Bhongir   Bhongir, Bibinagar, Valigonda and Pochampalle Mandals.  
 95. Nakrekal (SC)   Ramannapeta, Chityala, Kattangoor, Nakrekal, Kethepalle  and 
Narketpalle Mandals.  
 
 47 
                   1                                                                                 2 
 96. Thungathurthi (SC)   Thirumalagiri, Thungathurthi, Nuthankal, Jajireddigudem,  Sali 
Gouraram and Mothkur Mandals.  
 97. Alair   M.Turkapalle, Rajapet, Yadagirigutta, Alair, Gundala,  Atmakur (M) 
and Bommalaramaram Mandals.  
 
  9—DISTRICT:  WARANGAL  
 
 98. Jangaon   Cherial, Maddur, Bachannapet, Narmetta and Jangaon  Mandals.  
 
 99. Ghanpur   Ghanpur (Station), Dharmasagar, Raghunathpalle,   
            (Station) (SC)   Zaffergadh, and Lingalaghanpur Mandals.  
 100. Palakurthi   Palakurthi, Devaruppula, Kodakandla, Raiparthy and  Thorrur 
Mandals.  
 101. Dornakal (ST)   Narsimhulapet, Maripeda, Kuravi and Dornakal Mandals.  
 102. Mahabubabad (ST)   Gudur, Nellikudur, Kesamudram and Mahabubabad  Mandals.  
 103. Narsampet   Narsampet, Khanapur, Chennaraopet, Duggondi,  Nekkonda and 
Nallabelly Mandals.  
 104. Parkal   Parkal, Atmakur, Sangam and Geesugonda Mandals.  
 105. Warangal West   Warangal Mandal (Part)  
   Warangal (M Corp.) (Part)  
   Warangal (M Corp.) - Ward No. 1 to 7, 15, 21 and 23 to 25  
 106. Warangal East   Warangal Mandal (Part)  
   Warangal (M Corp.) (Part)  
   Warangal (M Corp.) - Ward No. 8 to 14, 16 to 20 and 22.  
 107. Waradhanapet (SC)   Hasanparthy, Hanamkonda, Parvathagiri and Wardhanna  Pet 
Mandals.  
 108. Bhupalpalle   Mogullapalle, Chityal, Bhupalpalle, Ghanpur (Mulug),  Regonda and 
Shayampet Mandals.  
 109. Mulug (ST)   Venkatapur, Eturnagaram, Mangapet, Tadvai, Kothaguda,  
Govindaraopet and Mulug Mandals.  
 
  10—DISTRICT: KHAMMAM  
 
 1[110. Pinapaka (ST)   Pinapaka, Manuguru, Gundala,  Aswapuram Mandals and 
Bhurgumpadu Mandal excluding the Revenue Villages of 
Seetharamanagram, Sridhara Velair, Gumpanapalli, Ganapavaram, 
Ibrahimpet and Ravigudem (big). ]  
 111. Yellandu (ST)   Kamepalle, Yellandu, Bayyaram, Tekulapalle a nd Garla  Mandals.  
 112. Khammam   Khammam Mandal.  
 113. Palair   Thirumalayapalem, Kusumanchi, Khammam Rural and  
Nelakondapalle Mandals.  
 114. Madhira (SC)   Mudigonda, Chinthakani, Bonakal, Madhira and  Yerrupalem 
Mandals.  
 115. Wyra (ST)   Enkuru, Konijerla, Singareni, Julurpadu and Wyra  Mandals.   
 116. Sathupalle (SC)   Sathupalle, Penuballi, Kallur, Tallada and Vemsoor Mandals.  
 117. Kothagudem   Kothagudem and Palwancha Mandals.  
 1[118. Aswaraopeta (ST)   Mulikalapalle, Chandrugonda,  Aswaraopeta and Dammapeta 
Mandals. ] 
 119. Bhadrachalam (ST)   Wazeed, Venkatapuram, Cherla, Dummugudem,  Bhadrachalam, 
Kunavaram, Chintur and V.R. Puram  Mandals.  
 
    
                                                           
1. Subs  by notification  No. G.S.R. 311(E), dated 23 -4-2015 . 48 
 TABLE B – PARLIAMENTARY CONSTITUENCIES  
Sl.No. & Name                                                                     Extent of Parliamentary Constituencies  
            1                                                                                                               2 
  
 1. ADILABAD (ST)     1-Sirpur, 5 -Asifabad (ST), 6-Khanapur (ST), 7 -Adilabad,  
       8-Boath (ST), 9 -Nirmal and 10 -Mudhole.  
 2. PEDDAPALLE (SC)    2 Chennur (SC), 3 Bellampalle (SC), 4 Mancherial,  
       22 Dharmapuri (SC), 23 Ramagundam, 24 Manthani and  
25 Peddapalle.  
 3. KARIMNAGAR     26-Karimnagar, 27-Choppadandi (SC), 28 -Vemulawada,  
       29-Sircilla, 30 -Manakondur (SC), 31 -Huzurabad and  
       32-Husnabad.  
 4. NIZAMABAD  11-Armur, 12-Bodhan, 17 -Nizamabad (Urban),  
  18- Nizamabad  (Rural), 19-Balkonda, 20 -Koratla and  
  21-Jagtial.  
 5. ZAHIRABAD  13 Jukkal (SC), 14 Banswada, 15 Yellareddy, 16 Kamareddy,  
35 Narayankhed, 36 Andole (SC) and 38 Zahirabad (SC).  
 6. MEDAK       33-Siddipet, 34-Medak, 37-Narsapur, 39-Sangareddy,  
       40-Patancheru, 41-Dubbak and 42 -Gajwel.  
 7. MALKAJGIRI  43- Medchal, 44 -Malkajgiri, 45 -Qutbullapur, 46 -Kukatpalle,  
47-Uppal,  49-Lal Bahadur Nagar and 71 -Secunderabad  Cantt. 
(SC).  
 8. SECUNDERABAD  57 Musheerabad, 59 Amberpet, 60 Khairatabad, 61 Jubilee  
       Hills, 62 Sanathnagar, 63 Nampally and 70 Secunderabad.  
 9. HYDERABAD     58-Malakpet, 64 -Karwan, 65 -Goshamaha l, 66-Charminar,  
       67-Chandrayangutta, 68 -Yakutpura and 69 -Bahadurpura.  
  
 10. CHEVELLA     50-Maheswaram, 51-Rajendranagar, 52 -Serilingampally,  
       53-Chevella (SC), 54 -Pargi, 55 -Vicarabad (SC) and 
       56-Tandur.  
  11. MAHBUBNAGAR    72-Kodangal,  73- Narayanpet, 74 -Mahbubnagar,  
       75-Jadcherla, 76 -Devarkadra, 77  -Makthal and  
       84- Shadnagar.  
 12. NAGARKURNOOL (SC)   78 Wanaparthy, 79 Gadwal, 80 Alampur (SC),  
       81 Nagarkurnool, 82  Achampet (SC), 83 Kalwakurthy and  
       85 Kollapur.  
 13. NALGONDA     86-Devarakonda(ST), 87 -Nagarjuna Sagar,  
       88- Miryalaguda, 8 9- Huzurnagar, 90-Kodad, 91 -Suryapet  
       and 92 -Nalgonda.  
 14. BHONGIR     48 Ibrahimpatnam, 93 Munugode, 94 Bhongir,  
       95 Nakrekal (SC), 96 Thungathurthi (SC), 97 Alair and  
       98 Jangoan.   
 15. WARANGAL(SC)    99-Ghanpur (Station) (SC), 100 -Palakurthi, 104 -Parkal,  
105-Warangal West, 106 -Warangal East, 107 -Wardhannapet  
       (SC) and 108 -Bhupalpalle.  
 16. MAHABUBABAD (ST)  101 Dornakal (ST), 102 Mahabubabad (ST), 103 Narsampet,  
109 Mulug (ST), 110 Pinapaka (ST), 111 Yellandu (ST) and  
       119 Bhadrachalam (ST).  
 17. KHAMMAM     112-Khammam, 113 -Palair, 114 -Madhira (SC),  
115-Wyra (ST),  116- Sathupalle (SC), 117 -Kothagudem and 
118-Aswaraopeta  (ST).  
 
NOTE: Any reference in Table A to a CT, OG, Mandal and Villages or other territorial division shall be  
taken to mean the area comprised within that CT, OG, Mandal and Villages or other territorial  
division as on the 15th day of February, 2004. Further, any reference in Table – A, to wards in  
municipal areas shall be taken to mean the areas as defined in the Census of India 2001Report.‖.   49 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 24)  
PART I  
MODIFICATION IN THE DELIMITATION OF COUNCIL CONSTITUENCIES  
(ANDHRA PRADESH) ORDER, 2006  
For the Table appended to the Delimitation of Council Constituencies  (Andhra Pradesh) Order, 2006, the 
following Table shall be substituted, namely: –– 
―TABLE  
Name of Constituency                                         Extent of  Constituency                                       Number of  seats  
Local Authorities' Constituencies  
1. Srikakulam Local Authorities                          Srikakulam  1 
2. Vizianagaram Local Authorities  Vizianagaram  1 
3. Visakhapatnam Local Authorities  Visakhapatnam  2 
4. East Godavari Local Authorities  East Godavari  2 
5. West Godavari Local Authorities  West Godavari  2 
6. Krishna Local Authorities  Krishna  2 
7. Guntur Local Authorities  Guntur  2 
8. Prakasam Local Authorities  Prakasam  1 
9. Nellore Local Authorities  Nellore  1 
10. Chittoor Local Authorities  Chittoor  2 
11. Kadapa Local Authorities  Kadapa  1 
12. Anantapur Local Authorities  Anantapur  2 
13. Kurnool Local Authorities  Kurnool  1 
Graduates’ Constituencies  
1. Srikakulam -Vizianagaram -                        Srikakulam, Vizianagaram,                            1 
    Visakhapatnam Graduate                        Visakhapatnam  
2. East -West Godavari Graduates  East-West Godavari  1 
3. Krishna -Guntur Graduates  Krishna -Guntur  1 
4. Prakasam -Nellore -Chittoor Graduates  Prakasam -Nellore -Chitt oor  1 
5. Kadapa -Anantapur -Kurnool Graduates   Kadapa -Anantapur -Kurnool  1 ‖. 
Teacher's Constituencies  
1. Srikakulam -Vizianagaram -  Srikakulam, Vizianagaram,  1 
Visakhapatnam Teachers  Visakhapatnam  
2. East -West Godavari Teachers  East-West Godavari  1 
3. Krishna -Guntur Teachers  Krishna -Guntur  1 
4. Prakasam -Nellore -Chittoor Teachers  Prakasam -Nellore -Chittoor  1 
5. Kadapa -Anantapur -Kurnool Teachers  Kadapa -Anantapur -Kurnool  1‖. 
  50 
 PART II  
1. This Order may be called the Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Telangana)  Order, 2014.  
2. The costituencies into which the State of Telangana shall be divided for the  purpose of elections to the 
Legislative Council of the State from ( a) the local authorities'  constituencies, ( b) the graduates' 
constituencies, and ( c) the teachers' constituencies in the  said State, the extent of each su ch constituency 
and the number of seats allotted to each  such constituency shall be as shown in the following Table: — 
TABLE  
Name of Constituency                                         Extent of  Constituency                                       Number of  seats  
*Local Authorities’  Constituencies  
1. Mahbubnagar Local Authorities  Mahbubnagar  1 
2. Ranga Reddy Local Authorities  Ranga Reddy  1 
3. Hyderabad Local Authorities  Hyderabad  2 
4. Medak Local Authorities  Medak  1 
5. Nizamabad Local Authorities  Nizamabad  1 
6. Adilabad Local Authorities  Adilabad  1 
7. Karimnagar Local Authorities  Karimnagar  1 
8. Warangal Local Authorities  Warangal  1 
9. Khammam Local Authorities  Khammam  1 
10. Nalgonda Local Authorities  Nalgonda  1 
Graduates’ Constituencies  
1. Mahbubnagar -Ranga Reddy -     Mahbubnagar -Ranga    1 
Hyderabad Graduates      Reddy Hyderabad  
2. Medak -Nizamabad -Adilabad -     Medak -Nizamabad -    1 
Karimnagar Graduates      Adilabad -Karimnagar  
3. Warangal -Khammam -      Warangal -Khammam -    1 
Nalgonda Graduates      Nalgonda  
Teacher’ s Constituencies  
1. Mahbubnagar -Ranga Reddy -     Mahbubnagar -Ranga    1 
Hyderabad Teachers      Reddy Hyderabad  
2. Medak -Nizamabad -Adilabad -    Medak -Nizamabad -    1 
Karimnagar Teachers      Adilabad -Karimnagar  
3. Warangal -Khammam -      Warangal -Khammam -    1 
    Nalgonda Teachers                                                                  Nalgonda  
 
* See notification No. G.S.R. 313(E) , dated 23 -4-2015.  
 
 
 
 
  51 
 THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 22( 2)] 
List of members of the Legislative Council of successor States of Andhra Pradesh and  Telangana : — 
Legislative Council of Andhra Pradesh:  
Members of Local Authorities Constituencies:  
(1) Ilapuram Venkaiah, (2) Pothula Rama Rao, (3) D.V. Suryanarayana Raju, (4) Narayana  Reddy 
Chadipiralla, (5) Boddu Bhaskara Ramarao, (6) Angara Ramamohan, (7) Dr. Desai  Thippa Reddy, M.S., 
(8) Meka Seshu Babu, (9)  Peerukatla Viswa Prasada Rao, (10) Narayana  Reddy Vakati, (11) Mettu 
Govinda Reddy.  
Members of Graduates’ Constituenci es: 
(1) Boddu Nageswara Rao, (2) Kalidindi Ravi Kiran Varma, (3) M.V.S. Sarma,  (4) Yandapalli 
Srinivasulu Reddy, (5) Dr. Geyanand M.  
Members of Teachers’ Constituencies.  
(1) Gade Srinivasulu Naidu, (2) K.V.V. Satyanarayana Raju, (3) K.S. Lakshmana Rao,   
(4) Balasubrahmany am Vitapu, (5) Bachala Pullaiah, 1[(6) Kantheti Satya narayana Raju, (7) T. Ratna 
Bai]. 
 Nominated Members.  
(1) Jupudi Prabhakar Rao, (2) Balashali Indira, (3) Dr. A. Chakrapani, (4) R. Reddeppa  Reddy,  
(5) Shaik Hussain.  
Members elected from Legislative Assembly Constituencies.  
(1) K. Veerabhadra Swamy, (2) A. Lakshmi Siva Kumari, (3) R. Padma Raju, (4) Paladugu  Venkata 
Rao, (5) Mohammad Jani, (6) N. Rajakumari, (7) Y. Ramakrishnudu, (8) S. Basava  Punnaiah,  
(9) A. Appa Rao, (10) P.J. Cha ndrasekhara Rao, (11) B. Changal Rayudu,  (12) P. Samanthakamani,  
(13) C. Ramachandraiah, (14) S.V. Satish Kumar Reddy, (15) G.Thippe  Swamy, (16) M.Sudhakar Babu.  
Legislative Council of Telangana:  
Members of Local Authorities Constituencies.  
(1) Nethi Vidya Sagar, (2) V. Bhoopal Reddy, (3) Arikala Narsa Reddy, (4) Potla Nageswar  Rao,  
(5) T. Bhanu Prasad Rao, (6) S. Jagadeeshwar Reddy, (7) Sri M.S. Prabhakar Rao,  (8) Sri Patnam 
Narender Reddy, (9) Syed Aminul Hasan Jafri.  
Members of Graduates’ Constitue ncies:  
(1) Dr. K. Nageshwar, (2) Kapilavai Dileep Kumar, (3) K. Swamy Goud.  
Members of Teachers’ Constituencies.  
(1) Pathuri Sudhakar Reddy, (2) Poola Ravinder, (3) Katepally Janardhan Reddy.  
Nominated Members.  
(1) D. Rajeshwar Rao, (2) Farooq Hussain, (3) B. Venkata Rao.  
Elected by Members of Legislative Assembly  
*(1) K.R. Amos, (2) Mohammad Ali Shabbir, (3) K. Yadava Reddy, (4) V. Gangadhar  Goud,  
(5) T. Santosh Kumar, (6) N. Rajalingam, (7) D. Srinivas, (8) M. Ranga Reddy,  (9) P. Sudhakar Reddy, 
(10) B. Lakshmi Narayana, (11)  Mohammad Saleem,  (12) B. Venkateswarlu, (13) Peer Shabbir Ahmed, 
(14) Mohammad Mahmood Ali,  (15) Syed Altaf Hyder Razvi.   
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No. G.S.R. 725(E), dated 14 -10-2014.  
* Omitted by notification  No. G.S.R. 31 2(E), dated 23 -4-2015.   
The seat vacated by Shri K. R. Amos shall cease to exist and shall not b e filled up in accordance with s ub-clause ( b) of clause ( i) 
of sub -section ( 2) of section 23 of the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act , 2014.  52 
 THE FIFTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 28)  
In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, –– 
(1) in paragraph 2, for the figures ―XXIV‖, the figures ―XXV‖ shall be  substituted;  
(2) in the Schedule, –– 
(a) in PART I relating to Andhra Pradesh, item number 9, shall be omitted;  
(b) after Part XXIV, the following Part shall be inserted, namely: –– 
―PART XXV. ––Telangana  
1. Adi Andhra  
2. Adi Dravida  
3. Anamuk  
4. Aray Mala  
5. Arundhatiya  
6. Arwa Mala  
7. Bariki  
8. Bavuri  
9. Beda (Budga) Jangam  
10. Bindla  
11. Byagara, Byagari  
12. Chachati  
13. Chalavadi  
14. Chamar, Mochi, Muchi, Chamar -Ravidas, Chamar -Rohidas  
15. Chambhar  
16. Chandala  
17. Dakkal, Dokkalwar  
18. Dandasi  
19. Dhor  
20. Dom, Dombara, Paidi, Pano  
21. Ellamalawar, Yellammalawandlu  
22. Ghasi, Haddi, Relli, Chanchandi  
23. Godari  
24. Gosangi  
25. Holeya  
26. Holeya Dasari  
27. Jaggali  
28. Jambuvulu  
29. Kolupulva ndlu, Pambada, Pambanda, Pambala  53 
 30. Madasi Kuruva, Madari Kuruva  
31. Madiga  
32. Madiga Dasu, Mashteen  
33. Mahar  
34. Mala, Mala Ayawaru  
35. Mala Dasari  
36. Mala Dasu  
37. Mala Hannai  
38. Malajangam  
39. Mala Masti  
40. Mala Sale, Nethani  
41. Mala Sanyasi  
42. Mang  
43. Mang Garodi  
44. Manne  
45. Mashti  
46. Matangi  
47. Mehtar  
48. Mitha Ayyalvar  
49. Mundala  
50. Paky, Moti, Thoti  
51. Pamidi  
52. Panchama, Pariah  
53. Relli  
54. Samagara  
55. Samban  
56. Sapru  
57. Sindhollu, Chindollu  
58. Yatala  
59. Valluvan.‖.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 54 
 THE SIXTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 29)  
AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDER, 1950  
In the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, –– 
(1) in paragraph 2, for the figures ―XXII‖, the figures ―XXIII‖ shall be  substituted;  
(2) in the Schedul e,–– 
(a) in PART I relating to Andhra Pradesh, –– 
(i) in item number 20, the brackets and words ―(excluding Adilabad,  Hyderabad, Karimnagar, 
Khammam, Mahbubnagar, Medak, Nalgonda,  Nizamabad and Warangal districts)‖ shall be 
omitted;  
(ii) item  number 30 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted;  
 (b) after Part XXIV, the following Part shall be inserted, namely: –– 
―PART XXV. ––Telangana  
1. Andh, Sadhu Andh  
2. Bagata  
3. Bhil  
4. Chenchu  
5. Gadabas, Bodo Gadaba, Gutob Gadaba, Kallayi Gadaba, Parangi Gadaba, Kathera  
Gadaba, Kapu Gadaba  
6. Gond, Naikpod, Rajgond, Koitur  
7. Goudu (in the Agency tracts)  
8. Hill Reddis  
9. Jatapus  
10. Kammara  
11. Kattunayakan  
12. Kolam, Kolawar  
13. Konda Dhoras, Kubi  
14. Konda Kapus  
15. Kondareddis  
16. Kondhs, Kodi, Kodhu, Desaya Kondhs, Dongria Kondhs, Kuttiya Kondhs, Tikiria  
Kondhs, Yenity Kondhs, Kuvinga  
17. Kotia, Bentho Oriya, Bartika, Duli a, Holva , Sanrona, Sidhopaiko  
18. Koya, Doli Koya, Gutta Koya, Kammara Koya, Musara Koya, Oddi Koya, Pattidi  
Koya, Rajah, Rasha Koya, Lingadhari Koya (ordinary), Kottu Koya, Bhine Koya, Rajkoya  
19. Kulia  
20. Manna Dhora  
21. Mukha Dhora, Nooka Dhora  
22. Nayaks (in the Agency tracts)  55 
 23. Pardhan  
24. Porja, Parangiperja  
25. Reddi Dhoras  
26. Rona, Rena  
27. Savaras, Kap u Savaras, Maliya Savaras, Khutto Savaras  
28. Sugalis, Lambadis, Banjara  
29. Thoti (in Adilabad, Hyderabad, Karimnagar, Khammam, Mahbubnagar, Medak,  
Nalgonda, Nizamabad and Warangal districts)  
30. Yenadis, Chella Yenadi, Kappala Yenadi, Manchi Yenadi, Redd i Yenadi  
31. Yerukulas, Koracha, Dabba Yerukula, Kunchapuri Yerukula, Uppu Yerukula  
32. Nakkala, Kurvikaran.‖.  
 
  56 
 THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 52)  
LIST OF FUNDS  
A. Provident Funds, Pension Funds, Insurance Funds  
 1. Contributory Provident Fund Work -charged 50% N.R.S.  
 2. All India Ser vice Provident Fund.  
 3. Deposits of Zilla Praja Parishads out of Provident Fund contribution.  
 4. General Provident Fund (Regular).  
 5. Andhra Pradesh Class IV Govt. Servants Family Pension Fund.  
 6. Andhra Pradesh  State Employees Family Benefit Fund.  
 7. Andhra Pradesh State Government Life Insurance Fund.  
 8. Compulsory Savings Scheme.  
 9. 50% D.A., G.P.F.N.R.S.  
 10. G.P.F. Class -IV. 
 11. G.P.F. Work Charged 50% N.R.S.  
 12. C.P.F. work -charged Establishment.  
 13. Electricity Department Provident Fund.  
 14. ICS Provident Fund.  
 15. Compulsory Savings Scheme for University Employees.  
 16. Postal Insurance and Life Annuity Fund.  
 17. Central Government Employees Group Insurance Scheme.  
 18. I.A.S. Group Insurance.  
 19. Andhra Pradesh State Government Employees Contributory Pension Scheme — 
(i) Employees Contribution  
(ii) Government Contribution.  
 20. Andhra Pradesh Aided Educational Institution Employees Contributory Pension  Scheme— 
(i) Employees Contribution  
(ii) Government Contribution  
 21. Group Insurance for Panchayat Raj Employees  
 22. Group Insurance Market Committee  
 23. State Government Employees Group Janata Personal Accident Policy  
 24. Employees Welfare Fund (Andhra Pradesh State)  
 B. Sinking Fund, Guaran tee Resumption Fund, Reserve Funds  
 25. Sinking Fund —Investment Account  
 26. Guarantee Redemption Fund —Investment Account  
 27. Depreciation Reserve Fund —Government Commercial Departments and  Undertakings — 
  (i) Alcohol Factory, Narayanaguda  57 
   (ii) Alcohol  Factory, Kamareddy  
  (iii) Andhra Pradesh Text Book Press  
  (iv) Government Distillery, Chagallu  
  (v) Government Ceramic Factory, Gudur  
  (vi) Government Block Glass Factory, Gudur.  
 28. Industrial Development Funds — 
  (i) Reserve Fund for Protection of Sugar Industries  
  (ii) Sericulture Development Fund.  
 29. Electricity Development Funds —Special Reserve Fund —Electricity.  
 30. Other Development and Welfare Fund — 
  (i) Funds for Development Schemes  
  (ii) Industrial Plantation Fund  
  (iii) Andhra Pradesh  State Distilleries  
  (iv) Andhra Pradesh Distilleries Pollution Control  
 31. Depreciation Reserve Fund of Government Press  
 32. Depreciation Reserve Fund of Water Works  
 33. State Development Subsidy Fund for Small and Marginal Formers  
 34. Industrial Res earch and Development Fund —Main Account  
 35. Industrial Research and Development Fund —Investment Account  
 36. Funds for Development Schemes —Investment Account  
 37. Andhra Pradesh Distilleries and Brewaries  
 38. Amount with RBI in GRF Current Account  
 39. S ecurity Adjustment Reserve —Investment Account  
 C. Other Funds  
 40. Development Funds for Educational Purposes  
 41. K.G. and Pennar Drainage Cess Fund  
 42. C.M. Relief Fund  
 43. Municipal Environmental Scheme Fund  
 44. Zilla Praja Parishad Funds  
 45. Subvensions from Central Road Fund  
 46. Deposits of Police Funds  
 47. Deposits of Andhra Pradesh Social Welfare Fund  
 48. Development of Mineral Resources and Technology Upgradation Fund  
 49. Village Panchayat Funds  
 50. Mandala Praja Parishad Funds  
 51. Market Committee Funds  
 52. Thrift Fund cum Savings and Security Schemes for Weavers  58 
  53. State Agriculture Credit Stabilisation Fund  
 54. Andhra Pradesh State Government Employees Contributory Pension Scheme  
  (i) Employees Contribution  
  (ii) Government Contribution  
55. Deposits on Employees Welfare Fund and Matching contribution equivalent to  the interest earned 
on the Employees Welfare Fund  
 (i) Loans to Government Employees  
 (ii) Loans to Panchayat Raj Employees  
 (iii) Loans to Municipal Corporation/Municipal Employees  
  (iv) Remuneration to the employees working in the Employees Welfare Fund and  other 
connected expenditure    like Stationery, Stamps, Contingent items, etc.  
56. Deposits of Andhra Pradesh Building and Other Construction Wor kers Welfare  Board.  
57. Natural Calamities Unspent Margin Money Fund  
58. Development Funds for Agricultural Purposes  
59. Zamindari Abolition Fund  
60. Ethyl Alcohol Storage Facilities Fund — 
 (i) Andhra Pradesh Government Power Alcohol Factory, Bodhan  
 (ii) Andhra Pradesh Government Power Alcohol Factory, Chagallu  
61. Security Adjustment Reserve  
62. Andhra Pradesh Crop Insurance Fund  
63. Andhra Pradesh Comprehensive Crop Insurance Scheme  
64. Religious Charitable Endowment Funds  
65. Depreciation Reserve Fund o f Hydro—Thermal Electricity Schemes  
 (i) Depreciation Reserve Fund of Hydro —Thermal Electricity Schemes  
 (ii) Machkund  
 (iii) Tungabhadra  
66. State Renewal Fund  
67. Andhra Pradesh Rural Development Fund  
68. Corpus Fund for upgradation of public libraries  
69. General Reserve Funds of Government Commercial Departments/Undertakings.  
 
  59 
 THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 59)  
APPORTIONMENT OF LIABILITY IN RESPECT OF PENSIONS  
 1. Subject to the adjustments mentioned in paragraph 3, each of the successor States  shall, in respect 
of pensions  granted before the appointed day by the existing State of  Andhra Pradesh, pay the pensions 
drawn in its treasuries.  
2. Subject to the said adjustments, the liability in respect of pensions of officers  serving in connection 
with the  affairs of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh who retire or  proceed on leave preparatory to 
retirement before the appointed day, but whose claims for  pensions are outstanding immediately before 
that day, shall be the liability of the State of  Andhr a Pradesh.  
3. There shall be computed, in respect of the period commencing on the appointed  day and ending on 
such date after the appointed day, as may be fixed by the Central  Government and in respect of each 
subsequent financial year, the total payments made to  the two successor States in respect of pensions 
referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2. The total  representing the liability of the existing State of Andhra 
Pradesh in respect of pensions and  other retirement benefits shall be apportioned between the su ccessor 
States on the basis of  population ratio and any successor State paying more than its due share shall be 
reimbursed  the excess amount by the other successor State paying less.  
4. The liability of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh in respect of pe nsion rolls  granted before the 
appointed day and drawn in any area outside the territories of the  existing State shall be the liability of the 
State of Andhra Pradesh subject to adjustments to  be made in accordance with paragraph 3 as if such 
pensions had been drawn in any treasury  in the State of Andhra Pradesh under paragraph 1.  
5. (1) The liability in respect of the pension of any officer serving immediately before  the appointed 
day in  connection with the affairs of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh a nd retiring on or after that day, 
shall be that of the successor State granting him the pension  and other retirement benefits; but the portion 
of the pension and other retirement benefits  attributable to the service of any such officer before the 
appointed  day in connection with  the affairs of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh shall be allocated 
between the successor  States on the basis of population ratio, and the Government granting the pension 
shall be  entitled to receive from the other successor Stat e its share of the liability.  
(2) If any such officer was serving after the appointed day in connection with the  affairs of more than 
one successor State other than the one granting the pension shall  reimburse to the Government by which 
the pension is gran ted an amount which bears to the  portion of the pension attributable to his service after 
the appointed day the same ratio as  the period of his qualifying service after the appointed day under the 
reimbursing State  bears to the total qualifying service of such officer after the appointed day reckoned for 
the purposes of pension.  
6. Any reference in this Schedule to a pension shall be construed as including a  reference to the 
commuted value of the pension.   60 
 THE NINTH SCHEDULE  
(See sections 68 and 71)  
LIST OF  GOVERNMENT COMPANIES AND CORPORATIONS  
 
Sl. No.                             Name of Govern ment Company                                         Address                                                       
(1)                                                       (2)                                                                        (3) 
 1. Andhra Pradesh State Seeds Development Corporation   S-10-193, 2nd Floor,  
 Ltd.,   HACA Bhavan, Opp.  
   Public Gardens,  
   Hyderabad -500 004.  
 
 2. Andhra Pradesh State Agro Industrial Development   504, Hermitage Office  
 Corporation Ltd.,   Complex, Hill Fort Road,  
   Hyderabad -500 004.  
 
 3. Andhra Pradesh State Warehousing Corporation.,   Warehousing Sadan,  
   2nd Floor, Behind  
   Gandhi Bhavan,  
   Nampally,  
   Hyderabad - 500 001.  
 
 4. Andhra Pradesh State Civil Supplies Corporation Ltd.,   6-3-655/1/A, Civil  
   Supplies Bhavan,  
   Somajiguda,  
   Hyderabad -500 082.  
 
 5. Andhra Pradesh Genco,   Vidyut Soudha,  
   Khairathabad,  
   Hyderabad -500 004.  
 
 6. Andhra Pradesh Transco,   Vidyut Soudha,  
   Khairathabad,  
   Hyderabad -500 004.  
 
 7. Singareni Collieries Company Ltd.,   Singareni Bhavan,  
   Macharmanzil, Redhills,  
   Hyderabad -500 004.  
 
 8. NREDCAP   Pisgha Complex,  
   Nampally,  
   Hyderabad -500 001.  
 
 9. Andhra Pradesh Forest Development Corporation Ltd.,   UNI Building, 3rd Floor,  
   A.C.Guards,  
   Hyderabad -500 004.  
 
 10. Andhra Pradesh State Film and Television Theatre   10-2-1, FDC Complex,  
 Development Corporation Ltd.,   A.C.Guards,  
   Hyderabad -500 004.  
 
 11. Andhra Pradesh Medical Services Infrastructure   APMSIDC Building,  
 Development Corporation,   DM and HS Campus,  
   Sulthan Bazar,  
   Hyderabad -500 095.  
 
 61 
 (1)                                                       (2)                                                                        (3)  
 
 12. Andhra Pradesh State Police Housing Corporation Ltd.,   DIG Office, Saifabad,  
   Hyderabad -500 004.  
 
 13. Andhra Pradesh State Housing Corporation Ltd.,   3-6-184, Street No.17,  
   Urdu Hall Lane,  
   Himayat Nagar,  
   Hyderabad.  
 
 14. Andhra Pradesh Housing Board,   Gruhakalpa, M.J.Road,  
   Nampally,  
   Hyderabad -500 028.  
 
 15. Andhra Pradesh Technologies Services Ltd.,   B.R.K. Buildings, Tank  
   Bund Road,  
   Hyderabad.  
  
 16. Andhra Pradesh Mineral Development Corporation Ltd.,   Rear Block, 3rd Floor,  
   HMWSSB Premises,  
   Khairathabad,  
   Hyderabad -500 004.  
 
 17. Andhra Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure Corporation Ltd.,   5-9-58/B, 6th Floor,  
   Parishrama  Bhavan,  
   Basheerbagh,  
   Hyderabad -500 004.  
 
 18. Andhra Pradesh Industrial Development Corporation Ltd.,   5-9-58/B, 6th Floor,  
   Parishrama  Bhavan,  
   Basheerbagh,  
   Hyderabad -500 004.  
 
 19. Andhra Pradesh State Finance Corporation,   5-9-194, Chirag Ali  
   Lane, Abids,  
   Hyderabad -500 001.  
 
20. Leather Industries Development Corporation of   5-77/27, Darga Hussaini  
    Andhra Pradesh (LIDCAP),                                                                              Shaw Ali,  Golkonda  Post,  
   Hyderabad -500008.  
  
 21. Andhra Pradesh Handicraft Development Corporation Ltd.,   Hasthakala Bhavan,  
   Musheerabad X Roads,  
   Hyderabad.  
 
 22. Andhra Pradesh State Trade Promotion Corporation Ltd.   6-10-74, Fathe Maidhan  
(APTPC).,        Road, Shakar Bhavan,  
Hyderabad -500 004.  
 
 23. Andhra Pradesh State Irrigation Development     8-2-674/2/B, Road  
 Corporation Ltd.,        No.13, Banjara Hills,  
          Hyderabad -500 034.  
 
 
 
 
 
 62 
 (1)                                                       (2)                                                                        (3) 
 
 24. Andhra Pradesh State Minorities Finance Corporation Ltd.,   5th Floor,  A.P. State Haj  
          House, Opp. Public  
          Gardens, Nampally,  
          Hyderabad -500 001.  
 
 25. Andhra Pradesh Beverages Corporation Ltd.,     4th Floor, Prohibition  
          and Excise Complex, 9  
          and 10 Eastern,  
          M.J.Road,  Nampally,  
          Hyderabad -500 001.  
 
 26. Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation,    Bus Bhavan,  
          Musheerabad X Roads,  
          Hyderabad.  
 
 27. Andhra Pradesh Foods,       IDA, Nacharam,  
          Hyderabad -500 076.  
 
 28. Andhra Pra desh State Tourism Development     3-5-891, A.P. Tourism   
  Corporation Ltd.,                    House, Himayath  
          Nagar, Hyderabad.  
 
 29. Andhra Pradesh Rajiv Swagruha Corporation Ltd.,    A-06, Sahabhavan,  
          Bandlaguda, GSI (Post),  
          Hyderabad -500 068.  
 
 30. Eastern Power Distribution Corporation Ltd.,     Corporate Office, Near  
          Guruwar Junction,  
          P and T  
          Seethammadhara  
          Colony,  
          Vishakapatnam -530 013.  
 
 31. Southern Power Distribution Corporation Ltd.,     # 1-13-65/A,  
          Srinivasapuram,  
          Tirupati -517503.  
 
 32. Central Power Distribution Corporation Ltd.,     6-1-50, Corporate  
          Office, Mint  
          Compound,  
          Hyderabad -500 063.  
 
 33. Northern Power Distribution Corporation Ltd.,     1-1-478, Chaitanyapuri  
          Colony, Near RES  
          Petrol Pump, Warangal.  
 
 34. Andhra Pradesh Heavy Machinery and Engineering Ltd.,   Regd. Office and Factory,  
          Kondapally -521228.  
          Krishna District.  
 
 35. Vizag Apparel Park for Export Ltd.,      C-Block, 4th Floor, BRK  
          Bhavan, Hyderabad - 
          500 063.  
 
 
 
 63 
 (1)                                                       (2)                                                                        (3) 
 
 36. Andhra Pradesh State Christian (Minorities)     6-2-41, Flat No. 102,   
  Finance Corporation,       Moghal Emami  
          Mansion, Opp. Shadan   
          College, Khairathabad,   
          Hyderabad -500 004.  
 
 37. Hyderabad Metro Rail Ltd.,       Metro Rail Bhavan,  
          Saifabad,  
          Hyderabad -500 004.  
 38. Andhra Pradesh Urban Finance Infrastructure     2nd Floor, E and PH  
 Development Corporation Ltd.,      Complex, Kashana  
          Building, AC Guards,  
          Hyderabad.  
 
 39. Infrastructure Development Corporation of Andhra Pradesh   10-2-1, 3rd Floor, FDC  
 (INCAP),         Complex, AC Guards,  
          Hyderabad -500 028.  
 
 40. Overseas Manpower Company of Andhra Pradesh Ltd.    ITI Mallepally Campus,  
 (OMCAP),         Vijayanagar Colony,  
          Hyderabad -500 057.   
 
 41. Andhra Pradesh Power Finance Corporation Ltd.,    L-Block, 4th Floor,  
          Andhra Pradesh  
          Secretariat, Hyderabad.  
 
 42. Andhra Pradesh Roads Development Corporation,    R and B Office, Beside  
          Mahaveer, AC Guards,  
          Hyderabad -500 057.  
 
 43. Andhra Pradesh Tribal Power Company Ltd. (TRIPCO),   4th Floor, Damodharam  
          Sanjivaiah  
          Samkshema  Bhavan,  
          Masab Tank,  
          Hyderabad.  
 
 44. Andhra Pradesh Tribal Mining Company Ltd. (TRIMCO),   4th Floor, Damodharam  
          Sanjivaiah  
          Samkshema  Bhavan,  
          Masab Tank,  
           Hyderabad.  
 
 45. Andhra Pradesh Cooperative Oil seeds     Parishrama Bhavan,  
 Growers Federation Limited.       9th Floor, Hyderabad.  
 
 46. Andhra Pradesh Marketing Federation Ltd.     Haka Bhavan, Hill Fort  
          Road, Hyderabad.  
 
 47. Deccan Infrastructure and Land Holdings Ltd.     C/o Andhra Pradesh  
          Housing Board,  
          Ground Floor,  
          Gruha Kalpa, MJ R oad, 
          Nampally,  
          Hyderabad -500001.  
 
 
 64 
 (1)                                                       (2)                                                                        (3)  
 
 48. Andhra Pradesh Aviation Corporation Ltd.     II Floor, Container,  
          Floride Station, Air  
          Corporation Complex,  
          Begumpet 16.  
 
 49. Andhra Pradesh Gas Infrastructure      5-9-58/B, Parishrama  
 Corporation (P) Ltd.       Bhavan, II Floor,  
          Fathe Maidan Road,  
          Basheerbagh,  
          Hyderabad -14. 
  50. Andhra Pradesh Gas Distribution      5-9-58/B, Parishrama  
 Corporation Ltd.  Bhavan, II Floor, Fathe  
  Maidan Road,  
  Basheerbagh,  
  Hyderabad -14. 
 
 51. Andhra Pradesh Khadi and Village  Mehdipatnam Road,  
 Industries Board (APKVIB).  Masab Tank,  
  Humayun Nagar,  
  Hyderabad.  
 
 52. Andhra Pradesh State Handloom  Road No. 16, Industrial  
 Weavers Co -operative Society Ltd. (APCO)   Development Area,  
  Chinthal, Hyderabad -55. 
 
 53. Andhra Pradesh Textile Development  4th Floor, BRKR  
 Corporation (APTEX).  Bhavan, C Block,  
  Tankbundroad,  
  Saifabad, Hyderabad -4. 
 
 54. Nizam Sugars Ltd. (NSL).  6-3-570/1, 201, Diamond  
  Block, Rockdale  
  Compound, Somajiguda,  
  Errammanjil,  
  Hyderabad -82. 
 
 55. Andhra Pradesh Food Processing  1st Floor, BRKR  
 Society (APFPS).  Bhavan,  
  Tank Bund Road,  
  Hyderabad -63. 
 
 56. Krishnapatnam International Leather  5th Floor, Parishrama  
 Complex Pvt. Ltd. (KPILC)  Bhavan, Basheerbagh,  
  Hyderabad -4. 
 
 57. Andhra Pradesh State Federation of  Chirag Ali Lane,  
 Co-operative Sugar Factories Ltd. (APSFCSC).  Hyderabad -500001.  
 
 58. Textile Park, Pasha Mailaram  Pasha Mailaram,  
  Medak District.  
 
 59. Andhra Pradesh Women's Co -operative  Door No. 1335/H, Road  
 Finance Corporation Ltd.  No. 45, Jubilee Hills,  
  Hyderabad -500 033.  
 
 
 65 
 (1)                                                       (2)                                                                        (3)  
 
 60. Andhra Pradesh Vikalangula  AP Vikalangula  
 Co-operative Corporation  Sankshema Bhavan,  
  Nalgonda X Roads,  
  Malkpet.  
 
 61. Andhra Pradesh Water Resources  IV Floor, Jalasoudha  
 Development Corporation  Building Erram Manzil,  
  Hyderabad.  
 
 
 62. Andhra Pradesh State Property Tax Board  AC Guards, Masabtank,  
 (APSPTB), Hyderabad.  Hyderabad.  
 
 63. Andhra Pradesh Toddy Tappers Cooperative  3-5-1089, Beside  
 Finance Corporatio n Ltd. (AP Geetha Paarishramika   Deepak Cinema Theater,  
 Sahakara Arthika Samkhsema Samstha), Narayanagunda,  Narayanguda,  
 Hyderabad.  Hyderabad -29. 
 
 64. Society for Employment, Promotion and  Azmath Jah Palace,  
 Training in Twin Cities  (SETWIN).  Purani Haveli,  
  Hyderabad -500 002.  
 
 65. Sports Authority of Andhra Pradesh  Lal Bahadur Stadium,  
 (SAAP)  Hyderabad -500 001.  
  AP. INDIA.  
 
 66. Andhra Pradesh Society for Training and  Director of Youth  
 Emp loyment Promotion (APSTEP)  Service s and MD,  
  APSTEP,  
  Behind Boats Club,  
  Secunderabad.  
 
 67. State Institute of Hotel Management  Near SV Zoo Park,  
 Catering Technology, Tirupathi  Beside AP Tourism  
  Transport, Peler V illage,  
  Tirupathi,  
  Chittoor Distt. 517507  
 
 68. State Institute of Hotel Management  Kohir X road,  
 Catering Technology, Medak  Kaveri Village,  
  Medak Distt. 502321  
 
 69. Andhra Pradesh Meat Development  10-2-289/129,  
 Corporation, Hyderabad  Shanthinagar,  
  Hyderabad -28 
 
 70. Andhra Pradesh Dairy Development  Vijaya Bhavan, Lalapet,  
 Corporation, Hyderabad  Hyderabad -17 
 
  
 71. AP Sheep and Goat Develoment  Managing Director,  
 Cooperative Federation, Hyd.  10- 2-289/127 Shanthinagar,  
  Masabtank,  
  Hyderabad -28 
 
 
 66 
 (1)                                                       (2)                                                                        (3)  
  
 72. Andhra Pradesh State Fishermen  Managing Director, O/o  
 Cooperative Societies Federation, Hyd.  Commissioner of  
  Fisheries, 4th L ane, 
  Shanthinagar, Mathsya  
  Bhavan, Hyderabad.  
 
 73. Andhra Pradesh Dairy Development  Vijaya Bhavan, Lalapet,  
 Cooperative Federation, Ltd., Hyderabad.   Hyderabad -17 
 
 74. Andhra Pradesh State Veternary Council,  H.No. 2 -289/124, Road,  
 Hyderabad.  No. 4, Shanthi Nagar,  
  Hyderabad -500028. 
 
 
 75. Andhra Pradesh Girijan Co -operative  Telugu Samkshema  
 Corporation  Bhavan, Masab Tank,  
  Hyderabad -28 
 
 76. Andhra Pradesh State ST Co -operative  Managing Director,  
 Finance Corporation (Tricor)  1st Floor, D.S.S.  
  Bhavan, Masab Tank,  
  Hyderabad.  
 
 77. Andhra Pradesh Education and Welfare  4th Floor, Rajiv Vidya  
 Infrastructure Development Corporation  Mission Building,  
 (APEWIDC)  SCERT Compound,  
  Hyderabad -500001  
  
 78. Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Castes  VC and MD  
 Co-operative Finance Corporation  Damodaram  
  Sanjeevayya  
  Samkshema Bhavan,  
  5th Floor, Masab Tank,  
  Hyderabad -28 
 
 79. Andhra Pradesh Backward Classes  Samkshema  Bhavan,  
 Co-operative Finance Corporation  Masab Tank,  
  Hyderabad  
 
 80. Andhra Pradesh Washermen  Samkshema Bhavan,  
 Co-operative Societies Federation Ltd.  Masab Tank,  
  Hyderabad -28 
 
 81. Andhra Pradesh Nayee Brahmana  Samkshema Bhavan,  
 Co-operative Societies Federation Ltd.  Masab Tank,  
  Hyderabad -28 
 
 82. Andhra Pradesh Sagara  (Uppara)   Samkshema Bhavan,  
 Co-operative Societies Federation Ltd.  Masab Tank,  
  Hyderabad -28 
 
 83. Andhra Pradesh Valmiki/ Boya   Samkshema Bhavan,  
 Co-operative Societies Federation Ltd.  Masab Tank,  
  Hyderabad -28 
 
 
 67 
 (1)                                                       (2)                                                                        (3) 
 
 84. Andhra Pradesh Krishna Balija, Poosala   Samkshema Bhavan,  
 Co-operative Societies Federation Ltd.  Masab Tank,  
  Hyderabad -28 
 
 85. Andhra Pradesh Bhattraja   Samkshema Bhavan,  
 Co-operative Societies Federation Ltd.  Masab Tank,  
  Hyderabad -28 
 
 86. Andhra Pradesh Medara  Samkshema Bhavan,  
 Finance Corporation.  Masab Tank,  
  Hyderabad -28 
 
 87. Andhra Pradesh Kummari Salivahana   Samkshema Bhavan,  
 Co-operative Societies Federation Ltd.  Masab Tank,  
  Hyderabad -28 
 
 88. Andhra Pradesh  State  Vishwabrahmana   Samkshema Bhavan,  
 Co-operative Corporation Ltd. Masab Tank,  
  Hyderabad -28 
 
 89. Andhra Pradesh Taddy Tappers  Samkshema Bhavan,  
 Co-operative Societies Federation Ltd.  Masab Tank,  
  Hyderabad -28. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 68 
 THE TENTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 75)  
CONTINUANCE OF FACILITIES IN CERTAIN STATE INSTITUTIONS  
List of Training Institutions/Centres  
1. Andhra Pradesh State Co -operative Union, Hyderabad.  
2. Andhra Pradesh Study Circle for Backward Classes, Visakhapatnam.  
3. Environment Protection Training and Research Institute, Hyderabad.  
4. Andhra Pradesh Forest Academy, Ranga  Reddy District.  
5. Andhra Pradesh State Council of Science and Technology (APCOST), Hyderabad.  
6. Dr.MCR Human Resource Development Institute of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad.  
7. Centre for Good Gov ernance, Hyderabad.  
8. State Institute of Health and Family Welfare, Vengalrao Nagar, Hyderabad.  
9. State Board of Technical Education and Training, Hyderabad.  
10. Andhra Pradesh Police Academy, Hyderabad.  
11. Water and Land Management, Training and Resear ch Institute, Hyderabad.  
12. AMR Andhra Pradesh Academy of Rural Development, Hyderabad.  
13. Sriramananada Theertha Training and Research Institute.  
14. Andhra Pradesh Prohibition and Excise Academy.  
15. State Institute of Educational Technology, Hyderabad . 
16. State Council of Educational Research and Training, Hyderabad.  
17. Andhra Pradesh Study Circle, Hyderabad.  
18. Tribal Culture and Research Institute, Sankshema Bhavan, Masab Tank,  
 Hyderabad.  
19. Board of Intermediate Education, Hyderabad.  
20. Andhra  Pradesh State Seeds Certification Agency, Hyderabad.  
21. Andhra Pradesh Live Stock Development Agency, Hyderabad.  
22. Centre for Forest and Natural Resource Management Studies (CEFNARM),  
 Ranga  Reddy  District.  
23. Andhra Pradesh Press Academy, Hyderabad.  
24. AIDS Control Society, Hyderabad.  
25. Andhra Pradesh Medical and Aromatic Plants Board, Hyderabad.  
26. Andhra Pradesh Para Medical Board, Hyderabad.  
27. Andhra Pradesh State Council of Higher Education, Hyderabad.  
28. Forensic Science Laboratory, Hydera bad. 
29. State Level Police Recruitment Board.  
30. Society for Andhra Pradesh Network (SAPNET) , Hyderabad.  
31. Andhra Pradesh Engineering Research Labs, Hyderabad.  69 
 32. Andhra Pradesh Urdu Academy, Hyderabad.  
33. Andhra Pradesh Urban Services for the Poor,  Hyderabad.  
34. Mission for Elimination of Poverty in Municipal Areas (MEPMA), Hyderabad.  
35. Andhra Pradesh Rural Livelihoods Project (P.M.U) , Hyderabad.  
36. Water Conservation Mission.  
37. Society for Elimination of Rural Poverty, Hyderabad.  
38. Employment Generation and Marketing Mission, Hyderabad.  
39. Andhra Pradesh State Remote Sensing Applications Centre, Hyderabad.  
40. Andhra Pradesh Open School Society, Hyderabad.  
41. A.P.R.E.I. Society, Hyderabad.  
42. Andhra Pradesh Social Welfare Resident ial Educational Institutions Society  
 (A.P.S.W.R.E.I.) , Hyderabad.  
43. State Agriculture Management and Extention Training Institute (SAMETI)  
 Hyderabad.  
44. Soil Conservation Training Centre, Hyderabad.  
45. State Management Institute for Livestock Develo pment in Andhra Pradesh,  
Hyderabad (SMILDA), Hyderabad.  
46. State Animal Husbandry Training Centre, East Godavari.  
47. State Institute for Fisheries Technologies (SIFT), Kakinada.  
48. Mahatma Jyothiba Phule Andhra Pradesh Backward Classes Welfare Residenti al 
 Educational Institutions Society, Hyderabad.  
49. Andhra Pradesh Commission for Backward Classes, Hyderabad.  
50. Hindi Academy, Hyderabad.  
51. Telugu Academy, Hyderabad.  
52. Sanskrit Academy, Hyderabad.  
53. Oriental Manuscripts Library and Research Institute, Hyderabad.  
54. Andhra Pradesh State Archives and Research Institute, Hyderabad.  
55. Rajiv Gandhi University of Knowledge Technologies, Hyderabad.  
56. Jawaharlal Nehru Architecture and Fine Arts University, Hyderabad.  
57. Sri Padmavathi Mahila Un iversity, Tirupati.  
58. Dravidian University, Kuppam.  
59. Telugu University, Hyderabad.  
60. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Open University, Hyderabad.  
61. RVM (SSA) Authority, Hyderabad.  
62. Andhra Pradesh Government Text Book Press, Hyderabad.  
63. State Central Librar y, Hyderabad.  
64. Andhra Pradesh Pollution Control Board, Hyderabad.  70 
 65. Andhra Pradesh State Bio -Diversity Board, Hyderabad.  
66. Andhra Pradesh N ational Green Corps, Secunderabad . 
67. Directorate of Institute of Preventive Medicine, Hyderabad.  
68. Institute for Electronic Governance (IEG) AP Society for Knowledge Networks,  
 Hyderabad.  
69. National Institute of Urban Management (NIUM), Hyderabad.  
70. Andhra Pradesh State Wakf Board, Hyderabad.  
71. The Survey Commissioner of Wakfs, Hyderabad.  
72. Cent re for Educational Development of Minorities, Hyderabad.  
73. Dairatul Maarif, OU Hyderabad.  
74. Andhra Pradesh State Haj Committee, Hyderabad.  
75. Andhra Pradesh State Development Planning Society, Hyderabad.  
76. Extention Training Centre, Rajendranagar.  
77. Extention Training Centre, Hasanparthy.  
78. Extention Training Centre, Bapatla.  
79. Extention Training Centre, Samalkot.  
80. Extention Training Centre, Srikalahasthi.  
81. Rajiv Education and Employment Mission in Andhra Pradesh (REEMAP),  
 Hyderabad.  
82. Society for Rural Development Services, Hyderabad.  
83. Society for Social Audit, Accountability and Transparency, Hyderabad.  
84. Streenidhi Credit Cooperative Federation Ltd., Hyderabad.  
85. Andhra Pradesh S urvey Training Academy, Hyderabad . 
86. The Ambe dkar Research and Training Institute for Scheduled Castes, Hyderabad.  
87. Andhra Pradesh State Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes,  
 Hyderabad.  
88. Victoria Memorial Home (Residential School), Hyderabad.  
89. APTW Residential Education Inst itutions Society (Gurukulam), Hyderabad.  
90. DR. YSR Study Circle for Scheduled Tribes (PETC), Secunderabad.  
91. Andhra Pradesh Women's Commission, Secunderabad.  
92. Andhra Pradesh State Social Welfare Advisory Board, Hyderabad.  
93. State Commission for Pr otection of Child Rights, Secunderabad.  
94. The Training Centre for Teachers of Visually Handicapped, Secunderabad.  
95. Study Circle for Disabled Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad.  
96. APSRTC Employees THRIFT and Credit Cooperative Society Ltd., Hyderabad.  
97. Tru ck Operators Highway Amenities Society (TOHAS), Hyderabad.  
98. National Cadet Corps Directorate, Secunderabad.  71 
 99. Shilparamam Arts Crafts Cultural Society, Madhapur, Hyderabad.  
100. Dr. YSR National Institute of Tourism and Hospitality Management, Hyderabad.  
101. State Institute of Correctional Administration, Chanchalguda, Hyderabad.  
102. Andhra Pradesh Fire Services and Civil Defence Training Institute, Hyderabad.  
103. Sri Pragada Kotaiah Memorial Indian Institute of Handloom Technology  
 (SPKMIIHT ), Nellore.  
104. Telugu Chenetha Parishramika Shikshna Kendram, Ananthapur.  
105. Weavers Training Centre, Karimnagar (WTC), Karim Nagar.  
106. Powerloom Service Centre, Sircilla, Karimnagar.  
107. Khadi Gramodyoga Maha Vidyalaya, Hyderabad.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 72 
 THE ELEVENTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 85(7)(e)]  
Principles governing the functioning of the River Management Boards.  
1. The operation protocol notified by the Ministry of Water Resources with respect  to water resources 
arrived at  based on appropriate dependability criteria after the adjudication  by the Krishna Water Disputes 
Tribunal shall be binding on both the successor States.  
2. In the event of conflicting demand of water for irrigation and power, the requirement  of water for 
irrigation  shall take precedence.  
3. In the event of conflicting demand of water for irrigation and drinking water, the  requirement of 
water for drinking water purpose shall take precedence.  
4. The allocations made by the River Water Tribunals with regard to various  projects  on Godavari and 
Krishna Rivers or for the regions of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh,  in respect of assured water shall 
remain the same.  
5. Allocations, if any, to be made on excess flows by any Tribunal in future shall be  binding on both 
the State of Telangana and the successor State of Andhra Pradesh.  
6. While the successor State Governments shall be responsible for managing natural  calamities, the 
Boards shall advise the two State Governments on the management of disaster   or drought or fl ood in the 
rivers of Krishna and Godavari, particularly in reference to the  release of water for the management and 
mitigation of the natural calamities. The Boards  shall have the full authority to get their orders 
implemented by the two successor State  Governments promptly and effectively in respect of operation of 
the head works of the  dams, reservoirs or head works of canals and works appurtenant thereto including 
the hydel power projects, as notified by the Central Government, on Krishna and Godavari  Rivers.  
7. No new projects based on water resources arrived at based on appropriate  dependability criteria on 
Godavari or Krishna rivers can be taken up by the State of Telangana  or the State of Andhra Pradesh 
without obtaining sanction from the Apex Counc il on River  water resources. All such proposals shall be 
first appraised and technically cleared by the  respective Board, before sanction by the said Apex Council.  
8. Execution of ongoing projects and future new projects on Godavari and Krishna  rivers shal l be the 
responsibility of the State Government concerned where the project is  located.  
9. In case of non -implementation of the decision by either of the States, the defaulting  State shall bear 
the responsibility and shall face financial and other penaltie s imposed by  the Central Government.  
10. The following irrigation projects which are under construction shall be completed  as per the plan 
notified by the existing State of Andhra Pradesh and the water sharing  arrangement shall continue as 
such: — 
(i) Handr i Niva  
(ii) Telugu Ganga  
(iii) Galeru Nagiri  
(iv) Venegondu  
(v) Kalvakurthi  
(vi) Nettempadu.  
 
 
 
 
 73 
 THE TWELFTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 92)  
A. Coal  
1. Of the total equity of Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. (SCCL), 51% shall be with  the 
Government of Telangana and 49% with the Government of India.  
2. Existing coal linkages of SCCL shall continue without any change.  
3. New linkages shall be allotted to the successor States as per the New Coal  Distribution Policy by 
Government of India.  
4. End use plants  of the allocated coal blocks shall continue with coal from the block  to be supplied in 
proportion to their respective capacities.  
B. Oil and Gas  
1. Allocation of natural gas will continue to be done as per the policies and guidelines  issued by the 
Governm ent of India from time to time.  
2. The royalties payable on domestic onshore production of oil and gas shall accrue  to the State in 
which such production takes place.  
C. Power  
1. Units of APGENCO shall be divided based on geographical location of power  plants.  
2. Existing Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) with respective DISCOMS shall  continue for both 
on-going projects and projects under construction.  
3. The existing Andhra Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission (APERC) shall  function as a joint 
regulatory body for a period not exceeding six months within which time  separate SERCs will be formed 
in the successor States.  
4. The existing State Load Despatch Centre (SLDC) shall function for both successor  States for a 
period not exceeding two years w ithin which time separate SLDC shall be set up  for each successor State. 
During this period, the existing SLDC shall function under the  direct administration and control of the 
Southern RLDC at Bengaluru.  
5. Transmission lines of APTRANSCO of 132 KV and hi gher voltage cutting across  the successor 
States shall be deemed as Inter -State Transmission System (ISTS) lines. The  transmission lines falling 
within the territory of each successor State shall be transferred to  the respective State Transmission 
Utilitie s. The maintenance of ISTS lines shall also be  done by successor States in their respective 
jurisdictions.  
6. The power of the Central Generating Stations will be allotted in such ratio to the  State of Telangana 
and the State of Andhra Pradesh based on the  actual energy consumption  of the last 5 years of the relevant 
DISCOMS in the respective successor State.  
7. For a period of ten years, the successor State that has a deficit of electricity shall  have the first right 
of refusal for the purchase of surplus power from the other successor  State.  
8. The districts of Anantapur and Kurnool which fall within the jurisdiction of the AP  Central Power 
Distribution Company Ltd. will now be reassigned to the AP South Power  Distribution Company Ltd.   74 
 THE THIRTEENTH SCHE DULE  
(See section 93)  
Education  
1. The Government of India shall take steps to establish institutions of national  importance in the 12th 
and 13th Plan periods in the successor State of Andhra  Pradesh. This would include one IIT, one NIT, one 
IIM, one IISER, one Central  University, one Petroleum University, one Agricultural University and one 
IIIT. 
2. The Government of India shall establish one AIIMS -type Super -Specialty Hospitalcum -Teaching 
Institution in the successor State of Andhra Pradesh.  
3. The G overnment of India shall establish a Tribal University each in the State of  Andhra Pradesh 
and in the State of Telangana.  
4. A Horticulture University shall be established in the successor State of Telangana.  
5. The Government of India shall establish the National Institute of Disaster  Management in the 
successor State of Andhra Pradesh.  
Infrastructure  
 1. The Government of India shall develop a new major port at Duggirajupatnam in the  successor  State 
of Andhra Pradesh to be completed in phases with Phase I by  end-2018;  
 2. SAIL shall examine, within six months from the appointed day, the feasibility of  establishing an 
integrated steel plant in Khammam district of the successor State of  Telangana ; 
 3. SAIL shall, within six months from the appointed day, examine the feasibility of  establishing an 
integrated Steel Plant in YSR District of the successor State of  Andhra Pradesh;  
 4. IOC or HPCL shall, within six months from the appointed day, examine  the feasibility  of 
establishing a greenfield crude oil refinery and petrochemical complex in the  successor State of Andhra 
Pradesh and take an expeditious decision thereon;  
 5. The Government of India shall, within six months from the appointed day, exami ne the feasibility 
of establishing a Vizag -Chennai industrial corridor along the lines of  Delhi -Mumbai Industrial Corridor 
and take within such period an expeditious decision  thereon;  
 6. The Government of India shall, within six months from the appointed day, examine  the feasibility 
of expanding the existing Visakhapatnam, Vijayawada and Tirupati  airports to international standards and 
take an expeditious decision thereon;  
 7. NTPC shall establish a 4000 MW power facility in the successor State of Telangan a after 
establishing necessary coal linkages;  
 8. Indian Railways shall, within six months from the appointed day, examine establishing  a new 
railway zone in the successor State of Andhra Pradesh and take an expeditious  decision thereon;  
 9. NHAI shall take necessary steps to improve road connectivity in the backward  regions of the 
successor State of Telangana;  
 10. The Indian Railways shall, within six months from the appointed day, examine  the feasibility of 
establishing a Rail Coach Factory in the suc cessor State of  Telangana and improve rail connectivity in the 
State and take an expeditious  decision thereon;   75 
 11. The Central Government shall take measures to establish rapid rail and road  connectivity from the 
new capital of the successor State of Andhra Pradesh to  Hyderabad and other important cities of 
Telangana;  
12. The Government of India shall examine the feasibility of Metro Rail facility in  Vishakhapatnam 
and Vijayawada -Guntur -Tenali Metropolitan Urban Development  Authority within  a period of  one year 
from the appointed day and take an expeditious  decision thereon.  
--------------------------The Indian Institutes of Information Technology Act, 2014--------------------------
 
1 
 THE INDIAN INSTITUTES OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2014  
–––––––––––––––  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
––––––––––––––––  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTION S 
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration of certain institutions as institutions of national importance.  
3. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II 
THE INSTITUTES  
4. Incorporation of Institutes.  
5. Effect of incorporation of Institutes.  
6. Objects of Institute.  
7. Powers and functions of Institute.  
8. Institute to be open to all races, creeds and classes.  
9. Teaching at Institute.  
10. Institute to be a distinct legal entity not -for-profit.  
11. Visitor.  
 
CHAPTER III  
AUTHORITIES OF CENTRALLY FUNDED  INDIAN  INSTITUTE  OF INFORMATION  TECHNOLO GY 
12. Authorities of Institute.  
13. Board of Governors.  
14. Term of office of, vacancies among, and allowances payable to, members  of Board.  
15. Powers and functions of Board of Governors.  
16. Senate.  
17. Powers and functions of Senate.  
18. Finance Committee.  
19. Power and functions of Finance Committee.  
20. Building and Works Committee.  
21. Powers and functions of Building and Works Committee.  
22. Research  Council . 
23. Meetings.  
24. Director.  
25. Registrar.  
26. Other authorities and officers.  
27. Review of performance of Institute.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
28. Grants by Central Government.  
29. Fund of Institute.  
30. Accounts and audit.   
2 
 SECTIONS  
31. Pension and provident fund.  
32. Appointments.  
33. Statutes.  
34. Statutes how to be made.  
35. Ordinance s. 
36. Ordinances how to be made.  
37. Tribunal of Arbitration.  
38. Annual report of Director.  
39. Annual report of each Institute.  
 
CHAPTER V  
THE COUNCIL  
40. Council of Institutes.  
41. Term of office and allowances payable to members of  Council.  
42. Function and duties of Council.  
43. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Chapter.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
44. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc.  
45. Returns and information to be provided to Central Government.  
46. Power  of Central Government to issue directions.  
47. Institute to be public authority under Right to Information Act.  
48. Transitional provisions.  
49. Power to remove difficulties.  
50. Laying of rules and notification.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
   
3 
 THE INDIAN INSTITUTES OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2014  
ACT NO. 30 OF 2014 
[8th December,  2014.]  
An Act to declare certain institutions of information technology to be institutions of national importance, 
with a view to develop new knowledge in information technology and to provide manpower  of global 
standards for the information technology industry and to provide for certain other matters connected 
with such institutions or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Indian Institutes of Information 
Technology Act, 2014.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration of certain institutions as insti tutions of national importance .—Whereas the objects 
of the Institutes mentioned in the Schedule are such as to make them institutions of national importance, it 
is hereby declared that each such Institute is an inst itution of national importance.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Board ”, in relation to any Institute, means the Board of Governors referred to in                        
sub-section (1) of section 13;  
(b) “Chairperson ” means the Chairperson of the Board of Governors appointed under                       
sub-section (2) of section 13;  
(c) “Council ” means the Council established under sub -section (1) of section 40;  
(d) “Director ” means the Director of the Ins titute;  
(e) “existing Institute ” means the institute mentioned in column (3) of the Schedule;  
(f) “Institute ” means any of the institutions mentioned in column (5) of the Schedule;  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(h) “Schedule ” means the Schedule to this Act;  
(i) “Senate ”, in relation to any Institute, means the Senate thereof;  
(j) “Statutes ” and “Ordinances ”, in relation to any Institute, means the Statutes and Ordinances of 
the Institute made under this Act.  
CHAPTER II 
THE INSTITUTES  
4. Incorporation of Institutes .—(1) On and from the commencement of this Act, every existing 
Institute, shall be a body corporate by the same name as mentioned in column (5) of the Schedule.  
(2) Every existing Institute referred to in column (5) of the Schedule shall have perpetual succession 
and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of 
property, both movable and immovable, and to contract,  and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.  
  
                                                             
1. 5th  January, 2015,  vide Notification No. S.O. 41(E) , dated 5th January, 2015, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,           
sec. 3( ii).  
4 
 5. Effect of incorporation of Institutes .—On and from the commencement of this Act, — 
(a) any reference to a Society in any contract or other instrument shall be deemed as a reference 
to the corresponding Institute mentioned in column (5) of the Schedule;  
(b) all properties, movable and immovable, of or belonging to every existing Institute sh all vest in 
the corresponding Institute mentioned under column (5) of the Schedule;  
(c) all rights and debts and other liabilities of every existing Institute mentioned in column (3) of 
the Schedule shall be transferred to, and be the rights and liabilitie s of, the corresponding Institute 
mentioned in column (5) of the Schedule;  
(d) every person employed by every existing Institute mentioned in column (3) of the Schedule, 
immediately before such commencement shall hold his office or service in the corresponding Institute 
mentioned in column (5) of the Schedule, with the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon 
the same terms and conditions and with t he same rights and privileges as to pension, leave, gratuity, 
provident fund and other matters as he would have held the same if this Act had not been enacted and 
shall continue to do so unless and until his employment is terminated or until such tenure, 
remuneration and terms and conditions are duly altered by the Statutes:  
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee, his employment may 
be terminated by the Institute in accordance with the terms of the contract with the emplo yee or, if no 
provision is made therein in this behalf, on payment, to him by the Institute, of compensation 
equivalent to three months ’ remuneration in case of permanent employees and one month ’s 
remuneration in the case of other employees:  
Provided furth er that any reference, by whatever form of words, to the Director, Registrar and 
other officers of an existing Institute mentioned in column (3) of the Schedule, in any law for the time 
being in force, or in any instrument or other document, shall be const rued as a reference to the 
Director, Registrar and other officers of the corresponding Institute mentioned in column (5) of the 
Schedule;  
(e) every person pursuing, before the commencement of this Act, any academic or research 
course in every existing Inst itute mentioned in column (3) of the Schedule, shall be deemed to have 
migrated and registered with the corresponding Institute mentioned in column (5) of the Schedule, on 
such commencement at the same level of course in the Institute from which such perso n migrated;  
(f) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or 
against an existing Institute, mentioned in column (3) of the Schedule, immediately before the 
commencement of this Act shall be continued or institu ted by or against the corresponding Institute 
mentioned in column (5) of the Schedule.  
6. Objects of Institute .—Each Institute shall have the following objects, namely: — 
(a) to emerge amongst the foremost institutions in information technology and allied fields of 
knowledge;  
(b) to advance new knowledge and innovation in information technology and allied fields to 
empower the nation to the forefront in the global context;  
(c) to develop competent and capable youth imbued with the spirit of innovation and 
entrepreneurship with the social and environmental orientation to meet the knowledge needs of the 
country and provide global leadership in information technology and allied fi elds; 
(d)  to promote and provide transparency of highest order in matters of admission, appointments 
to various positions, academic evaluation, administration and finance.  
7. Powers and functions of Institute .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every Institute shall 
exercise the following powers and perform the following functions, namely: — 
(a) to provide instruction in such fields of knowledge concerning information technology and 
allied areas as such Inst itute may think fit, for the advancement of learning and dissemination of 
knowledge;   
5 
 (b) to lead, organise and conduct research and innovation in information technology and allied 
fields of knowledge in such manner as the Institute may think fit, including  in collaboration or in 
association with any other Institute, educational institution, research organisation or body corporate ; 
(c) to hold examinations and grant degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions or titles; 
and to confer honorary degrees;  
(d) to institute teaching, research or other academic positions, required by the Institute with such 
designations as it may deem fit, and to appoint persons on tenure, term or otherwise to such positions, 
other than the post of Director in accordance with the policy laid down by the Council;  
(e) to appoint persons working in any other Institute or educational institution or involved in 
research of significance in any industry as adjunct, guest or visiting faculty of the Institute on such 
terms and for such duration as the Institute may decide;  
(f) to create administrative and other posts and to make appointments thereto in accordance with 
the policy laid down by the Council;  
(g) to make provision for dissemination of knowledge emerging from research and for that 
purpose to enter into such arrangements, including consultancy and advisory services, with other 
institutions, industry, civil society or other organisations, as the Institute may deem necessary;  
(h) to create a website, highlight all information not restricted to those related to students, 
admission, fee, administrative structure, policies including recruitment rules, faculty and non -faculty 
posts, annual reports and financial details including statement of account of the Institute;  
(i) to determine, specify and receive payment of the charges, as the Institute may deem fit, from 
person, institution or body corporate for services, including training, consultancy and advisory 
services, provided by the Institute;  
(j) to deal with any property belonging to  or vested in, the Institute in such manner as the Institute 
may deem fit for advancing the objects of the Institute:  
Provided that where the land for the Institute has been provided free of cost by a State 
Government, such land may be disposed of only wit h the prior approval of such State Government;  
(k) to receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from the Government and to receive 
bequests, donations and transfers of movable or immovable properties from testators, donors or 
transferors, as the cas e may be;  
(l) to co -operate with educational or other institutions in any part of the world having objects 
wholly or partly similar to those of the Institute by exchange of teachers and scholars and generally in 
such manner as may be conducive to their com mon objects;  
(m) to establish and maintain such infrastructure as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to 
the attainment of the objects of the Institute;  
(n) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, prizes and medals;  
(o) to stri ve to meet the technological needs of the States and the Union territories by supporting 
technical educational institutions; and  
(p) to do all such things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment of all or 
any of the objects of the In stitute.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( j), an Institute shall not dispose of in any manner 
any immovable property, without the prior approval of the Visitor.  
8. Institute to be open to all races, creeds and classes .—(1) Every Institute shall be open to all 
persons irrespective of gender, caste, creed, disability, domicile, ethnicity, social or economic 
background.  
(2) No bequest, donation or transfer of any property shall be accepted by any Institute which in the  
opinion  of the Council involves conditions or obligations opposed to the spirit and object of this section.   
6 
 (3) Admissions to every programme of study in each Institute shall be based on merit assessed 
through transparent and reasonable criteria disclosed through  its prospectus, prior to the commencement 
of the process of admission by such Institute:  
Provided that every such Institute shall be a Central Educational Institution for the purposes of the 
Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act,  2006 (5 of 2007).  
9. Teaching at Institute .—All teaching at each of the Institute shall be conducted by or in the name 
of the Institute in accordance with the Statutes and Ordinances made in this behalf.  
10. Institute to be a distinct legal entity not -for-profit .—Each Institute shall be a not -for-profit 
legal entity and no part of the surplus, if any, in revenue of such Institute, after meeting all expenditure in 
regard to its operations under this Act, shall be invested for any purpose other than for the growth and 
development of such Institute or for conducting research therein.  
11. Visitor .—(1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of every Institute.  
(2) The Visitor may appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress of any Institute and 
to hold inquiries into the affairs thereof and to report thereon in such manner as the Visitor may direct.  
(3) Upon receipt of any such report, the Visitor may take such action and issue such directions as he 
considers necessary in respect of any of th e matters dealt with in the report and the Institute shall be 
bound to comply with such directions within a reasonable time.  
CHAPTER III  
AUTHORITIES OF CENTRALLY FUNDED  INDIAN  INSTITUTE  OF INFORMATION  TECHNOLO GY 
12. Authorities of Institute .—The following shall be the authorities of an Institute, namely: — 
(a) Board of Governors;  
(b) Senate;  
(c) Finance Committee;  
(d) Building and Works Committee;  
(e) Research Council;  
(f) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the Institute.  
13. Board of Governors .—(1) The Board of Governors of each Institute shall be the principal 
executive body of that Institute.  
(2) The Board of Governors of e ach Institute shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) a Chairperson, an eminent technologist or industrialist or educationist to be nominated by the  
Visitor from a panel of three names recommended by the Central Government;  
(b) Secretary incharge of Information Technology or Higher Education in the State in which the 
Institute is located, ex officio;  
(c) one representative of the Department of Higher Education, Government of India dealing with 
Indian Institute of Information Tec hnology, ex officio ; 
(d) one representative of the Ministry of Communication and Information Technology, 
Government of India, ex officio ; 
(e) Director of Indian Institute of Technology to be nominated by the Central Government;  
(f) Director of Indian Insti tute of Management to be nominated by the Central Government;  
(g) four persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of information 
technology or engineering or science or allied areas to be nominated by the Council;  
(h) two Professor s of the Institute nominated by the Senate;   
7 
 (i) Director of the Institute, ex officio;  
(j) the Registrar, ex officio  Secretary.  
14. Term of office of, vacancies among, and allowanc es payable to, members of Board .—(1) 
Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of office of member of the Board, other than the             
ex officio  member, shall be three years from the date of nomination.  
(2) The term of office of an ex officio  member shall continue so long as  he holds the office by virtue 
of which he is a member.  
(3) The term of office of a member nominated under clause ( h) of sub -section ( 2) of section 13 shall 
be two years from the date of nomination.  
(4) A member of the Board, other than an ex officio  membe r, who fails to attend three consecutive 
meetings of the Board, shall cease to a member of the Board.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, an outgoing member shall, unless the Council 
directs, continue in office until another person is n ominated as a member in his place.  
(6) Members of the Board shall be entitled to such allowances, as may be specified in the Statutes, for 
attending meetings of the Board or as may be convened by the Institute.  
15. Powers and functions of Board of Governor s.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the 
Board of every Institute shall be responsible for the general superintendence, direction and control of the 
affairs of the Institute and shall have the power to frame, amend, modify or rescind the Statutes and 
Ordinances governing the affairs of the Institute to achieve the objects specified in section 6.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section (1), the Board shall have the following powers, 
namely: — 
(a) to take decisions on questions of polic y relating to the administration and working of the 
Institute;  
(b) to establish departments, faculties or schools of studies and initiate programmes or courses of 
study at the Institute;  
(c) to examine and approve the annual budget estimates of such Instit ute; 
(d) to examine and approve the plan for development of such Institute and to identify sources of 
finance for implementation of the plan;  
(e) to create teaching and other academic posts, to determine, by Statutes, the number and 
emoluments of such posts and to define the duties and conditions of service of teachers and other 
academic staff:  
Provided that the Board shall not take action otherwise than on consideration of the 
recommendations of the Senate;  
(f) to provide  by Statutes, the qualification s, criteria and processes for appointment to teaching 
and other posts in such Institute;  
(g) to fix fees, by the Statutes and other charges to be demanded for pursuit of studies in the 
Institute;  
(h) to make Statutes governing the administration, managemen t and operations of such Institute; 
and 
(i) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed 
upon it by this Act or Statutes.  
(3) The Board shall have the power to appoint such committees, as it considers necessary  for the 
exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties under this Act.  
(4) The Board shall conduct an annual review of the performance of the Director with specific 
reference to his leadership in the context of the achievement of the objects of the Institute.   
8 
 (5) Where in the opinion of the Director or the Chairperson, the situation is so emergent that an 
immediate decision needs to be taken in the interest of the Institute, the Chairperson, in consultation with 
the Director may issue such orders  as may be necessary, recording the grounds for his opinion:  
Provided that such orders shall be submitted for ratification of the Board in the next meeting.  
16. Senate .—(1) The Senate of each Institute shall consist of the following persons, namely: — 
(a) Director of the Institute, ex officio  Chairperson;  
(b) Deputy Director, ex officio;  
(c) Deans , ex officio;  
(d) Heads of the Departments of the Institute, ex officio;  
(e) all Professors other than the Deans or Heads of the Departments;  
(f) three persons from amongst educationists of repute or persons from another field related to the 
activities of the Institute who are not in service of the Institute, nominated by the Board of Governors;  
(g) three persons who are not members of teaching staff co -opted by the Senate for their 
specialised knowledge;  
(h) Registrar of the Institute, ex officio  Secretary.  
(2) The term of office of members other than ex officio  member shall be two years from the date of 
nomination.  
(3) The term of office of an ex officio  member shall continue so long as he holds the office by virtue 
of which he is a member.  
17. Powers and functions of Senate .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Senate shall be 
the principal academic body of the Institute and shall have the power to enact, amend, modify 
Ordinances, governing academic matters and the affairs and well -being of students in the Institute.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section (1), the Senate shall have the following powers, 
namely: — 
(a) to specify the criteria and process for admission to courses or programmes of study offered by 
the Institute;  
(b) to recommend to the Board c reation of teaching and other academic posts, determination of 
the number and emoluments of such posts and defining the duties and conditions of service of 
teachers and other academic posts;  
(c) to recommend to the Board about commencement of new programme s or courses of study;  
(d) to specify the broad academic content of programmes and courses of study and undertake 
modifications therein;  
(e) to specify the academic calendar and approve grant of degrees, diplomas and other academic 
distinctions or titles;  
(f) to appoint examiners, moderators, tabulators and such other personnel for different 
examinations;  
(g) to recognise diplomas and degrees or Universities and other Institutes and to determine 
equivalence with the diplomas and degrees of the Institute;  
(h) to suggest measures for departmental co -ordination;  
(i) to make major recommendations to the Board of Governors on — 
(a) measures for improvement of standard of teaching, training and research;  
(b) institution of chairs, fellowships, scholarships, student ships, free -ships, medals and prizes 
and other related matters;   
9 
 (c) establishment or abolition of departments or centres; and  
(d) bye-laws covering the academic functioning of the institute, discipline, residence, 
admissions, examinations, award of fellows hips and studentships, free -ships concessions, 
attendance and other related matters;  
(j) to appoint sub -committees to advise on such specific matters as may be referred to by the 
Board of Governors or by itself;  
(k) to consider the recommendations of the s ub-committees and to take such action including 
making of recommendations to the Board of Governors as may be required;  
(l) to take periodical review of the activities of the Departments or Centres and to take appropriate 
action including making of recommendations to the Board of Governors with a view to maintain and 
improve the standards of instructions, in the institutions; and  
(m) to exercise such other powers and discharge such other functions as may be assigned to it, by 
Statutes or otherwise, b y the Board.  
18. Finance Committee .—(1) The Finance Committee of each Institute shall consist of the following 
persons, namely: — 
(a) the Chairperson, Board of Governors , ex officio , who shall be the Chairperson of the 
Committee;  
(b) one representative of the Government of India, Ministry of Human Resource Development, 
Department of Higher Education handling the matters relating to Indian Institute of Information 
Technology, ex officio ; 
(c) one representative of the Government of India , Ministry of Human Resource Development, 
Department of Higher Education handling the matters relating to finance, ex officio ; 
(d) two persons nominated by the Board;  
(e) the Director, ex officio;  
(f) the Officer incharge of Finance and Accounts of the Institute , ex officio Secretary.  
(2) The members of the Finance Committee other than ex officio  members shall hold office for a term 
of three years.  
19. Power s and functions of Finance Committee .—The Finance Committee shall examine the 
accounts, scrutinise  proposals for expenditure and financial estimates of the Institute and thereafter submit 
it to the Board of Governors together with its comments for approval.  
20. Building and Works Committee .—The Building and Works Committee of each Institute shall 
consist of the following persons, namely: — 
(a) the Director, ex officio,  who shall be the Chairperson of the Committee;  
(b) one person nominated by Indian Institute of Technology located in the State in which the 
Institute is  situated;  
(c) one person nomin ated by the Board from amongst its members;  
(d) Dean, Planning and Development;  
(e) a civil engineer not below the rank of superintending engineer in the Government or 
Government Agency nominated by the Board;  
(f) an electrical engineer not below the rank of superintending engineer in the Government or 
Government Agency nominated by the Board;  
(g) the officer incharge of Estate of the Institute , ex officio  Secretary.  
  
10 
 21. Powers and functions of Building and Works Committee .—The Building and Works 
Committee  shall discharge the following powers and functions, namely: — 
(a) it shall be the responsibility of the Committee for construction of all major capital works after 
securing from the Board the necessary administrative approval and financial sanction;  
(b) it shall have the power to give the necessary administrative approval and financial sanction for 
all construction work and work pertaining to maintenance and repairs, within the grant place at the 
disposal of the Institute for the purpose;  
(c) it shall cause  to be prepared estimates of cost of building and other capital work, minor works, 
repair, maintenance and the like;  
(d) it shall be responsible for making technical scrutiny of each work as may be considered 
necessary by it;  
(e) it shall be responsible for enlistment of suitable contractors and acceptance of tenders and 
shall have the power to give direction for departmental works where necessary.  
22. Research  Council .—(1) Each Institute shall establish a Research Council comprising of the 
Director and such other members as may be specified, by Statutes, by the Board.  
(2) The Research Council of each Institute shall — 
(a) interface with research funding organisations, indust ry and civil society to identify potential 
areas for research;  
(b) to organise and promote research in such Institute or in collaboration with any institution of 
higher learning or research laboratories;  
(c) assist teachers in obtaining funding from extern al sources for research projects prepared by 
them;  
(d) provide, out of the funds placed at its disposal by the Board, research resources and grant 
assistance for research projects proposed to be undertaken by teachers in such Institute;  
(e) provide for incubation of technology applications emerging from research and to protect and 
utilise the intellectual property obtained from research in the Institutes;  
(f) make provision for research and advisory services and for that purpose enter into such 
arrangeme nts with other institutions, industry, civil society or other organisations and enable the fruits 
of research to be disseminated to industry and society through such arrangements;  
(g) exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be assig ned to it by Statutes.  
23. Meetings .—(1) The Chairperson shall ordinarily preside over the meetings of the Board, Finance 
Committee and at the convocations of the Institute.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Chairperson to ensure that the decisions taken by the Board are 
implemented.  
(3) The Chairperson shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be 
assigned to him by this Act or the Statutes.  
24. Director .—(1) The Director of a Institute shall be appointed by the Central Government from a 
panel of names recommended in order of merit by a search -cum-selection committee with prior approval 
of the Visitor.  
(2) The search -cum-selection committee shall consist of the following, namely: — 
(a) an eminent person to be nominated by the Minister in charge of Human Resource 
Development in the Government of India as Chairperson of the Committee;  
(b) the Chairperson, Boar d of Governors of the concerned Indian Institutes of Information 
Technology –Member, ex officio ; 
(c) Secretary incharge of Higher Education in the Government of India –Member, ex officio ;  
11 
 (d) Director of a 1[Indian Institute of Technology]  to be nominated by  Minister  incharge of 
Human Resource Development –Member, ex officio;  
(e) a person of eminence in the field of information technology to be nominated by Minister 
incharge of Human Resource Development;  
(f) Head of Bureau, Ministry of Human Resource Development dealing with Indian Institutes of 
Information Technology –non-member Secretary, ex officio.  
(3) The Director shall be appointed on such terms and conditions of service as may be provided by 
the Statutes.  
(4) The Director shall be the principal a cademic and executive officer of the Institute and shall be 
responsible for the implementation of the decisions of the Board and Senate and day -to-day 
administration of the Institute.  
(5) The Director shall exercise such other powers and perform such other  duties as may be assigned to 
him by this Act or the Statutes or delegated by the Board or the Senate or the Ordinances.  
(6) The Director shall submit annual reports and audited accounts to the Board.  
(7) The Director may during his absence from the headqu arters, authorise the Deputy Director or one 
of the Deans or the senior most Professor present, to sanction advances for travelling allowances, 
conti ngencies and medical treatment of the staff and sign and countersign bills on his behalf and authorise 
to the Deputy Director or one of the Dean or the senior most Professor present, by him in writing.  
25. Registrar .—(1) The Registrar of every Institute shall be appointed on such terms and conditions 
as may be laid down by the Statutes and shall be the custodi an of records, the common seal, the funds of 
the Institute and such other property of the Institute as the Board shall commit to his charge.  
(2) The Registrar shall act as the Secretary of the Board, Senate and such committees as may be 
prescribed by the S tatutes.  
(3) The Registrar shall be responsible to the Director for the proper discharge of his functions.  
(4) The Registrar shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be assigned 
to him by this Act or the Statutes or by the Director.  
26. Other authorities and officers .—(1) The Board may, by Statutes, declare such other posts as 
authorities of the Institute and specify the duties and function of each such authority.  
(2) The Board may constitute such authorities as it may deem fit for proper management of affairs of 
the Institute.  
27. Review of performance of Institute .—(1) Each In stitute shall, within five years from the 
establishment and incorporation of Institute under this Act and thereafter at the expiration of every fifth 
year, constitute, with the prior approval of the Central Government, a Committee to evaluate and review 
the performance of the Institute in achievement of its objects in the said period.  
(2) The Committee under sub -section (1) shall consist of members of acknowledged repute in 
academia or industry, drawn from such fields of knowledge as may have relevance to t eaching, learning 
and research in such Institute.  
(3) The Committee shall assess the performance of Institute and make recommendations  on— 
(a) the extent of fulfilment of the objects of the Institute referred to in section 6, as demonstrated 
by the state of teaching, learning and research and its contribution to society;  
(b) the promotion of transformational research and its impact on industry a nd society;  
(c) the advancement of fundamental research beyond the current frontiers of knowledge;  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2017, s. 2 , for “Indian Institutes of Information Technology ” (w.e.f. 7-9-2017 ).  
12 
 (d) the establishment of the Institute as amongst the global leaders in the area of information 
technology;  
(e) such other matters as the Board may specify.  
(4) The Board shall consider the recommendations referred to in sub -section (3) and take such action 
on it as it may deem fit:  
Provided that the recommendations of the Committee along with an explanatory memorandum on the 
action taken or proposed to be taken, specifying the reasons thereof, shall be submitted to the Central 
Government.  
CHAPTER IV  
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
28. Grants by Central Government .—(1) For the purposes of enabling the Institutes to discharge 
their functions efficiently under this Act, the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to each Institute in every financ ial year such sums of money in such 
manner as it may think fit.  
(2) The Central Government shall provide to each Institute, grants of such sums of money as are 
required to meet the expenditure on scholarships or fellowships instituted by it, including scho larships or 
fellowships for students from socially and educationally backward classes of citizens enrolled in such 
Institute.  
29. Fund of Institute .—(1) Every Institute shall maintain a fund to which shall be credited — 
(a) all monies provided by the Central Government or State Government, as the case may be;  
(b) all fees and other charges received by the Institute from students;  
(c) all monies received by the Institute by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, beque sts 
or transfers;  
(d) all monies received by the Institute from utilisation of intellectual property arising from 
research conducted or provision of advisory or consultancy services by it; and  
(e) all monies received by the Institute in any other manner or  from any other source.  
(2) The fund of every Institute shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of the Institute, 
including expenses incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its duties under this Act, 
furtherance of research in the Ins titute or in collaboration with other educational institutions or industry 
and for capital investment aimed at the growth and development of the Institute.  
30. Accounts and audit .—(1) Every Institute shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare annual statement of  accounts including the balance -sheet in such form and accounting 
standard as may be specified by notification, by the Central Government in consultat ion with the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) Where the statement of income and expenditure and the balance sheet of the Institute do not 
comply with the accounting standards, the Institute shall disclose in its statement of income and 
expendi ture and balance -sheet, the following, namely: — 
(a) the deviation from the accounting standards;  
(b) the reasons for such deviation; and  
(c) the financial effect, if any, arising out due to such deviation.  
(3) The accounts of every Institute shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
and any expenditure incurred by audit team in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Institute 
to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.   
13 
 (4) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of any Institute shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India has in connection with the 
audit of the Government accounts and, in particular , shall have the rights to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the offices of the 
Institute.  
(5) The accounts of every Institute as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or 
any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Gove rnment shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament in accordance with such procedure as may be laid down by the Central Government.  
31. Pension and provident fund .—(1) Every Institute may constitute for the benefit of its employees 
such provident or pension fund or provide such insurance scheme as it may deem fit in such manner and 
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Where such provident fund or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central Government  may 
declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925), shall apply to such fund, as if it 
were a Government Provident Fund.  
32. Appointments .—All appointments of the staff of every Institute, except that of the Director, shall 
be m ade in accordance with the procedur e laid down in the Statutes, by — 
(a) the Board, if the appointment is made on the academic staff in the post of 1[Assistant 
Professor or above]  or if the appointment is made on the non -academic staff in every cadre the 
maximum of the pay scale for which exceeds prevalent grade pay scale for Group A Officers;  
(b) the Director, in any other case.  
33. Statutes .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely: — 
(a) the conferment of honorary degree;  
(b) the formation of departments of teaching;  
(c) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the Institute and for admission to the 
examinations of degrees and diplomas of the Institute;  
(d) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes;  
(e) the terms of office and the method of appointment of officers of the Institute;  
(f) the qualifications of teachers of the Institute;  
(g) the classification, the method of appointment and the de termination of the terms  and 
conditions of service of teachers and other staff of the Institute;  
(h) the constitution of pension, insurance and provident funds for the benefit of the officers, 
teachers and other staff of the Institute;  
(i) the constitution, powers and duties of the authorities of the Institute;  
(j) the establishment and maintenance of halls and hostels;  
(k) the conditions of residence of students of the Institute and the levying of fees for residence in 
the halls and hostels and  of other charges;  
(l) the allowances to be paid to the Chairperson and members of the Board;  
(m) the authentication of the orders and decisions of the Board; and  
(n) the meetings of the Board, the Senate, or any Committee, the quorum at such meetings and the 
procedure to be followed in the conduct of their business.  
                                                             
1. Subs. by  Act 25 of 2017, s . 3, “Assistant Professor ” (w.e.f. 7-9-2017 ).  
14 
 34. Statutes how to be made .—(1) The first Statutes of each Institute shall be made by the Board 
with the prior approval of the Visitor and a copy of the same shall be laid as soon as may be before each 
House of Parliament.  
(2) The Board may, from time to time, make new or additional Sta tutes or may amend or repeal the 
Statutes in the manner provided in this section.  
(3) Every new Statutes or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of Statutes shall require 
the prior approval of the Visitor who may grant assent or withhold ass ent or remit it to the Board for 
consideration.  
(4) New Statutes or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless it 
has been assented to by the Visitor:  
Provided that the Central Government with the prior approval of the Visitor may make or amend the 
Statutes for the Institute, if the same is required for uniformity, and a copy of the same shall be laid as 
soon as may be before each House of the Parliament.  
35. Ordinances .—Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances of every 
Institute may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of the students to the Institute;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees and diplomas of the Institute;  
(c) the co nditions under which students shall be admitted to the degree or diploma courses and to 
the examinations of the Institute, and shall be eligible for degrees and diplomas;  
(d) the conditions of award of the fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and  prizes;  
(e) the conditions and mode of appointment and duties of examining bodies, examiners and 
moderators;  
(f) the conduct of examinations;  
(g) the maintenance of discipline among the students of the Institute; and  
(h) any other matter which by this Act  or the Statutes is to be or may be provided for by the 
Ordinances.  
36. Ordinances  how to be made .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, Ordinances shall 
be made by the Senate.  
(2) All Ordinances made by the Senate shall have effect from such date as it may direct, but every 
Ordinance so made shall be submitted, as soon as may be, to the Board and shall be considered by the 
Board at its next meeting.  
(3) The Board shall have power b y resolution to modify or cancel any such Ordinance and such 
Ordinance shall from the date of such resolution stand modified accordingly or cancelled, as the case may 
be. 
37. Tribunal of Arbitration .—(1) (a) Any dispute arising out of a contract between a Institute and 
any of its employees shall, at the request of the employee concerned or at the instance of the Institute, be 
referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by the Institute, one member 
nominated by the employee, and an umpire appointed by the Visitor.  
(b) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final and shall not be questioned in any court.  
(c) No suit or proceeding shall lie in any court in respect of any matter, which is required by                
sub-section (1) to be referred to the Tribunal of Arbitration.  
(d) The Tribunal of Arbitration shall have power to regulate its own procedure:  
Provided that the Tribunal shall have regard to the principles of natural justice while making such 
procedure.   
15 
 (e) Nothing in an y law for the time being in force relating to arbitration shall apply to arbitrations 
under this section.  
(2) Any student or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed from the rolls of the 
Institute by the orders or resolution of the Directo r of the Institute and who has been debarred from the 
appearing at the examinations of the Institute for more than one year, may within ten days of the date of 
receipt of such resolution by him, appeal to the Board of Governors who may confirm, modify or r everse 
the decision of the Director.  
(3) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the Institute against a student shall, at 
the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of sub -section (1) 
shall, as far as may be, apply to a reference made under this sub -section.  
(4) Every employee or student of the Institute, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, have a 
right to appeal within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes, to the Board  of Governors against 
the decision of any officer or authority of the Institute as the case may be and thereupon the Board of 
Governors may confirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed against.  
38. Annual report of Director .—(1) There shall be attached to every statement of accounts laid 
before the Board of each Institute, a report by its Director, with respect to — 
(a) the state of affairs of such Institute;  
(b) the amounts, if any, which it proposes to carry to any surplus reserves in its balance sheet;  
(c) the extent to which understatement or overstatement of any surplus of income over 
expenditure or any shortfall of expenditure over income has been indicated in the auditor ’s report and 
the reasons for such understatement or overstatement;  
(d) the productivity of research projects undertaken by the Institute measured in accordance with 
such norms as may be specified by any statutory regulatory authority;  
(e) appointments of the officers and teachers of the Institute;  
(f) benchmark and internal standards set by the Institute, including the nature of innovations in 
teaching, research and application of knowledge.  
(2) The Director shall also be bound to give the complete information and explanations in its report 
aforesaid on e very reservation, qualification or adverse remark contained in the auditors ’ report.  
39. Annual report of each Institute .—(1) The annual report of each Institute shall be prepared under 
the direction of the Board, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the Institute 
towards the fulfilment of its objects and an outcome based assessment of the research being undertaken in 
such Institute, and be submitted to the Board on or before such date as may be specified and the Board 
shall consider  the report in its annual meeting.  
(2) The annual report on its approval by the Board shall be published on the website of the Institute.  
(3) The annual report of each Institute shall be submitted to the Central Government who shall, as 
soon as may be, cau se the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.  
CHAPTER V  
THE COUNCIL  
40. Council of Institutes .—(1) In order that there may be better coordination between the Institutes, 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish, with effect from such date 
as may be specified in the notification, there shall be established for all the Institutes specified in column 
(5) of the Schedule, a central body to be called the Council.  
(2) The Council shall consist of the following, namely: — 
(i) the Minister of the Central Government in charge of technical education, who shall be the 
Chairperson of the Council, ex officio;   
16 
 (ii) two members of Parliament of India (one member to be nominated by Speaker of Lok Sabha 
and one member to be nominated by Chairperson of Rajya Sabha), ex officio ; 
(iii) Secretary, Government of India, Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department of 
Higher Education;  
(iv) the Chairpersons of each of the Institutes, ex officio;  
(v) the Directors of each of the Institutes, ex officio;  
(vi) the Director -General, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, ex officio;  
(vii) three persons to be nominated by the Central Govern ment, one  each to represent the Ministry 
concerned with Finance, Science and Technology and Information Technology;  
(viii) three persons to be nominated by Visitor, who shall be persons having special knowledge or 
practical experience in respect of industry, academia, engineering, alumni and social sciences to be 
nominated by the Council from a panel comprised of two names recommended by each Institute;  
(ix) one representative of University Grants Commission;  
(x)  one representative of All India Coun cil of Technical Education; and  
(xi) Chairperson, Central Board of Secondary Education.  
(3) An officer of the Department of Higher Education, Government of India, concerned with technical 
education shall be nominated by that Government to act as the Secretary of the Council.  
(4) The Council may, at its discretion, constitute a Standing Committee of the Indian Institute of 
Information Technology Council to assist the Council in discharge of its duties and responsibilities.  
(5) The expenditure on the Co uncil shall be met by the Central Government.  
41. Term of office and allowances payable to members of Council .—(1) Save as otherwise 
provided in this section, the term of office of a member of the Council, other than an ex officio  member, 
shall be for a period of three years from the date of nomination.  
(2) The term of office of an ex officio  member shall continue so long as he holds the office by virtue 
of which he is a member.  
(3)  The term of office of a member elected under cla use ( ii) of sub -section ( 2) of section 40 shall 
expire as soon as he ceases to be a member of the House which elected him.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, an outgoing member shall, unless the Council 
directs, continue in office unti l another person is nominated as a member in his place.  
(5) Members of the Council shall be entitled to travelling and such other allowances, as may be 
prescribed, for attending meetings of the Council or its Committees thereof.  
42. Function s and duties of  Council .—(1) The Council shall work to coordinate the activities of all 
the Institutes.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section (1), the Council shall perform the following 
functions, namely: — 
(a) to advise on matters relating to the duration of the courses, the degrees and other academic 
distinctions to be conferred by the Institutes, admission standards and other academic matters;  
(b) to lay down policy regarding cadres, methods of recruitment an d conditions of service of 
employees, institution of scholarships and free -ships, levying of fees and other matters of common 
interest;  
(c) to examine the development plans of each Institute and to approve such of them as are 
considered necessary and also to indicate broadly the financial implications of such approved plans;  
(d) to examine the annual budget estimates of each Institute and to recommend to the Central 
Government the allocation of funds for that purpose;   
17 
 (e) to recommend to the Central Government, the institution of scholarships including research 
and for the benefit of students belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and Other 
Backward Classes of citizens;  
(f) to recommend to the Central Government, proposals for establi shment of new Institutes of 
Information Technology;  
(g) to advise the Visitor, if so required, in respect of any function to be performed by him under 
this Act; and  
(h) to perform such other functions as may be referred to it by the Central Government:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall derogate the powers and functions vested by law in the 
Board or Senate or other authorities of each Institute.  
(3) The Chairperson of the Council shall ordinarily preside at the meetings of the Council and in his  
or her absence, any other member, chosen by the Members present from amongst themselves at the 
meeting, shall preside at the meeting.  
(4) The Council shall meet once in every year and follow such procedure in its meetings as may be 
prescribed.  
43. Power t o make rules in respect of matters in this Chapter .—(1) The Central Government may, 
after previous publication, by notification, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the travelling and other allowances payable to members of the Council under sub -section (5) 
of secti on 41;  
(b) the procedure to be followed in the meetings of the Council under sub -section (4) of            
section 42.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
44. Acts and proceedings not to b e invalidated by vacancies, etc .—No act of the Council, or any 
Institute, Board or Senate or any other body set -up under this Act or the Statutes, shall be invalid merely 
by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in or defect in the constitution thereof;  
(b) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the case;  
(c) any defect in the selection, nomination or appointment of a person acting as a member thereof.  
45. Returns and information to be provided to Central Government .—Every Institute shall 
furnish to the Central Government s uch returns or other information with respect to its policies or 
activities as the Central Government may, for the purpose of reporting to Parliament or for the making of 
policy, from time to time require.  
46. Power of Central Government to issue direction s.—The Institute shall carry out such directions 
as may be issued to it from time to time by the Central Government for the efficient administration of this 
Act. 
47. Institute to be public authority under Right to Information Act .—The provisions of the Right 
to Information Act, 2005 (22 of 2005) shall apply to each Institute,  defined in clause (h) of section 2 of 
the Right to Information Act, 2005.  
48. Transitional provisions .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act — 
(a) the Board of Governors of an Institute functioning as such immediately before the 
commencement of this Act shall continue to so function until a new Board is constituted for that  
18 
 Institute under this Act, but on the constitution of a new Board under this A ct, the members of the 
Board holding office before the commencement of this Act shall cease to hold office;  
(b) every Senate constituted in relation to every Institute before the commencement of this Act 
shall be deemed to be the Senate constituted under t his Act until a Senate is constituted under this Act 
for the Institute, but on the constitution of the new Senate under this Act, the members of the Senate 
holding office before the commencement of this Act shall cease to hold office;  
(c) the Statutes, Ord inances, rules, regulations and bye -laws of each existing Institute as in force, 
immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall continue to apply to the corresponding 
institute in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act until the first Statutes and 
the Ordinances are made under this Act;  
(d) any student who joined classes of the existing Institute on or after the academic year                 
2007 -2008 or completed the course on or after the academic year 2010 -2011 shall for the purpose of 
clause (c) of sub -section (1) of section 7, be deemed to have pursued a course of study in the existing 
Institute located at Kancheepuram only if such student has not already been awarded degree or 
diploma for the same course of study.  
(2) The Central Government may, without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section (1), if it 
considers necessary and expedient to do so, by notification, take such measures which may be necessary 
for the transfer of the existing Institute mentio ned in column (3) of the Schedule to the corresponding 
Institute mentioned under column (5) of the Schedule.  
49. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act the Central Government, may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be, after it is made, be  laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
50. Laying of rules and notification .—Every rule made and every notification issued by the Central 
Government under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House 
of Parliamen t, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the  session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or notification or both Houses agree that the rule or notification should not be made or issued, 
the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the  
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under  that rule or notification.    
19 
 THE  SCHEDULE  
[See section  4(1)] 
 
Sl. 
No. Name of the 
State  Name of the existing Institute  Location  Name of the Institute 
under this Act  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1. Uttar Pradesh  Indian Institute of 
Information Technology, 
Allahabad  Allahabad  Indian Institute of 
Information 
Technology, 
Allahabad . 
2. Madhya Pradesh  Indian Institute of 
Information Technology, 
Gwalior  Gwalior  Atal Bihari Vajpayee 
Indian Institute of 
Information 
Technology and 
Management, 
Gwalior.  
3. Madhya Pradesh  Indian Institute of 
Information Technology, 
Design and Manufacturing  Jabalpur  Pandit Dwarka Prasad 
Mishra Indian Institute 
of Information 
Technology, Design 
and Manufacturing, 
Jabalpur.  
4. 
 
 
 
1[5. Tamil Nadu  
 
 
 
Andhra  Pradesh  
 Indian Institute of 
Information Technology, 
Design and Manufacturing  
 
 
Indian Institute of 
Information Technology, 
Design and Manufacturing  
 
 
 Kancheepuram  
 
 
 
Kurnool  Indian Institute of 
Information 
Technology, Design 
and Manufacturing, 
Kancheepuram.  
Indian Institute of 
Information 
Technology, Design 
and Manufacturing, 
Kurnool.] . 
 
 
 
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2017, s.  4 (w.e.f. 7-9-2017 ). 
--------------------------The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013--------------------------
   
1 
  
THE LOKPAL AND LOKAYUKTAS ACT, 2013  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
PART I  
PRELIMINARY   
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement . 
 
PART II  
LOKPAL FOR THE  UNION  
CHAPTER I  
DEFINITIONS  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT  OF LOKPAL  
3. Establishment of Lokpal . 
4. Appointment of Chairperson and Members on recommendations of Selection Committee.  
5. Filling of vacancies of Chairperson or Members.  
6. Term of office of Chairperson and Members.  
7. Salary, allowances and other conditions of serv ice of Chairperson and Members.  
8. Restriction on employment by Chairperson and Members after ceasing to hold office.  
9. Member to act as Chairperson or to discharge his functions in certain circumstances.  
10. Secretary, other officers and staff of Lokpal.  
 
CHAPTER III 
INQUIRY  WING  
11. Inquiry Wing.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
PROSECUTION  WING  
12. Prosecution Wing .  
 
CHAPTER V  
EXPENSES OF LOKPAL TO BE CHARGED ON CONSOLIDATED  FUND  OF INDIA  
13. Expenses of Lokpal to be charged on Consolidated Fund of India . 
 
CHAPTER VI  
JURISDICTION IN RESPECT  OF INQUIRY  
14. Jurisdiction of Lokpal to include Prime Minister, Ministers, members of Parliament, Groups A, B, 
C and D officers and officials of Central Government.  
15. Matters pending before any court or committee or authority for inquiry not to be affected . 
16. Constitution of benches of Lokpal .    
2 
 SECTIONS  
17. Distribution of business amongst benches.  
18. Power of Chairperson to transfer cases.  
19. Decision to be by majority.  
CHAPTER VII  
PROCEDURE IN RESPECT OF PRELIMINARY INQUIRY AND INVESTIGATION  
20. Provisions relating to complaints and preliminary inquiry and investigation . 
21. Persons likely to be prejudicially affected to be heard.  
22. Lokpal may require any public servant or any other person to furnish information, etc.  
23. Power of Lokpal to grant sanction for initiating prosecuti on. 
24. Action on investigation against public servant being Prime Minister, Ministers or members of 
Parliament.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
POWERS OF LOKPAL  
25. Supervisory powers of Lokpal . 
26. Search and seizure.  
27. Lokpal to have powers of civil court in certain cases.  
28. Power of Lokpal to utilise services of officers of Central or State Government.  
29. Provisional attachment of assets.  
30. Confirmation of attachment of assets.  
31. Confiscation of assets, proceeds, receipts and benefits arisen or procured by means of corruption 
in special circ umstances.  
32. Power of Lokpal to recommend transfer or suspension of public servant connected with allegation 
of corruption.  
33. Power of Lokpal to give directions to prevent destruction of records during preliminary inquiry.  
34. Power to delegate.  
 
CHAPTER IX  
SPECIAL  COURTS  
35. Special Courts to be constituted by Central Government.  
36. Letter of request to a contracting State in certain cases.  
 
CHAPTER X  
COMPLAINTS AGAINST CHAIRPERSON,  MEMBERS AND OFFICIALS OF  LOKPAL  
37. Removal and suspension of Chairperson and Members of  Lokpal . 
38. Complaints against officials of Lokpal.  
 
CHAPTER XI  
ASSESSMENT OF LOSS AND RECOVERY THEREOF BY SPECIAL  COURT  
39. Assessment of loss and recovery thereof by special court.  
 
CHAPTER XII  
FINANCE,  ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
40. Budget.     
3 
 SECTIONS  
41. Grants by Central Government.  
42. Annual statement of accounts.  
43. Furnishing of returns, etc., to Central Government.  
 
CHAPTER XIII  
DECLARATION OF ASSETS  
44. Declaration of assets . 
45. Presumption as to acquisition of assets by corrupt means in certain cases.  
 
CHAPTER XIV  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
46. Prosecution for false compl aint and payment of compensation, etc., to public servant . 
47. False complaint made by society or association of persons or trust.  
 
CHAPTER XV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
48. Reports of Lokpal . 
49. Lokpal to function as appellate authority for appeals arising out of any other law for the time 
being in force.  
50. Protection of action taken in good faith by any public servant.  
51. Protection of action taken in good faith by others.  
52. Members, officers and employees of Lokpal to be public servants.  
53. Limitation to apply in certain cases.  
54. Bar of jurisdiction.  
55. Legal assistance.  
56. Act to have overriding effect.  
57. Provisions of this Act to be in addition of other laws.  
58. Amendment of certain enactments.  
59. Power to make rules.  
60. Power of Lokpal to make regulations.  
61. Laying of rules and regulations.  
62. Power to remove difficulties.  
 
PART III  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE LOKAYUKTA  
63. Establishment of Lokayukta . 
 
THE SCHEDULE.      
4 
 THE LOKPAL AND LOKAYUKTAS ACT, 2013  
ACT NO. 1 OF 2014  
[1st January, 2014.]  
An Act to provide for the establishment of a body of Lokpal for the Union and  Lokay ukta for 
States to inquire into allegations of corruption against certain  public functionaries and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  the Constitution of India established  a Democratic Republic to ensure justice  for all;  
AND WHEREAS  India has ratified the United Nations Convention Against Corruption;  
AND WHEREAS  the Government's commitment to clean and responsive governance has  to be reflected 
in effective bodies to contain  and punish acts of corruption;  
NOW, THEREFORE , it is expedient to enact a law, for more effective implementation of the  said 
Convention and to provide for prompt and fair investigation and prosecution in cases of  Corruption.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in  the Sixty -fourth Year of the Republic of India as  follows: — 
PART I  
PRELIMINARY   
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement .—(1) This Act may be  called the  Lokpal and 
Lokayuktas Act, 2013.  
(2)  It extends to the whole of India.  
(3)  It shall apply to public servants in and outside India.  
(4) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by  notification  in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
PART II  
LOKPAL FOR THE UNION  
CHAPTER I  
DEFINITIONS  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) "bench" means a bench of the Lokpal;  
(b) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Lokpal;  
(c) "competent authority", in relation to — 
(i) the Prime Minister, means the House of the People;  
(ii) a memb er of the Council of Ministers, means the Prime Minister;  
(iii) a member of Parliament other than a Minister, means — 
(A) in the case of a member of t he Council of  States, the  Chairman of  the Council; 
and 
(B) in the case of a member of the House of the People, the  Speaker  of the House;  
(iv) an officer in the Minist ry or Department of the Central Government,  means the Minister 
in charge of the Ministry or Department under which the  officer is serving;  
(v) a chairperson or members of any body  or Board or corporation or  authority or company or 
society or autonomous body (by whatever n ame called)  established or constituted under any Act 
of Parliament or wholly or partly financed  by the C entral Government or controlled by it, means 
                                                           
1. 16 th January, 2014 , vide notification No. S.O. 119 (E), dated 16 th January, 2014, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii).    
5 
 the Minister i n charge of  the administrative Ministry of such body or Board or corporation or 
authority or  company or society or autonomous body;  
(vi) an officer of any body or Board  or corporation or authority  or company  or society or 
autonomous body (by whatever name called) established or  constituted under any Act of 
Parliament or wholly or partly financed by the  Central Government or controlled by it, means the 
head of such body or Board  or corporation or authority or company or society or autonomous 
body;  
(vii) in a ny other case not falling under sub -clauses ( i) to ( vi) above,  means such Department 
or authority as the Central Government may, by  notification, specify:  
Provided that if any person referred to in sub -clause ( v) or sub -clause (vi) is also a member of 
Parliament, then, the competent authority shall be — 
(A) in case such member is a member of the Council of States, the  Chairman of the 
Council; and  
(B) in case such member is a member of the House of the  People, the  Speaker of the 
House;  
(d) "Central Vigilance Commissi on" means the Central Vigilance Commission  constituted 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Central Vigilance Commission  Act, 2003  (45 of 2003) ; 
(e) "complaint" means a complaint, made in such form as may be prescribed,  alleging that a 
public servant has committed an offence punishable under the Prevention  of Corruption Act, 1988  
(49 of 1988) ; 
(f) "Delhi Special Police Establishment" means the Delhi Special Police  Establishment 
constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Delhi Special  Police Establishment Act, 1946  
(25 of 1946) ; 
(g) "investigation" means an investigation as defined under clause ( h) of section 2  of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) ; 
(h) "Judicial Member" means a Judicial Member of the Lokpal;  
(i) "Lokpal"  means the body established under section 3;  
(j) "Member" means a Member of the Lokpal;  
(k) "Minister" means a Union Minister  but does not include the Prime Minister;  
(l) "notification" means notification published in the Official Gazette and the  expression 
"notify" shall be construed accordingly;  
(m) "preliminary inquiry" means an inquiry conducted under this Act;  
(n) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(o) "public servant" means a person referred to in clauses ( a) to ( h) of sub-section ( 1) of 
section 14 but does not include a public servant in respect of whom  the jurisdiction is exercisable 
by any court or other authority under the Army Act, 1950  (45 of 1950) , the Air Force Act, 1950  
(46 of 1950) , the Navy Act, 1957  (62 of 1957)  and the Coast  Guard Act, 1978  (30 of 1978)  or the  
procedure is applicab le to such public servant under those Acts;  
(p) "regulations" means regulations made under this Act;  
(q) "rules" means rules made under this Act;  
(r) "Schedule" means a Schedule a ppended to this Act;  
(s) "Special Court" means the court of a Special Judge appointed under  sub-section ( 1) of 
section 3 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988  (49 of 1988) . 
(2) The words and expressions used herein and not defined in this Act but defined in  the Prevention 
of Corruption Act, 1988  (49 of 198 8), shall have the meanings respectively assigned to  them in that Act.     
6 
 (3) Any reference in this Act to any other Act or provision thereof which is not in force  in any area to 
which this Act appli es shall be construed to have a reference to the  corresponding Act or provision 
thereof in force in such area.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT  OF LOKPAL  
3. Establishment of Lokpal .—(1) On and from the commencement of this Act, there  shall be 
established, for the  purpose of this Act, a body to be called the "Lokpal".  
(2) The Lokpal shall consist of — 
(a) a Chairperson, who is or has been a Chie f Justice of India or is or has been a  Judge of the 
Supreme Court or an eminent person who fulfi lls the eligibility specified in  clause ( b) of                         
sub-section ( 3); and  
(b) such number of Members, not exceeding eight out of whom fifty per cent.  shall be Judicial 
Members:  
Provided that not less than fifty per cent. of the Members of the Lokpal shall be  from amongst the 
persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes,  Other Backward Classes, 
Minorities and women.  
(3) A person shall be eligible to be appointed, — 
(a) as a Judicial Member if he is or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or is or has been a 
Chief Justice of a High Court;  
(b) as a Member other than a Judicial Member, if he is a person of impeccable  integrity and 
outstanding ability having special knowledge and expertise of not less  than twenty -five years in the 
matters relating to anti -corruption policy, public  administration, vigilance, finance including 
insurance and banking, law and  management.  
(4) The Chairperson or a Member shall not be — 
(i) a member of Parliament or a member of the Legislature of any State or Union territory;  
(ii) a person convicted of any offence involving moral turptitude;  
(iii) a person of less than forty -five years of age, on the date of assuming office  as the 
Chairperson or Member, as the case may be;  
(iv) a member of any Panchayat or Municipal ity; 
(v) a person who has been removed or dismissed from the service of the Union  or a State,  
and shall not hold any office of trust or profit (other than his office as the Chairperson or a  Member) or be 
affiliated with any political party or carry on any business or practise any  profession and, accordingly, 
before he enters upon his office, a person appointed as the  Chairperson or a Member, as the case may be, 
shall, if — 
(a) he holds any office of trust or profit, resign from such office; or  
(b) he is carr ying on any business, sever his connection with the conduct and  management of such 
business; or 
(c) he is practising any profession, cease to practise such profession.  
4. Appointment of Chairperson and Members on recommendations of Selection               
Committee. —(1) The Chairperson and Members shall be appointed by the President after obtaining the 
recommendations of a Selection Committee consisting of — 
(a) the Prime Minister —Chairperson;  
(b) the Speaker of the House of the People —Member;  
(c) the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People —Member;     
7 
 (d) the Chief Justice of India or a Judge of the Supreme Court nominated by  him—Member;  
(e) one eminent jurist, as recommended by the Chairperson and Members  referred to in clauses 
(a) to ( d) above, to be nominated by the President —Member.  
(2) No appointment of a Chairperson or a Member shall be invalid merely by reason of  any vacancy 
in the Selection Committee.  
(3) The Selection Committee shall for the purposes of selecting the Chairperson and  Members of the 
Lokpal and for preparing a panel of persons to be considered for appointment  as such, constitute a Search 
Committee consisting of at least seven persons of standing and  having special knowledge and expertise in 
the matters relating to anti -corruption policy,  public administration, vigilance, policy making, finance 
including insurance and banking,  law and management or in any other matter which, in the opinion of the 
Selection Committee,  may be useful in making the selection of the Chairperson  and Members of the 
Lokpal:  
Provided that not less than fifty per cen t. of the members of the Search Committee shall  be from 
amongst the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes,  Other Backward Classes, 
Minorities and women:  
Provided  further that the Selection Committee may also consider any person other  than the persons 
recommended by the Search Committee.  
(4) The Selection Committee shall regulate its own procedure in a transparent manner  for selecting 
the Chairperson and Members of  the Lokpal.  
(5) The term of the Search Committee referred to in sub -section ( 3), the fees and  allowances payable 
to its members and the manner of selection of panel of names shall be  such as may be prescribed.  
5. Filling of vacancies of Chairperson or Members .—The President shall take or cause to be taken 
all necessary steps for the appointment  of a new Chairperson and Members at least three months before 
the expiry of the term of the  Chairperson or Member, as the  case may be, in accordance with the 
procedure laid down in  this Act.  
6. Term of office of Chairperson and Members .—The Chairperson and ever y Member shall, on the 
recommendations of the Selection  Committee, be appointed by the President by warrant under hi s hand 
and seal and hold office  as such for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office 
or until he  attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that he may — 
(a) by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his office; or  
(b) be removed from his office in the manner provided in section 37.  
7. Salary, allowances and other conditions  of service  of Chairperson and Members .—The salary, 
allowances and other conditions of service of — 
(i) the Chairperson shall be the same as those of the Chief Justice of India;  
(ii) other Members shall be the same as those of a Judge of the Supreme Court:  
Provided that if the Chairperson or a Member is, at the time of his appointment,  in receipt of 
pension (other than disability pension) in respect of any previous service  under the Government of 
India or under the Government of a State, his salary in  respect of service as the Chairperson or, as  the 
case may be, as a Member, be reduced — 
(a) by the amount of that pension; and  
(b) if he has, before such appointment, received, in lieu of a portion of the  pension due to him 
in respect of such previous service, the commuted value  thereof, by the amoun t of that portion of 
the pension:  
Provided further that the salary, allowances and pension payable to, and  other  conditions of 
service of, the Chairperson or a Member shall not be varied  to his disadvantage after his 
appointment.     
8 
 8. Restriction on employme nt by Chairperson and Members  after ceasing to hold office .—(1) 
On ceasing to hold office, the Chairp erson and every Member shall be ineligible  for— 
(i) reappointment as the Chairperson or a Member of the Lokpal;  
(ii) any diplomatic assignment, appointment  as administrator of a Union territory  and such other 
assignment or appointment which is required by law to be made by the  President by warrant under his 
hand and seal;  
(iii) further employment to any other office of profit under the Government of  India or  the 
Government of a State;  
(iv) contesting any election of President or Vice -President or Member of either  House of 
Parliament or Member of either House of a State Legislature or Municipality  or Panchayat within a 
period of five years from the date of relinquishing the post.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a Member shall be eligible  to be appointed 
as a Chairperson, if his total tenure as Member and Chairperson does not  exceed five years.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, it is hereby clarified that where the  Member is 
appointed as the Chairperson, his term of office shall not be more than five years  in aggregate as the 
Member and the Chairperson.  
9. Member to act as Chairperson or to discharge his functions in cer tain circumstances. —(1) In 
the event of occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson by reason of his death, resignation 
or otherwise, the President may, by notification, authori se the senior -most Member to act as the 
Chairperson until the appointment of a new Chairperson  to fill such vacancy.  
(2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence on  leave or 
otherwise, the senior -most Member available, as the President may, by notification,  authori se in this 
behalf, shall discharge the functions of the Chairperson until the date on  which the Chairperson resumes 
his duties.  
10. Secretary, other officers and staff of Lokpal. —(1) There shall be a Secretary to the Lokpal in 
the rank of Secretary to Government  of India, wh o shall be appointed by the Chairperson from a panel of 
names sent by the  Central Government.  
(2) There shall be a Director of Inquiry and a Director of Prosecution not below the  rank of 
Additional Secretary to the Government of India or equivalent, who shall be appointed  by the Chairperson 
from a panel of names sent by the Central Government.  
(3) The appointment of officers and other staff of the Lokpal shall be made by the  Chairperson or 
such Member or officer of Lokpal as the Chairperson may direct:  
Provided that the President may by rule require that the appointment in respect of any  post or posts as 
may be specified in the rule, shall be made after consultation with the Union  Public Service Commission.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the conditions of service  of Secretary 
and other officers and staff of the Lokpal shall be such as may be specified by  regulations made by the 
Lokpal for the purpose:  
Provided that the regulations made under this sub -section shall, so far as th ey relate to  salaries, 
allowances, leave or pensions, require the approval of the President.  
CHAPTER III  
INQUIRY  WING  
11. Inquiry Wing. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, 
the Lokpal shall constitute an Inquiry Wing headed by the Director of Inquiry  for the purpose of  
conducting preliminary inquiry into any offence alleged to have been  committed by a public  servant 
punishable under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988  (49 of 1988) : 
Provided that till such time the Inquiry Wing is constituted by the Lokpal, the Central  Government 
shall make available such number of officers and other staff from its Ministries  or Departments, as may 
be required by the Lokpal, for conducting preliminary inquiries  under this Act.     
9 
 (2) For the purposes of assisting the Lokpal in conducting a preliminary inquiry under  this Act, the 
officers of the Inquiry Wing not below the rank of the Under Secretary to the  Government of India, shall 
have the same powers as are conferred upon the Inquiry Wing of  the Lokpal under section 27.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROSECUTION  WING  
12. Prosecution Wing .—(1) The Lokpal shall , by notification, constitute a Prosecution Wing headed 
by the  Director of Prosecution for the purpose of prosecution of public servants in relation to any  
complaint by the Lokpal under this Act:  
Provided that till such time the Prosecution Wing is constituted by the Lokpal, the  Central 
Government shall make available such number of officers and other staff from its  Ministries or 
Departments, as may be required by the Lokpal, for conducting prosecution  under this Act.  
(2) The Director of Prosecution shall, after having been so directed by the Lokpal, file  a case in 
accordance with the findings of investigation report, before the Special Court a nd take all necessary steps 
in respect of the prosecution of public servants in relation to any  offence punishable under the Prevention 
of Corruption Act, 1988  (49 of 1988) . 
(3) The case under sub -section ( 2), shall be de emed to be a report, filed on completion  of 
investigation, referred to in section 173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) .  
CHAPTER V  
EXPENSES OF LOKPAL  TO BE CHARGED ON CONSOLIDATED  FUND  OF INDIA  
13. Expenses of Lok pal to be charged on Consolidated Fund  of India .—The administrative 
expenses of the Lokpal, including all salaries, allowances and  pensions payable to or in respect of the 
Chairperson, Members or Secretary or other officers  or staff of the Lokpal, shall be charged upon the 
Consolidated Fund of India and any fees or  other moneys taken by the Lokpal shall form part of that 
Fund.   
CHAPTER VI  
JURISDICTION IN RESPECT OF INQUIRY  
14.  Jurisdiction of Lokpal to include Prime Minister, Ministers, member s of Parliament, 
Groups A, B, C  and D officers and officials of Central Government .—(1) Subject to the other 
provisions of this Act, the Lokpal shall inquire or cause an  inquiry to be conducted into any matter 
involved in, or arising from, or connected with, any  allegation of corruption  made in a complaint in 
respect of the following, namely: — 
(a) any person who is or has been a Prime Minister:  
Provided that the Lokpal shall not inquire into any matter involved in, or arising  from, or 
connected with, any such allegation of corruption aga inst the Prime Minister, — 
(i) in so far as it relates to international relations, external and internal  security, public order, 
atomic energy and space;  
(ii) unless a full bench of the Lokpal consisting of its Chairperson and all  Members considers 
the initiation of inquiry and at least two -thirds of its Members  approves of such inquiry:  
Provided further that any such inquiry shall be held in camera and if the  Lokpal comes to the 
conclusion that the complaint deserves to be dismissed, the  records of the inquiry shall not be 
published or made available to anyone;  
(b) any person who is or has been a Minister of the Union;  
(c) any person who is or has been a member of either House of Parliament;  
(d) any  Group 'A' or Group 'B' officer or equivalent or above, from amongst the  public servants 
defined in sub -clauses ( i) and ( ii) of clause ( c) of section 2 of the  Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988  
(49 of 1988)  when serving or who has served, in connection  with the affairs of the Union;     
10 
 (e) any Group 'C' or Group 'D' official or equivalent, from amongst the public  servants defined in 
sub-clauses ( i) and ( ii) of clause ( c) of section 2 of the Prevention  of Corruption Act, 1988               
(49 of 1988)  when s erving or who ha s served in connection with the affairs  of the Union subject to 
the provision of sub -section ( 1) of section 20;  
(f) any person who is or has been a chai rperson or member or officer or  employee  in any body or 
Board or corporation or author ity or company or society or trust or  autonomous body (by whatever 
name called) established by an Act of Parliament or  wholly or partly financed by the Central 
Government or controlled by  it: 
Provided that in respect of such officers referred to in clause ( d) who have  served in connection 
with the affairs of the Union or in any body or Board or corporation  or authority or company or 
society or trust or autonomous body referred to in clause  (e) but are working in connection with the 
affairs of the State or in any body or Board  or corporation or authority or company or society or trust 
or autonomous body (by  whatever n ame called) established by an Act of the State Legislature or 
wholly or  partly financed by the State Government or controlled by it, the Lokpal an d the officers  of 
its Inquiry Wing or Prosecution Wing shall have jurisdiction under this Act in  respect of such officers 
only after obtaining the consent of the concerned State  Government;  
(g) any person who is or has been a director, manager, secretary o r other officer  of every other 
society or association of persons or trust (whether registered under  any law for the time being in force 
or not), by whatever name called, wholly or partly  financed by the Government and the annual 
income of which exceeds suc h amount as  the Central G overnment may, by notification, specify;  
(h) any person who is or has been a direct or, manager, secretary or other officer  of every other 
society or association of persons or trust (whether registered under  any law for the time being in force 
or not) in receipt of any donation from any foreign  source under the Foreign Contribution 
(Regulation) Act, 2010  (42 of 2010)  in excess of ten lakh  rupees in a year or such higher amount as 
the Central Government may, by notification,  specif y. 
Explanation. —For the purpose of clauses ( f) and ( g), it is hereby clarified that any  entity or 
institution, by whatever name called, corporate,  society, trust, association of persons,  partnership, sole 
proprietorship, limited liability partnership (whet her registered  under any  law for the time being in force 
or not), shall b e the entities covered in those clauses:  
Provided that any person referred to in this clause shall be deemed to be a public  servant under clause 
(c) of section 2 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988  (49 of 1988)  and the  provisions of that Act 
shall apply accordingly.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Lokpal shall not inquire  into any 
matter involved in, or arising from, or connected with, any such alle gation of  corruption against any 
member of either House of Parliament in respect of anything said or  a vote given by him in Parliament or 
any committee thereof covered under the provisions  contained in clause ( 2) of article 105 of the 
Constitution.  
(3) The  Lokpal may inquire into any act or conduct of any person other than those  referred to in              
sub-section ( 1), if such person is involved in the act of abetting, bribe giving or  bribe taking or conspiracy 
relating to any allegation of corruption u nder the Prevention of  Corruption Act, 1988  (49 of 1988)  against 
a person referred to in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that no action under this section shall be taken in case of a person serving in  connection 
with the affairs of a State, without the consent o f the State Government.  
(4) No matter in respect of which a complaint has been made to the Lokpal under this  Act, shall be 
referred for inquiry under the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952  (60 of 1952) . 
Explanation. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby de clared that a complaint under  this Act shall 
only relate to a period during which the public servant was holding or serving  in that capacity.  
15. Matters pending before any court or committee or authority for inquiry not to be 
affected .—In case any   matter or  proceeding  related  to  allegation  of corruption  under  the  Prevention  
of  Corruption  Act,  1988  (49 of 1988)  has been pending before any court or committee of either  House    
11 
 of Parliament or before any other authority prior to commencement  of this Act or prior  to commencement 
of any inquiry after the commencement of this Act, such matter or  proceeding shall be continued before 
such court, committee or authority.  
16. Constitution of benches of Lokpal .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act,— 
(a) the jurisdiction of the Lokpal may be exercised by benches thereof;  
(b) a bench may be constituted by the Chair person with two or more Members as the Chairperson 
may deem fit;  
(c) every  bench shall ordinarily consist of at least one Judicial Member;  
(d) where a bench consists of the Chairperson, such bench shall be presided  over by the 
Chairperson;  
(e) where a bench consists of a Judicial Member, and a non -Judicial Member, not  being the 
Chairperson, such bench shall be presided over by the Judicial Member;  
(f) the benches of the Lokpal shall ordinarily sit at New Delhi and at such other  places as the 
Lokpal may, by regulations, specify.  
(2) The Lokpal shall notify the areas in relation to  which each bench of the Lokpal may  exercise 
jurisdiction.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the Chairperson shall  have the power to 
constitute or reconstitute benches from time to time.  
(4) If at any stage of the hearing of any ca se or matter it appears to the Chairperson or  a Member that 
the case or matter is of such nature that it ought to be heard by a bench  consisting of three or more 
Members, the case or m atter may be transferred by the Chairperson  or, as the case may be, refe rred to him 
for transfer, to such bench as the Chairperson may  deem fit.  
17. Distribution of business amongst benches .—Where benches are constituted, the  Chairperson 
may, from time to time, by  notification, make provisions as to the distribution of the business of the 
Lokpal amongst  the benches and also provide for the matters which may be dealt with by each bench.  
18. Power of Chairperson to transfer cases .—On an a pplication for transfer made by the 
complainant or the public servant, the  Chairperson, af ter giving an opportunity of being heard to the 
complainant or the public  servant, as the case may be, may transfer any case pending before one bench for 
disposal to  any other bench.  
19. Decision to be by majority .—If the Members of a bench consisting of an even  number of 
Members differ in  opinion on any point, they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and 
make a  reference to the Chairperson who shall either hear the point or points himself or refer the case  for 
hearing on such point or po ints by one or more of the other Members of the Lokpal and  such point or 
points shall be decided according to the  opinion of the majority of the Members  of the Lokpal who have 
heard the case, including those who first heard it.  
CHAPTER VII  
PROCEDURE IN RE SPECT OF PRELIMINARY INQUIRY AND INVESTIGATION  
20. Provision s relating to complaints and preliminary inquiry and investigation .—(1) The 
Lokpal on receipt of a complaint, if it decides to proceed further, may order — 
(a) preliminary  inquiry against any public servant by its Inquiry Wing or any  agency (including 
the Delhi Special Police Establishment) to ascertain whether there  exists a prima facie case for 
proceeding in the matter; or  
(b) investigation by any agency (inc luding the De lhi Special Police Establishment)  when there 
exists a prima facie case:  
Provided that the Lokpal shall if it has decided to proceed with the preliminary  inquiry,  by a general 
or special order, refer the complaints or a category of complaints or a complaint  received by it in respect 
of public servants belonging to Group A or Group B or Group C or  Group D to the Central Vigilance    
12 
 Commission constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 3  of the Central Vigilance Commission Act, 
2003  (45 of 2003) : 
Provided further that the Central Vigilance Commission in respect of complaints referred  to it under 
the first proviso, after making preliminary inquiry in respect of public servants  belonging to Group A and 
Group B, shall submit its report to the Lokpal in accorda nce with  the provisions contained in sub -sections 
(2) and ( 4) and in case of public servants belonging  to Group C and Group D, the Commission shall 
proceed in accordance with the provisions of  the Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003  (45 of 2003) : 
Provid ed also that before ordering an investigation under clause ( b), the Lokpal shall  call for the 
explanation of the public servant so as to determine whether there exists a  prima facie case for 
investigation:  
Provided also that the seeking of explanation from  the public servant before an  investigation shall not 
interfere with the search and seizure, if any, required to be undertaken  by any agency (including the Delhi 
Special Police Establishment) under this Act.  
(2) During the preliminary inquiry referred to i n sub -section ( 1), the Inquiry Wing or any  agency 
(including the Delhi Special Police Establishment) shall conduct a preliminary inquiry  and on the basis of 
material, information and documents collected seek the comments on the  allegations made in the 
comp laint from the public servant and the competent authority and  after obtaining the comments of the 
concerned public servant and the competent authority,  submit, within sixty days from the date of receipt 
of the reference, a report to the Lokpal.  
(3) A bench  consisting of not less than three Members of the Lokpal shall consider  every report 
received under sub -section ( 2) from the Inquiry Wing or any agency (including  the Delhi Special Police 
Establishment), and after giving an opportunity of being heard to th e public servant, decide whether there 
exists a prima facie case, and proceed with one or more  of the following actions, namely: — 
(a) investigation by any agency or the Delhi Special Police Establishment, as the  case may be;  
(b) initiation of the departmen tal proceedings or any other appropriate action  against the 
concerned public servants by the competent authority;  
(c) closure of the proceedings against the public servant and to proceed  against  the complainant 
under section 46.  
(4) Every preliminary inquiry referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall ordinarily be  completed  within a 
period of ninety days and for reasons to be recorded in writing, within a further  period of ninety days 
from the date of receipt of the complaint.  
(5) In case the Lokpal decides to proceed to investigate into the complaint, it shall  direct any agency 
(including the Delhi Special Police Establishment) to carry out the  investigation as expeditiously as 
possible and complete the investigation within a period of  six months from the da te of its order:  
Provided that the Lokpal may extend the said period by a further period not exceeding  of six months 
at a time for the reasons to be recorded in writing.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 173 of the Code of Criminal  Procedur e, 1973        
(2 of 1974) , any agency (including the Delhi Special Police Establishment) shall, in  respect of cases 
referred to it by the Lokpal, submit the investigation report under that  section to the court having 
jurisdiction and forward a copy thereof  to the Lokpal.  
(7) A bench consisting of not less than three Members of the Lokpal shall consider  every report 
received by it under sub -section ( 6) from any agency (including the Delhi  Special Police Establishment) 
and after obtaining the comments of the competent authority  and the public servant may — 
(a) grant sanction to its Prosecution Wing or investigating agency to file charge -sheet  or direct 
the closure of report before the Special Court against the public servant;  
(b) direct  the competent authority to initiate the departmental proceedings or  any other 
appropriate action against the concerned public servant.  
(8) The Lokpal may, after taking a decision under sub -section ( 7) on the filing of the  charge -sheet, 
direct its Prosecut ion Wing or any investigating agency (including the Delhi  Special Police    
13 
 Establishment) to initiate prosecution in the Special Court in respect of the  cases investigated by the 
agency.  
(9) The Lokpal may, during the preliminary inquiry or the investigation , as the case  may be, pass 
appropriate orders for the safe custody of the documents relevant to the  preliminary inquiry or, as the case 
may be, investigation as it deems fit.  
(10) The website of the Lokpal shall, from time to time and in such manner as may  be specified by 
regulations, display to the public, the status of number of complaints pending  before it or disposed of by 
it. 
(11) The Lokpal may retain the original records and evidences which are likely to be  required in the 
process of preliminary inqu iry or investigation or conduct of a case by it or by  the Special Court.  
(12) Save as otherwise provided, the manner and procedure of conducting a  preliminary  inquiry or 
investigation (including such material and documents to be made available to the  publi c servant) under 
this Act, shall  be such as may be specified by r egulations.  
21. Persons likely to be prejudicially affected to be heard .—If, at any stage of the proceeding, the 
Lokpal — 
(a) considers  it necessary to inquire into the conduct of any person other than  the accused; or  
(b) is of opinion that the reputation of any person other than an accused is likely  to be 
prejudicially affected by the preliminary inquiry,  
the Lokpal shall give to that pe rson a reasonable op portunity of being heard in the preliminary  inquiry and 
to produce evidence in his defence, co nsistent with the principles of natural  justice.  
22. Lokpal may require any public servant or any other person to furnish information , etc.— 
Subject to the provisions of this Act, for the purpose of any preliminary inquiry or  investigation, the 
Lokpal or the investigating agency, as the case may be, may require any  public servant or any other 
person who, in its opinion, is able to furnish information or  produce documents relevant to such 
preliminary inquiry or investigation, to furnish any  such information or produce any such document.  
23. Power of Lokpal to grant sanction for initiating prosecution .—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained i n section 197 of the Code of Criminal  Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  or section 6A of the Delhi 
Special Police Establishment Act, 1946  (25 of 1946)  or section 19 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 
1988  (49 of 1988) , the Lokpal shall have the power to grant  sanction for prosecution under clause ( a) of 
sub-section ( 7) of section 20.  
(2) No prosecution under sub -section ( 1) shall be initiated against any public servant  accused of any 
offence alleged to have been committed by him while acting or purporting to  act in the discharge of his 
official duty, and no court shall take cognizance of such offence  except with the previous sanction of the 
Lokpal.  
(3) Nothing contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall apply in respect of the persons  holding office 
in pursuan ce of the provisions of the Constitution and in respect of which a  procedure for removal of such 
person has been specified therein.  
(4) The provisions contained in sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3) shall be without prejudice  to the 
generality of the provisions  contained in article 311 and sub -clause ( c) of clause ( 3) of article 320 of the 
Constitution.  
24. Action on investigation against public servant bein g Prime Minister, Ministers or m embers 
of Parliament .—Where, after the conclusion of the investigation, the findings of the Lokpal disclose  the 
commission of an offence under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988  (49 of 1988)  by a public  servant 
referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 14, the  Lokpal may file a 
case in the Special Court and shall send a copy of the report together with  its findings to the competent 
authority.  
 
    
14 
 CHAPTER VIII  
POWERS OF LOKPAL  
25. Supervisory powers of Lokpal .—(1) The Lokpal s hall, notwithstanding anything contained in 
section 4 of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946  (25 of 1946) and section 8 of the Central 
Vigilance  Commissio n Act, 2003 (45 of 2003), have the powers of superintendence over, and to give 
direction to the  Delhi Special Polic e Establishment in respect of t he matters referred by the Lokpal for  
preliminary inquiry or investigation to the Delhi Special Police Establishment under this Act:  
Provided that while exercising powers of superintendence or giving direction  under this sub -section, 
the Lokpal shall not exercise powers in such a manner so as to  require any agency (including the Delhi 
Special Police Establishment) to whom the  investigation has been given, to investigate and dispose of any 
case in a particular manner.  
(2) The Central Vigilance Commission sh all send a statement, at such interval as the  Lokpal may 
direct, to the Lokpal in respect of action taken on complaints referred to it under  the second proviso to 
sub-section ( 1) of section 20 and on receipt of such statement, the  Lokpal may issue guidelin es for 
effective and expeditious disposal of such cases.  
(3) Any officer of the Delhi Special Police Establishment investigating a case referred  to it by the 
Lokpal, shall not be transferred without the approval of the Lokpal.  
(4) The Delhi Special Police Establishment may, with the consent of the Lokpal, appoint  a panel of 
Advocates, other than the Government Advocates, for conducting the cases  referred to it by the Lokpal.  
(5) The Central Government may from time to time make available such funds as may b e required by 
the Director of the Delhi Special Police Establishment for conducting effective  investigation into the 
matters referred to it by the Lokpal and the Director shall be responsible  for the expenditure incurred in 
conducting such investigation.  
26. Search and seizure .—(1) If the Lokpal has reason to believe that any document which, in its 
opinion,  shall be useful for, or relevant to, any investigation under this Act, are secreted in any place,  it 
may authorise any agency (including the Delhi Special Police Establishment) to whom the  investigation 
has been given to search for and to seize such documents.  
(2) If the Lokpal is satisfied that any document seized under sub -section ( 1) may be  used as evidence 
for the purpose of any investigation und er this Act and that it shall be  necessary to retain the document in 
its custody or in the custody of such officer as may be  authorised, it may so retain or direct such 
authorised officer to retain such document till the  completion of such investigation:  
Provided that where any document is required to be returned, the Lokpal or the  authorised officer may 
return the same after retaining copies of such document duly  authenticated.  
27. Lokpa l to have powers of civil court  in certain cases .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this 
section, for the purpose of any preliminary  inquiry, the Inquiry Wing of the Lokpal shall have all the 
powers of a civil court, under the  Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , while trying a suit in respect 
of the following matters,  namely: — 
(i) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him  on oath;  
(ii) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(iii) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(iv) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from an y court or office;  
(v) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents:  
Provided that such commission, in case of a witness, shall be issued only where  the witness, in 
the opinion of the Lokpal, is not in a position to attend the proceeding  before the Lokpal; and  
(vi) such other matters as may be prescribed.  
(2) Any proceeding before the Lokpal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding  within the meaning 
of section 193  of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) .    
15 
 28. Power of Lokpal to  utilise services of officers of Central or State Government .—(1) The 
Lokpal may, for the purpose of conducting any preliminary inquiry or  investigation, utilise the services of 
any officer or organisation or investigating agency of  the Central Government or any State Government, 
as the case may be.  
(2) For the purpose of preliminary inquiry or investigating into any matter pertaining to  such inquiry 
or investigation, any officer or organisation or agency whose services are  utilised under sub -section ( 1) 
may, subject to the superintendence and direction of the  Lokpal, — 
(a) summon and enforce the attendance of any person and examine him;  
(b) require the discovery and production of any document; and  
(c) requisition any public record or copy thereof from any of fice. 
(3) The officer or organisation or agency whose services are utilised under sub -section  (2) shall 
inquire or, as the case may be, investigate into any matter pertaining to the preliminary  inquiry or 
investigation and submit a report thereon to the Lo kpal within such period as may  be specified by it in 
this behalf.  
29. Provisional attachment of assets .—(1) Where the Lokpal or any officer authorised by it in this 
behalf, has reason to  believe, the reason for such belief to be recorded in writing, on the  basis of material 
in his  possession, that — 
(a)  any person is in possession of any proceeds of corruption;  
(b) such person is accused of having committed an offence relating to corruption;  and 
(c) such proceeds of offence are likely to be concealed, trans ferred or dealt with  in any manner 
which may result in frustrating any proceedings relating to confiscation  of such proceeds of offence,  
the Lokpal or the authorised officer may, by order in writing, provisionally attach such  property for a 
period not exce eding ninety days from the date of the order, in the manner  provided in the Second 
Schedule to the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961)  and the Lokpal and the officer  shall be deemed to be 
an officer under sub -rule ( e) of rule 1 of that Schedule.  
(2) The Lokp al or the officer authorised in this behalf shall, immediately after attachment  under        
sub-section ( 1), forward a copy of the order, along with the material in his possession,  referred to in that 
sub-section, to the Special Court, in a sealed envelope, in the manner as  may be prescribed and such 
Court may extend the order of attachment and keep such  material for such period as the Court may deem 
fit. 
(3) Every order of attachment made under sub -section ( 1) shall cease to have effect  after the e xpiry of 
the period specified in that sub -section or after the expiry of the period as  directed by the Special Court 
under sub -section ( 2). 
(4) Nothing in this section shall prevent the person interested in the enjoyment of the  immovable 
property attached under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), from such enjoyment.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, "person interested", in relation  to any immovable 
property, includes all persons claiming or entitled to claim any interest in  the property.  
30. Confirmation of attachment of assets .—(1) The Lokpal, when it provisionally attaches any 
property under sub -section ( 1) of section 29 shall, within a period of thirty days of such attachment, direct 
its Prosecution  Wing to file an application stating the facts of such attachment before the Special Court 
and make a prayer for confirmation of attachment of the property till completion of the p roceedings  
against the public servant in the Special Court.  
(2) The Special Court may, if it is of the opinion th at the property provisionally attached  had been 
acquired through corrupt means, make an order for confirmation of attachment of  such property till the 
completion of the proceedings against the public servant in the Special  Court.  
(3) If the public servant is subsequently acquitted of the charges framed against him,  the property, 
subject to the orders of the Special Court, shall be restored to the concerned  public servant along with 
benefits from such property as might have accrued during the  period of attac hment.     
16 
 (4) If the public servant is subsequently convicted of the charges of corruption, the  proceeds relatable 
to the offence under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988  (49 of 1988)  shall be  confiscated and vest in 
the Central Government free from any e ncumbrance or leasehold  interest excluding any debt due to any 
bank or financial institution.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, the expressions "bank", "debt"  and "financial 
institution" shall have the meanings respectively assigned to the m in clauses  (d), (g) and ( h) of section 2 
of the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions  Act, 1993  (51 of 1993) . 
31. Confiscation of assets, proceeds, receipts and benefits arisen or procured by means of 
corruption in special circumstances .—(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of sections 29 and 30, 
where the Special  Court, on the basis of prima facie evidence, has r eason to believe or is satisfied that the  
assets, proceeds, receipts and benefits, by whatever name called, have arisen or procured by  means of 
corruption by the public servant, it may authorise the confiscation of such assets,  proceeds, receipts and 
benef its till his acquittal.  
(2) Where an order of confiscation made under sub -section ( 1) is modified or annulled  by the High 
Court or where the public servant is acquitted by the Special Court, the assets,  proceeds, receipts and 
benefits, confiscated under sub-section ( 1) shall be returned to such  public servant, and in case it is not 
possible for any reason to return the assets, proceeds,  receipts and benefits, such public servant shall be 
paid the price thereof including the money  so confiscated with inter est at the rate of five per cent. per 
annum thereon calculated from the  date of confiscation.  
32. Power of Lokpal to recommend transfer or suspension of public servant connected with 
allegation of corruption .—(1) Where the Lokpal, while making a preliminar y inquiry into allegations of  
corruption, is prima facie satisfied, on the basis of evidence available, — 
(i) that the continuance of the public servant referred to in clause ( d) or clause  (e) or clause ( f) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 14 in his post while  conducting the  preliminary inquiry is likely to affect 
such preliminary inquiry adversely; or  
(ii) such public servant is likely to destroy or in any way tamper with the  evidence  or influence 
witnesses,  
then, the Lokpal may recommend to the Central Government for transfer or suspension of  such public 
servant from the post held by him till such period as may be specified in the  order.  
(2) The Central Government shall ordinarily a ccept the recommendation of the Lokpal  made under 
sub-section ( 1), except for t he reasons to be recorded in writing in a case where  it is not feasible to do so 
for administrative reasons.  
33. Power of Lokpal to give directions to prevent destruction of records during preliminary 
inquiry .—The Lokpal may, in the discharge o f its functi ons under this Act, issue appropriate  directions 
to a public servant entrusted with the preparation or custody of any document or  record — 
(a) to protect such document or record from destruction or damage; or  
(b) to prevent the public servant from altering or secreting such document or  record; or  
(c) to prevent the public servant from transferring or alienating any assets  allegedly acquired by 
him through corrupt means.  
34. Power to delegate .—The Lokpal may, by general or special order i n writing, and subject to such 
conditions  and limitations as may be specified therein, direct that any administrative or financial power  
conferred on it may also be exercised or discharged by such of its Members or officers or  employees as 
may be specified in the order.  
CHAPTER IX  
SPECIAL  COURTS  
35. Special C ourts to be constituted by Central Government .—(1) The Central Government shall 
constitute such number of Special Courts, as  recommended by the Lokpal, to hear and decide the cases 
arising out of the Prevention of  Corruption Act, 1988  (49 of 1988)  or under this Act.     
17 
 (2) The Special Courts constituted under sub -section ( 1) shall ensure completion of  each trial within a 
period of one year from the date of filing of the case in the Court:  
Provided that in case the trial cannot be completed within a period of one year, the  Special Court shall 
record reasons therefore  and complete the trial within a further period of  not more than three months or 
such further periods not exceeding three months each, for  reasons to be recorded in writing before the end 
of each such three months period, but not  exceeding a total period of two years.  
36. Letter of request to a contracting State in certain cases .—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained i n this Act or the Code of Criminal  Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) if, in the course of an 
preliminary inquiry or investigation into an offence or  other proceeding under this Act, an application is 
made to a Special Court by an officer of the  Lokpal authorised  in this behalf that any evidence is required 
in connection with the preliminary  inquiry or investigation into an offence or proceeding under this Act 
and he is of the opinion  that such evidence may be available in any place in a contracting State, and the  
Special  Court, on being satisfied that such evidence is required in connection with the preliminary  inquiry 
or investigation into an offence or proceeding under this Act, may issue a letter of  request to a court or an 
authority in the contracting State co mpetent to deal with such  request to — 
(i) examine the facts and circumstances of the case;  
(ii) take such steps as the Special Court may specify in such letter of request;  and 
(iii) forward  all the evidence so taken or collected to the Special Court issuing  such letter of 
request.  
(2) The letter of request shall be transmitte d in such manner as the Central Government  may prescribe 
in this behalf.  
(3) Every statement recorded or document or t hing received under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to 
be evidence collected during the course of the preliminary inquiry or  investigation.  
CHAPTER X  
COMPLAINTS AGAINST CHAIRPERSON,  MEMBERS AND OFFICIALS OF  LOKPAL  
37. Removal and suspension of Chairperson and Members of Lokpal .—(1) The Lokpal shall not 
inquire into any complaint made against the Chairperson  or any Member.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 4), the Chairperson or any Member shall  be removed 
from his office by order of the President on grounds of misbehaviour  after the  Supreme Court, on a 
reference being made to it by the President on a petition signed by at  least one hundred Members of 
Parliament has, on an inquiry held in accordan ce with the  procedure prescribed in that behalf, reported 
that the Chairperson or such Member, as the  case may be, ought to be removed on such ground.  
(3) The President may suspend from office the Chairperson or any Member in respect  of whom a 
reference ha s been made to the Supreme Court under sub -section ( 2), on receipt  of the recommendation or 
interim order made by the Supreme Court in this regard until the  President has passed orders on receipt of 
the final report of the Supreme Court on such  reference.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the President may, by  order, remove from 
the office, the Chairperson or any Member if the Chairperson or such  Member, as the case may be, — 
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) engages, during his term of office, in any paid employment outside the duties  of his office; or  
(c) is, in the opinion of the President, unfit to continue in office by reason of  infirmity of mind or 
body.  
(5) If the Chairperson or any Member is, or becomes, in any way concern ed or  interested  in any 
contract or agreement made by or on behalf of the Government of India or the  Government of a State or 
participates in any way in the profit thereof or in any benefit or  emolument arising therefrom otherwise 
than as a member and in c ommon with the other  members of an incorporated company, he shall, for the 
purposes of sub -section ( 2), be deemed to be guilty of misbehaviour .    
18 
 38. Complaints against officials of Lokpal .—(1) Every complaint of allegation or wrongdoing made 
against any off icer or employee  or agency (including the Delhi Special Police Establishment), under or 
associated with the  Lokpal for an offence punishable under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988        
(49 of 1988)  shall be dealt  with in accordance with the provisions of this section.  
(2) The Lokpal shall complete the inquiry into the complaint or allegation made within  a period of 
thirty days from the date of its receipt.  
(3) While making an inquiry into the complaint against any officer or employee of the  Lokpal or 
agency engaged or associated with the Lokpal, if it is prima facie satisfied on the  basis of evidence 
available, that — 
(a) continuance of such officer or employee of the Lokpal or agency engaged or  associated in his 
post while conducting the inqui ry is likely to affect such inquiry  adversely; or 
(b) an officer or employee of the Lokpal or agency engaged or associated is  likely to destroy or in 
any way tamper with the evidence or influence witnesses,  
then, the Lokpal may, by order, suspend such offi cer or employee of the Lokpal or divest  such agency 
engaged or associated with the Lokpal of all powers and responsibilities hereto  before exercised by it . 
(4) On the completion of the inquiry, if the Lokpal is satisfied that there is prima facie  evidence of the 
commission of an offence under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988  (49 of 1988)  or of  any 
wrongdoing, it shall, within a period of fifteen days of the completion of such inquiry,  order to prosecute 
such officer or employee of the Lokpal or such o fficer, employee, agency  engaged or associated with the 
Lokpal and initiate disciplinary proceedings against the  official concerned:  
Provided that no such order shall be passed without giving such officer or employee  of the Lokpal, 
such officer, employee, agency enga ged or associated, a reasonable opportunity  of being heard.  
CHAPTER XI  
ASSESSMENT OF LOSS AND RECOVERY THEREOF BY  SPECIAL  COURT  
39. Assessment of loss and recovery thereof by Special Court .—If any public  servant is convicted 
of an offence under the Prevention of Corruption  Act, 1988 (49 of 1988) by the s pecial Court, 
notwithstanding and without prejudice to any law for the time  being in force, it may make an assessment 
of loss, if any, caused to the public exchequer on  account of the actions or d ecisions of such public 
servant not taken in good faith and for  which he stands convicted, and may order recovery of such loss, if 
possible or quantifiable,  from such public servant so convicted:  
Provided that if the Special Court, for reasons to be record ed in writing, comes to the  conclusion that 
the loss caused was pursuant to a conspiracy with the beneficiary or  beneficiaries of actions or decisions 
of the public servant so convicted, then such loss may,  if assessed and quantifiable under this section, also 
be recovered from such beneficiary or  beneficiaries proportionately.  
CHAPTER XII  
FINANCE,  ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
40. Budget .—The Lokpal shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each  financial year as  may 
be prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and  expenditure of the 
Lokpal and forward the same to the Central Government for information.  
41. Grants by Central Government .—The Ce ntral Government may, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law in  this behalf, make to the Lokpal grants of such sums of money as are required to 
be paid for  the salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and Members and the administrative  
expenses, including the salaries and allowances and pension payable to or in respect of  officers and other 
employees of the Lokpal.  
42. Annual statement of accounts .—(1) The Lokpal shall maintain proper accounts and other 
relevant records and  prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the 
Centra l Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.     
19 
 (2) The accounts of the Lokpal shall be audited  by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India at 
such intervals as may be specified by him.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any person appointed by him in  connection with 
the audit of the accounts of the Lokpal under this Act shall have the same  rights, privileges and authority 
in connection with suc h audit, as the Comptroller and A uditor -General of India gene rally has, in 
connection with the audit of the Government accounts and,  in particular, shall have the right to demand 
the production of books, accounts, connected  vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect 
any of the offices of the  Lokpal.  
(4) The accounts of the Lokpal, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of  India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report  thereon, shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and the Central Government  shall cause the same to be laid before 
each House of Parliament.  
43. Furnishing of returns, etc. , to Central Government .—The Lokpal shall furnish to the Central 
Government, at such time and in such form  and manner as may be prescribed or as the Central 
Government may request, such returns  and statements and such particulars in regard to any matter under 
the jurisdiction of the  Lokpal, as the Central Government may, from time to time, require.  
CHAPTER XIII  
DECLARATION OF ASSETS  
1[44. Declaration of assets .—On and from the date of commencement of this Act, every public 
servant shall make a declaration of his assets and liabilities in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed.]  
45. Presumption as to acquisition of assets by corrupt mean s in certain cases .—If any public 
servant wilfully or for reasons which are not justifiable, fails to — 
(a) to declare his assets; or  
(b) gives misleading information in respect of such assets and is found to be in  possession of 
assets not disclosed or in respect of which misleading information was  furnished,  
then, such assets shall, unless otherwise prove d, be presumed to belong to the public  servant and shall be 
presumed to be assets acquired by corrupt means:  
Provided that the competent authority may con done or exempt the public servant from  furnishing 
information in respect of assets not exceeding such minimum value as may be  prescribed.  
CHAPTER XIV  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
46. Prosecution for false complaint and payment of compensation, etc. , to public servant .—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, whoever makes any false and  frivolous or vexatious 
complaint under this Act shall, on conviction, be punished with  imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year an d with fine which may ext end to one lakh rupees.  
(2) No Court, except a Special Court, shall take  cognizance of an offence under sub-section  (1). 
(3) No Special Court shall take cognizance of an offence under sub -section ( 1) except  on a complaint 
made by a person against whom the false, frivolous or vexatious complaint  was made or by an officer 
authorised by the Lokpal.  
(4) The prosecution in relation to an offence under sub -section ( 1) shall be conducted  by the public 
prosecutor and all expenses connected with such prosecution sha ll be borne  by the Central Government.  
(5) In case of conviction of a person [being an individual or society or association of  persons or trust 
(whether registered or not)], for having made a false complaint under this  Act, such person shall be liable 
to pay compensation to the public servant against whom he  made the false complaint in addition to the 
legal expenses for contesting the case by such  public servant, as the Special Court may determine.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 2016, s. 2, for section 44 (w.e.f. 16 -1-2014).     
20 
 (6) Nothing contained in this section shall apply in case o f complaints made in good  faith.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of this sub -section , the expression “good faith ” means  any act 
believed or done by a person in good faith with due care, caution and sense of  responsibility or by mistake 
of fact believing himse lf justified by law under section 79  of the  Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
47. False complaint made by society or association of persons or trust .—(1) Where any offence 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 46 has been committed by  any society or association of persons or trust 
(whether registered or not), every person who,  at the time the offence was committed, was directly in 
charge of, and was responsible to, the  society or association of persons or trust, for the conduct of the 
business or affairs or  activ ities of the society or association of persons or trust as well as such society or 
association  of persons or trust shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be  
proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing conta ined in this sub -section shall render any such person  liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed  without his knowledge or 
that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission  of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under  this Act has been 
committed by a society or association of persons or trust (whether  registered or not) and it is proved that 
the offence has been committed with the consent or  connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the 
part of, any director, manager, secretary  or other officer of such society or association of persons or trust, 
such director, manager,  secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of t hat offence and 
shall be liable  to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
CHAPTER XV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
48. Reports of Lokpal .—It shall be the duty of the Lo kpal to present annually to the President a 
report on  the work done by the Lokpal and on receipt  of such report the President shall cause a copy  
thereof together with a memorandum explaining, in respect of the cases, if any, where the  advice of the 
Lokpal was not accepted, the reason for such non -acceptance to be laid before  each House of Parliament.  
49. Lokpal to function as appellate authority for appeals arising out of any other law for the 
time being in force .—The Lokpal shall function as the final appellate authority in respect of appeals  
arising out of any other law for the ti me being in force p roviding for d elivery of public  services and 
redressal  of public grievances by any public authority in cases where the  decision contains findings of 
corruption under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988  (49 of 1988) . 
50. Protection of action taken in good faith by any public servant .—No suit, prosecution or other 
legal proceedings under this Act shall lie against any  public serv ant, in respect of anything which is done 
in good faith or intended to be done in  the discharge  of his official functions or in exercise of his powers.  
51. Protection of action taken in good faith by others .—No suit, prosecution or other legal 
proceedings shall lie against the Lokpal or  against any officer, employee, agency or any person, in respect  
of anything which is done in  good faith or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or the 
regulations made  thereunder.  
52. Members, officers and employees of Lokpal to be public servants .—The Chairperson, 
Members, officers and other employees of t he Lokpal shall be  deemed, when  acting or purporting to act 
in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act,  to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of 
the Indian Penal Code  (45 of  1860) . 
53. Limitation to apply in certain cases .—The Lokpal shall not inquire or investigate into any 
complaint, if the complaint is  made after the expiry of a period of seven years from the date on which the 
offence mentioned  in such complaint is alleged to have been committed.  
54. Bar of jurisdiction .—No civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the 
Lokpal is  empowered by or under this Act to determine.     
21 
 55. Legal assistance .—The Lokpal shall provide to every person against whom a complaint has been  
made, before it, under this A ct, legal assistance to defend his case before the Lokpal, if such  assistance is 
requested for.  
56. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent  therewith contained in any enactment other  than this Act or in any instrument 
having effect  by virtue of any enactment other than this Act.  
57. Provisions of this Act to be in addition of other laws .—The provisions of this Act shall be in 
addition to, and not in derogation of, any  other law for the time being in force.  
58. Amendment of certain enactments .—The enactments specified in the Schedule shall be 
amended in the manner specified  therein.  
59. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules  to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such  rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the form of complaint referred to in clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2; 
(b) the term of the Search Committee, the fee and allowances payable to its  members and the 
manner of selection of panel of names under sub -section ( 5) of section 4;  
(c) the post or posts in respect of which the appointment shall be made after  consultation with the 
Union Public Service Commission under the proviso to sub-section  (3) of section 10;  
(d) other matters for which the Lokpal shall have the powers of a civil court  under clause ( vi) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 27;  
(e) the manner of sending the order of attach ment along with the material to the Special Court 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 29;  
(f) the manner of transmitting the letter of request under sub -section ( 2) of section 36;  
(g) the  form and the time for preparing in eac h financial year the budget for the next financial 
year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Lokpal  under section 40;  
(h) the form for maintaining the accounts and other relevant records and the  form  of annual 
statement of accounts under sub -section ( 1) of section 42;  
(i) the form and manner and the time for preparing the returns and statements  along with 
particulars under section 43;  
(j) the form and the time for preparing an an nual return giving a s ummary of its activities during 
the previous year under sub -section ( 5) of section 44;  
1[(k) the form and manner of declaration of assets and liabilities by public servants under             
section 44:  
Provided that the rules may be made under this clause  retrospectively from the date on which that 
provisions of this Act came into force ;] 
(l) the minimum value for which the competent  authority may condone or exempt  a public 
servant from furnishing information  in respect of assets under the proviso to  section 45;  
(m) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.  
60. Power of Lokpal to make regulations .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules 
made thereunder, the Lokpal  may, by notifi cation in the Official Gazette, make regulations to carry out 
the provisions of   this Act.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 2016. s. 3, for clause ( k) (w.e.f. 16 -1-2014).     
22 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such  regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the conditions of service of the secretary and ot her officers and staff of the  Lokpal and the 
matters which in so far as they relate to salaries, allowances, leave or  pensions, require the approval 
of the President under sub -section ( 4) of section 10;  
(b) the place of sittings of benches of the Lokpal un der clause ( f) of sub -section  (1) of section 16;  
(c) the manner for displaying on the website of the Lokpal, the status of all  complaints pending or 
disposed of along with records and evidence with reference  thereto under sub -section ( 10) of       
section 20; 
(d) the manner and procedure of co nducting preliminary inquiry or investigation  under                
sub-section ( 11) of section 20;  
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified under this Act.  
61. Laying of rules and regulations .—Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after  it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty  days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and 
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions  aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation, or both  Houses agree that the rule 
or regulation should not b e made, the rule or regulation shall  thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,  however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity  of anything previously done under  that rule or regulation.  
62. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central  Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the  provisions of this Act, as appear to be necessary for removing the  difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a  period of two years 
from the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,  before each 
House of Parliament.  
PART III  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE LOKAYUKTA  
63. Establishment of Lokayukta .—Every State shall establish a body to be known as the Lokayukta 
for the State, if  not so est ablished, constituted or appointed, by a law made by the State Legislature, to 
deal with complaints relating to corruption against certain public functionaries, within a period of  one 
year from the date of commencement of this Act.  
 
 
 
 
     
23 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 58]  
AMENDMENT TO CERTAIN ENACTMENTS  
PART I  
AMENDMENT TO THE COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY ACT, 1952  
(60 OF 1952)  
Amendment of section 3 .—In section 3, in sub -section ( 1), for the words “The appropriate 
Government may ”, the words and figures “Save as otherwise provided in the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 
2013, the  appropriate Government may ” shall be substituted.  
PART II  
AMENDMENTS TO THE DELHI SPECIAL POLICE ESTABLISHMENT ACT, 1946  
(25 OF 1946)  
1. Amendment of section 4A .—In section 4A, — 
(i) for sub-section ( 1), the following sub -section shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(1) The Central Government shall appoint the Director on the  recommendation of the 
Committee consisting of — 
(a) the Prime Minister —Chairperson;  
(b) the Leader of Oppositi on in the House of the People —Member;  
(c) the Chief Justice of India or Judge of the Supreme Court nominated  by                   
him—Member. ”; 
(ii) sub -section ( 2) shall be omitted.  
2. Insertion of new section 4BA .—After  section 4B, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely: — 
“4BA. Director of Prosecution. —(1) There shall be a Directorate of Prosecution headed by a  
Director who  shall be an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India, for  
conducting prosecution of cases under this Act.  
(2) The Director of Prosecution shall function under the overall supervision and  control of the 
Director.  
(3) The Central Government shall appoint the Director of Prosecution on the  recommendation of 
the Cen tral Vigilance Commission.  
(4) The Director of Prosecution shall notwithstanding anything to the contrary  contained in the 
rules relating to his conditions of service, continue to hold office for  a period of not less than two 
years from the date on which h e assumes office.”.  
3. Amendment of section 4C .—In section 4C, for sub -section ( 1), the following sub -section shall be 
substituted,  namely: — 
“(1) The Central Government shall appoint officers to the posts of the level of  Superintendent of 
Police and above except Director, and also recommend the extension  or curtailment of the tenure of 
such officers in the Delhi Special Police Establishment,  on the recommendation of a committee 
consisting of: — 
(a) the Central Vigilance Commissioner —Chairperson;  
(b) Vigilance Commissioners —Members;  
(c) Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry of  Home —Member;     
24 
 (d) Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Department of                     
Personnel —Member:  
Provided that the Committee shall consult the Director before submitting  its recommendation 
to the Central Government.".  
PART III  
AMENDMENTS TO THE PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION ACT, 1988  
(49 OF 1988)  
1. Amendment of sections 7, 8, 9 and 12 .—In sections 7, 8, 9 and section 12, — 
(a) for the words “six months ”, the words “three years ” shall respectively be  substituted;  
(b) for the words “five years ”, the words “seven years ” shall respectively be  substituted.  
2. Amendment of section 13 .—In section 13, in sub -section ( 2),— 
(a) for the words “one year ”, the words “four years ” shall be substituted;  
(b) for the words “seven years ”, the words “ten years ” shall be substituted.  
3. Amendment of section 14 .—In section 14, — 
(a) for the words “two years ”, the words “five years ” shall be subs tituted;  
(b) for the words “seven years ”, the words “ten years ” shall be substituted.  
4. Amendment of section 15 .—In section 15, for the words “which may extend to three years ”, the 
words “which  shall not be less than two years but which may extend to five  years ” shall be substituted.  
5. Amendment of section 19 .—In section 19, after the words “except with the previous sanction ”, 
the words “save as otherwise provided in the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 ” shall be inserted.  
PART IV  
AMENDMENT TO THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973  
(2 OF 1974)  
Amendment of section 197. —In section 197, after the words “except with the previous sanction ”, 
the words “save as otherwise provided in the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 ” shall be inserted.  
PART V  
AMENDMENTS TO THE CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION ACT, 2003  
(45 OF 2003)  
1. Amendment of section 2 .—In section 2, after clause ( d), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely: — 
„(da) “Lokpal ” means the Lokpal established under sub -section ( 1) of section 3  of the Lokpal and 
Lokayuktas Act, 2013;‟.  
2. Amendment of section 8 .—In section 8, in sub -section ( 2), after clause ( b), the following clause 
shall be  inserted, namely: — 
“(c) on a reference made by the Lokpal under proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 20 of the 
Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013, the persons referred to in clause ( d) of sub -section (1) shall also 
include — 
(i) members of Group B, Group C and Group D services of the Central  Government;  
(ii) such level of officials or staff of the corporations established by or  under any Central Act, 
Government companies, societies and other local  authorities, owned or controlled by the Central 
Government, as that Government  may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this 
behalf:     
25 
 Provided that till such time a notif ication is issued under this clause, all officials or staff  of the 
said corporations, companies, societies and local authorities shall be deemed to be the  persons 
referred in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1).". 
3. Insertion of new sections 8A and 8B .—After se ction 8, the following sect ions shall be inserted, 
namely: — 
“8A. Action on preliminary inquiry in relation to public servants. —(1) Where, after the 
conclusion of the preliminary inquiry relating to  corruption of public servants belonging to Group C 
and Group D officials of the  Central Government, the findings of the Commission disclose, after 
giving an  opportunity of being heard to the public servant, a prima facie violation of conduct  rules 
relating to corruption under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988  (49 of 1988)  by such publi c 
servant, the Commission shall proceed with one or more of the following actions, namely: — 
(a) cause an investigation by any agency or the Delhi Special Police  Establishment, as the 
case may be;  
(b) initiation of the discipl inary proceedings or any other appropriate action  against the 
concerned public servant by the competent authority;  
(c) closure of the proceedings against the public servant and to proceed  against the 
complainant under section 46 of the Lokpal and Lokayukta s Act,  2013.  
(2) Every preliminary inquiry referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall ordinarily be  completed 
within a period of ninety days and for reasons to be recorded in writing,  within a further period of 
ninety days from the date of receipt of the complaint.  
8B. Action on investigation in relation to public servants. —(1) In case the Commission decides to 
proceed to investigate into the  complaint under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 8A, it shall 
direct any agency  (including the Delhi Specia l Police Establishment) to carry out the investigation as  
expeditiously as possible and complete the investigation within a period of six months  from the date 
of its order and submit the investigation report containing its findings to  the Commission:  
Provided that the Commission may extend the said period by a further period of  six months for 
the reasons to be recorded in writing.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 173 of the Code of Criminal  Procedure, 1973  
(2 of 1974) , any agency (incl uding the Delhi Special Police Establishment) shall,  in respect of cases 
referred to it by the Commission, submit the investigation report to  the Commission.  
(3) The Commission shall consider every report received by it under sub -section ( 2) from any 
agency (including the Delhi Special Police Establishment) and may decide  as to— 
(a) file charge -sheet or closure report before the Special Court against the  public servant;  
(b) initiate the departmental proceedings or any other appropriate action  against t he 
concerned public servant by the competent authority.".  
4. Insertion of new section 11A .—After section 11,  the following section shall be inserted, 
namely: — 
“11A.  Director of inquiry for making preliminary inquiry. —(1) There shall be a Director of  
Inquiry, not below the rank of Joint Secretary  to the Government of India, who shall be appointed by 
the Central Government for  conducting preliminary inquiries referred to the Commission by the 
Lokpal.  
(2) The Central Government shall provide the Directo r of Inquiry such officers  and employees as 
may be required for the discharge o f his functions under this Act.” . 
--------------------------The National Institute of Design Act, 2014--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF DESIGN ACT, 2014  
_______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration of National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad, as an institution of national importance . 
3. Definitions . 
 
CHAPTER II  
THE INSTITUTE  
4. Incorporation of Institute . 
5. Effect of incorporation of the Institute . 
6. Powers of Institute . 
7. Institute be open to all races, creeds and classes . 
8. Teaching at Institute . 
9. Visitor.  
10. Authorities of Institute . 
11. Governing Council . 
12. Term of office of, vacancies among, and allowances payable to Chairperson and other members 
of Governing Council . 
13. Meeting of Governing Council . 
14. Powers and functions of Governing Council . 
15. Senate . 
16. Functions of Senate . 
17. Functions , powers and duties of Chairperson.  
18. Director.  
19. Dean.  
20. Registrar.  
21. Powers and duties of other authorities and officers.  
22. Grants by Central Government.  
23. Fund of Institute.  
24. Setting up of Endowment Fund. 
25. Accounts and audit.  
26. Pension and provident fund.  
27. Appointment of  staff.  
28. Statutes.  
29. Statutes how to be made.  
30. Ordinances.  
31. Ordinances how to be made.  
32. Arbitral Tribunal.  
 
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
33. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc . 
34. Sponsored schemes . 
35. Power of Institute to grant degrees, etc.  
  2 
 SECTIONS  
36. Powers of Central Government to issue directions.  
37. Institute to be public authority under Right to Information Act, 2005.  
38. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
39. Transitional provisions.  
40. Statutes and Ordinances to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before Parliament.  
41. Power to remove difficulties.  
  3 
 THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF DESIGN ACT, 2014  
ACT NO. 18 OF 2014  
[17th July, 2014.]  
An Act to declare the institution known as the National Institute of Design,  Ahm edabad, to be an 
institution of national importance for the promotion  of quality and excellence in education, 
research and training in all  disciplines relating to Design and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament  in the Sixty -fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the National Institute of Design Act, 
2014.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification  in the 
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions  of this Act.  
2. Declaration of National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad, as an institution of national 
importance. —Whereas the objects of the institution known as the National Institute of Design,  
Ahmedabad, are such as to make it the institution of national importance, it is hereby declared  that the 
National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad is an institution of nationa l importance.  
3. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) ―Chairperson‖ means the Chairperson of the Governing Council nominated  under clause ( a) 
of section 11; 
(b) ―Dean‖, in relation to any Institute campus, means the Dean of  such Institute  campus;  
(c) ―design‖ means a rational, logical and sequential innovative process for the  purpose of 
transferring culture to viable products and services and for providing a  competitive edg e to products 
and services, and includes industrial design,  communication design, textile and apparel design, 
lifestyle design, experiential design,  exhibition design, craft and traditional sector design;  
(d) ―Director‖ means Director of the Institute, as appointed under section 18;  
(e) ―Fund‖ means the Fun d of the Institute maintained under section 23;  
(f) ―Governing Council‖ means the Governing Council of the Institute, as  constituted under 
section 11;  
(g) ―Institute‖ means the National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad, incorporated  under section 4;  
(h) ―Ins titute campus‖ means the campus of the Institute located at Bengaluru in  the State of 
Karnataka and Gandhinagar in the State of Gujarat, or such other campus  as may be established by 
the Institute at any place within India or outside India;  
(i) ―notificati on‖ means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(j) ―prescribed‖ means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(k) ―Registrar‖ means Registrar of the Institute;  
(l) ―Senate‖ means the Senate of the Institute;  
(m) ―Society‖ means the National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad, registered as  a society under 
the Societies Registration Act, 1860  (21 of 1860) ; 
(n) ―Statutes‖ and ―Ordinances‖ mean the Statutes and the Ordinances of the  Institute made under 
this Act.   
                                                           
1. 16th September, 2014 vide notification No. S.O. 2393(E), dated 16th September, 2014, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 4 
 CHAPTER II  
THE INSTITUTE  
4. Incorporation of Institute. —(1) The National Institute of Design, Ahmedaba d, shall be a body 
corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire, 
hold and dispose of property and to contract, and shall, by that name, sue or be sued.  
(2) The body corporate constituting the Institute shall consist of a Chairperson, a  Director and other 
members of the Governing Council for the time being of the Institute.  
(3) The headquarters of the Institute shall be in the di strict of Ahmedabad in the State  of Gujarat.  
(4) The Institute may establish an Institute campus at such other place within India or  outside India, 
as it may deem fit:  
Provided that each campus of the National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad, established  before the  
commencement of this Act, at Bengaluru in the State of Karnataka and Gandhinagar  in the State of 
Gujarat, shall be deemed to be the Institute campus.  
5. Effect of the incorporation of the Institute. —On and from the date of commencement of this 
Act,— 
(a) any reference to the Society in any law (other than this Act) or in any  contract or other 
instrument shall be deemed as a reference to the Institute incorporated  under this Act;  
(b) all property, movable and immovable of, or belonging to, the Soci ety, shall  vest in the 
Institute;  
(c) all the rights and liabilities of the Society shall be transferred to, and be, the  rights and 
liabilities of, the Institute;  
(d) any reference to any campus of the Institute, established before the  commencement of this  
Act, shall be deemed as a reference to that Institute campus;  
(e) every person employed by the Society, immediately before such  commencement, shall hold 
his office or service in the Institute including the Institute  campuses, located at Bengaluru in the State 
of Karnataka and at Gandhinagar in the  State of Gujarat, by the same tenure, at the same 
remuneration and upon the same  terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to 
pension, leave,  gratuity, provident fund and other matters as h e would have held the same, if this Act  
had not been enacted, and shall continue to be so, unless and until his employment is  terminated or 
until such tenure, remuneration, terms and conditions are duly altered by  the Statutes:  
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee, his  employment may 
be terminated by the Institute in accordance with the terms of the  contract with the employee or, if no 
provision is made therein in this behalf, on payment  to him by the Institute o f compensation 
equivalent to three months’ remuneration in  the case of permanent employee and one month’s 
remuneration in the case of other  employee.  
6. Powers of Institute. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Institute shall exercise the 
follow ing powers and perform the following duties, namely: — 
(a) to provide for instructions, research and training in the areas or disciplines  relating to design 
and to nurture and promote quality and excellence thereof in such  areas or disciplines;  
(b) to devel op courses leading to graduate and post -graduate degrees, doctoral  and post -doctoral 
distinctions and research in all areas or disciplines relating to design;  
(c) to hold examinations and grant degrees, and diplomas and other academic  distinctions or title s 
in the areas or disciplines relating to design;  
(d) to confer honorary degrees, awards or other distinctions in the areas or  disciplines relating to 
design;  
(e) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, prizes and medals;  
(f) to fix, demand and receive fees and other charges;  5 
 (g) to establish, maintain and manage halls and hostels for the residence of the  students;  
(h) to supervise and control the residence and regulate the discipline of students  of the Institute 
and to make arra ngements for promoting their health, general welfare  and cultural and corporate life;  
(i) to institute academic and other posts and to make appointments thereto  (except in the case of 
the Director);  
(j) to frame Statutes and Ordinances and to alter, modify  or rescind the same;  
(k) to co -operate with educational or other institutions in any part of the world  having objects 
wholly or partly similar to those of the Institute by exchange of faculty  members and scholars and 
generally in such manner as may be conducive to their  common objective;  
(l) to act as a nucleus for interaction between academia and industry by  encouraging exchange of 
designers and other technical staff between the Institute  and the industry and by undertaking 
sponsored and funded researc h as well as  consultancy projects by the Institute;  
(m) to establish, equip and maintain workshops or laboratories or studios with  modern machinery 
and equipments in order to undertake scientific and technological  research for creating good designs 
for the  production of goods and services and to  provide funds for such works and for payment to any 
person or persons engaged in  service, training and research work whether in such workshop or 
laboratory or studio;  
(n) to acquire any patent or licence relating to  such invention, improvement or  design or 
standardisation marks whether for general or specific purposes;  
(o) to undertake consultancy in the areas or disciplines relating to design;  
(p) to deal with any property belonging to, or vested in, the Institute, in such  manner as the 
Institute may deem fit for advancing the objects of the Institute;  
(q) to receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from the Government and  to receive 
bequests,  donations and transfers of movable or immovable properties from  testators, donors or 
transferors, as the case may be;  
(r) to encourage and improve education of persons who are engaged or are likely  to be engaged in 
the service, training or research activi ties by grant of loans,  scholarships or other monetary assistance 
or otherwise;  
(s) to prepare, print, publish, issue, acquire and circulate books, papers,  periodicals, exhibits, 
films, slides, gadgets, circulars and other literary undertakings,  dealing wi th or having a bearing upon 
the subject of industrial design and allied fields;  
(t) to establish, form and maintain museums, libraries and collections of literature  and films, 
slides, photographs, prototypes and other information relating to design  and all ied subjects;  
(u) to nominate designers, engineers (mechanical or electrical or civil), architects,  craftsmen, 
technicians or investigators to study in India or outside India in regard to  the service, training and 
research in such fields as the Institute m ay think fit;  
(v) to retain or employ skilled professional, technical advisers, consultants,  workers or craftsmen 
in connection with the objects of the Institute;  
(w) to encourage artisans, technicians and others with inventive skill to work  out details an d 
specifications of processes, appliances and gadgets by giving awards,  financial or technical 
assistance;  
(x) to construct buildings and alter, extend, improve, repair, enlarge or modify  and to provide and 
equip the same with light, water, drainage, furni ture, fittings and all  other accessories;  
(y) ) to borrow and raise moneys, with or without security or on the security of a  mortgage, 
charge, or hypothecation or pledge of any of the movable or immovable  properties belonging to the 
Institute or in any oth er manner;  6 
 (z) to do all such things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the  attainment of all or 
any of the objects of the Institute.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Institute shall not  dispose of in any 
manner any immovable property without the prior approval of the Visitor.  
7. Institute be open to all races, creeds and classes. —(1) The Institute sha ll be open to persons of 
either sex and of whatever race, creed,  caste or class, and no test or condition shall be  imposed as to 
religious belief or profession  in admitting or appointing members, students, teachers or workers or in any 
other connection  whatsoever.  
(2) No bequest, donation o r transfer of any property shall be accepted by the Institute,  which in the 
opinion of the Governing Council involves conditions or obligations opposed  to the spirit and objects of 
the Institute.  
8. Teaching at Institute. —All teaching at the Institute and the Institute campuses shall be conducted 
by or in  the name of the Institute in  accordance with the Statutes and the Ordinances made in this  behalf.  
9. Visitor.—(1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the Institute.  
(2) The Visitor may appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress of  the Institute or 
any Inst itute campus and to hold inquiries into the affairs thereof and to  report thereon in such manner as 
the Visitor may direct.  
(3) Upon receipt of any such report, the Visitor may take such action and issue such  directions as he 
considers necessary in respect  of any of the matters dealt with in the report  and the Institute shall be 
bound to comply with such directions.  
10. Authorities of Institute. —The following shall be the authorities of the Institute, namely: –– 
(a) the Governing Council,  
(b) a Senate, and  
(c) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities  of the Institute.  
11. Governing Co uncil.—The Governing Council shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be an eminent academician, scientist or technologist  or professional 
or industrialist, to be nominated by the Visitor;  
(b) the Director, ex officio ; 
(c) the Financial Adviser in the Ministry or Department of the Government of  India dealing with 
the National Institute of Design , ex officio;  
(d) the Joint Secretary, in the Ministry or Department in the Government of India  dealing with the 
National Institute of Design, ex officio ; 
(e) one representative of the Ministry or Department of the Government of India  not below the 
rank of Joint Secretary dealing with Higher Education, to be nominated  by the Secretary of that 
Ministry or Department, ex officio ; 
(f) one representative of the Ministry or Department of the Government of India  not below the 
rank of Joint Secretary dealing with Information Technology to be  nominated by the Secretary of that 
Ministry or Department, ex officio ; 
(g) one representative from the State in which the Institute campus is located, to  be nominated by 
that State  Government;  
(h) five professionals, one each from the fields of architecture, engineering, fine  arts, mass media 
and technology, to be nominated by the Central Government;  
(i) an outstanding Designer, to be nominated by the Visitor in consultation with  the Central 
Government ; 
(j) a management expert, to be nominated by the Chairperson;  7 
 (k) a representative of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, to be nominated  by the Central 
Government ; 
(l) three persons to be nominated by the Senate from amongst pers ons recommended by 
companies, firms or individuals who have provided financial assistance  or contribution to the 
Institute:  
Provided that the threshold of financial assistance or contribution and other  requirements to 
qualify for such nomination shall be such as may be provided for in  the Statutes; and  
(m) Dean of each Institute campus, ex officio.  
12. Term of office of, vacancies among, and allowances payable to Chairperson and other 
members of Governing Council. —(1) The term of office of the Chairperson or any other member of the 
Governing  Council (other than an ex officio member) shall be three years from the date of his nomination.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of office of an ex officio  member shall 
continue so long as he hol ds the office by virtue of which he is a member.  
(3) The term of office of a member of the Governing Council nominated to fill a casual  vacancy shall 
continue for the remainder of the term of the member in whose place he has  been nominated.  
(4) Notwithstan ding anything contained in this section, an outgoing member shall,  unless the 
Governing Council otherwise directs, continue in office until another person is  nominated as a member in 
his place.  
(5) The members of the Governing Council shall be entitled to such allowances, if any,  from the 
Institute as may be provided for in the Statutes but no member other than the  persons referred to in 
clauses ( b) and ( m) of section 11 shall be entitled to any salary by  reason of this sub -section.  
13. Meeting of Governing Council. —The Governing Council shall meet at least four times in a year 
at such place and  time and observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its  
meetings, as may be determined by the Governing Council . 
14. Powers and functions of Governing Council. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the 
Governing Council shall be responsible  for the general superintendence, direction and control of the 
affairs of the Institute and shall  exercise all the powers of the Institute not otherwise provide d for by this 
Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, and shall have the power to review the acts of the Senate.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Governing Council  shall –– 
(a) take  decisions on questions of policy relating to the administration and  working of the 
Institute;  
(b) take decision on the establishment of new Institute campus at any place in  India or outside 
India;  
(c) institute courses of study at the Institute;  
(d) insti tute academic and other posts and to make appointments thereto;  
(e) make Statutes;  
(f) consider and modify or cancel Ordinances;  
(g) consider and pass resolutions on the annual report, the annual accounts and  the budget 
estimates of the Institute including  each of the Institute campuses for the  next financial year, as it 
thinks fit and submit them to the Central Government together  with a statement of its development 
plans; and  
(h) exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred  or imposed 
upon it by this Act or the Statutes.  
(3) The Governing Council shall have power to appoint such committees as it considers  necessary for 
the exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties under this Act.  8 
 (4) The Governing Council shall have the power to enter into arrangements with the  Central 
Government, State Governments and other public or private organisations or  individuals in India or 
outside India for securing and accepting endowments, grants, donations  or gifts to the Insti tute on 
mutually agreed terms and conditions:  
Provided that the conditions of such grant, donation or gift, if any, shall not be inconsistent  or in 
conflict with the nature or objects of the Institute and the provisions of this Act.  
(5) The Governing Counc il shall have the power to take over and acquire by purchase,  gift or 
otherwise from Government and other public bodies or private individuals willing to  transfer movable and 
immovable properties, endowments or other funds together with any  attendant obligations and 
engagements not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.  
(6) The Governing Council may by specific resolution to this effect delegate to the  Chairperson such 
of its powers for the conduct of business, as it may deem necessary.  
15. Sena te.—The Senate of the Institute shall consist of the following persons, namely: –– 
(a) the Director, ex officio, who shall be the Chairman of the Senate;  
(b) Dean of each Institute campus, ex officio ; 
(c) Senior Professors of the Institute and of the Instit ute campuses;  
(d) three persons, not being employees of the Institute, to be nominated by the  Chairperson in 
consultation with the Director , from amongst educationists of repute,  one each from the fields of 
science, engineering and humanities and at least one of  them shall be a woman;  
(e) one alumnus of the Institute to be nominated by the Chairperson in  consultation with the 
Director;  and 
(f) such other members of the staff as may be laid down in the Statutes.  
16. Functions of Senate. —Subject to the provisions of this Act, the S tatutes and the Ordinances, the 
Senate  of the Institute shall have the control and general regulation, and be responsible for the  
maintenance of standards of instruction, education and examination in the Institute and shall  exercise such 
other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed  upon it by the Statutes.  
17. Functions, powers and duties of C hairperson. —(1) The Chairperson shall ordinarily preside at 
the meetings of the Governing  Council and at the convocations of the Institute.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Chairperson to ensure that the decisions taken by the  Governing Council 
are implemented.  
(3) The Chairperson shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as  may be 
assigned to  him by this Act or the Statutes.  
18. Director. —(1) The Director of the Institute shall be appointed by the Central Government for  a 
tenure of five years in such manner and on such terms and conditions of service as may be  prescribed.  
(2) The Director shall be appointed on the recommendations of the Selection Committee  constituted 
by the Central Government.  
(3) The Director shall be the principal executive officer of the Institute and shall be  responsible for — 
(a) proper administration of the Institute and for imparting of instructions and  maintenance of 
discipline therein;  
(b) co-ordination of activities of all the Institute campuses;  
(c) examining the development plans of the Institute and each Institute campus  and to approve 
such of them as are consid ered necessary and also to indicate broadly  the financial implications of 
such approved plans; and  
(d) examining the annual budget estimates of the Institute and each Institute  campus and to 
recommend to the Central Government the allocation of funds for t hat purpose.  9 
 (4) The Director shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as  may be assigned to 
him by this Act, Statutes and Ordinances.  
(5) The Director shall submit annual reports and accounts to the Governing Council.  
(6) The Central  Government shall have the power to remove the Director before expiry  of his tenure, 
if it considers it appropriate to do so.  
19. Dean.—(1) The Dean of each Institute campus shall be appointed on such terms and  conditions as 
may be laid down by the Statute s and shall exercise such powers and perform  such duties as may be 
assigned to him by this Act or the Statutes or by the Director.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub - section ( 1), the Dean of each Institute  campus shall 
look after all academic,  administrative, research and other activities of the  Institute campus in 
consultation with the Director.  
20. Registrar. —(1) The Registrar of the Institute shall be appointed on such terms and conditions  as 
may be laid down by the Statutes and shall be the  custodian of records, the common seal,  the funds of the 
Institute and such other property of the Institute as the Governing Council  shall commit to his charge.  
(2) The Registrar shall act as the Secretary of the Governing Council, the Senate and  such comm ittees 
as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(3) The Registrar shall be responsible to the Director for the proper discharge of his  functions.  
(4) The Registrar shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as  may be assigned 
to him by thi s Act or the Statutes or by the Director.  
21. Powers and duties of other authorities and officers. —The powers and duties of authorities and 
officers, other than those hereinbefore  mentioned, shall be determined by the Statutes.  
22. Grants by Central Government. —For the purpose of enabling the Institute to discharge its 
functions efficiently  under this Act, the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by  law in this behalf, pay to the Institute in each finan cial year such sums of money and in 
such manner as it may think fit.  
23. Fund of Institute. —(1) The Institute shall maintain a Fund to which shall be credited –– 
(a) all moneys provided by the Central Government;  
(b) all fees and other charges received by the Institute;  
(c) all moneys received by the Institute by way of grants, gifts, donations,  benefactions, bequests 
or transfers; and  
(d) all moneys received by the Institute in any other manner or from any other  source.  
(2) All moneys credited to the Fund shall be deposited in such banks or invested in  such manner as 
the Institute may, with the approval of the Central Government, decide.  
(3) The Fund shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of the Institute including  expenses 
incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its duties under this Act.  
24. Setting up of Endowment Fund. —Notwithstanding anything contained in section 23, the 
Central Government may  direct the Institute to –– 
(a) set up an Endowment Fu nd and any other Fund for specified purpose; and  
(b) transfer money from its Fund to Endowment Fund or any other Fund.  
25. Accounts and audit. —(1) The Institute shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the balance sheet, in such form as may  be 
prescribed, in accordance with such general directions as may be issued by the Central  Government in 
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Insti tute shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and 
any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be  payable by the Institute to the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  10 
 (3) The Comptroller and Auditor -Gener al of India and any person appointed by him in  connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Institute shall have the same rights, privileges  and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India,  generally has in c onnection 
with the audit of the Government accounts, and, in particular,  shall have the right to demand the 
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and  other documents and papers and to inspect any of 
the offices of the Institute.  
(4) The account s of the Institute as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of  India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report  thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall  cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
26. Pension and provident fund. —(1) The Institute shall constitute, for the benefit of its employees, 
including the  Director, such pension, insurance and provident funds as it may deem fit, in such manner 
and subject to such conditions as may be laid down in the Statutes.  
(2) Where any provident fund has been constituted under sub -section ( 1), the Central  Government 
may declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925  (19 of 1925)  shall apply to  such fund as 
if it were a Government provident fund.  
27. Appointment of staff. —All appointments of the staff of the Institute, except that of the Director, 
shall be  made in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Statutes by –– 
(a) the Governing Council, if the appointment is made on the academic staff in  the post of Senior 
Designer or Professor or above or if the appointment is made on the  non-academic staff in any cadre, 
the maximum of the pay -scale for which is the same or  higher th an that of Senior Designer or 
Professor; and  
(b) the Director, in any other case.  
28. Statutes.—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of the  
following matters, namely: — 
(a) conferment of honorary degrees;  
(b) format ion of departments of teaching, establishment of workshops,  laboratories and studios;  
(c) fees to be charged for courses of study in the Institute including Institute  campus and for 
admission to the examinations of degrees, diplomas and certificates of  the Institute;  
(d) institution of fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes;  
(e) qualifications of teachers of the Institute;  
(f) classification, method of appointment and the determination of the terms and  conditions of 
service of officers, teachers and other staff of the Institute;  
(g) reservation of posts for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and  Other Backward 
Classes of persons as may be determined by the Central Government;  
(h) constitution of pension, insurance and provident fu nds for the benefit of the  officers, teachers 
and other staff of the Institute;  
(i) constitution, powers and duties of the authorities of the Institute and Institute  campuses;  
(j) establishment and maintenance of halls and hostels;  
(k) conditions of reside nce of students of the Institute and the levying of the  fees for residence in 
the halls and hostels and other charges;  
(l) manner of filling up of vacancies among members of the Governing Council;  
(m) allowances  to be paid to the Chairperson and members of the Governing  Council;  
(n) authentication of the orders and decisions of the Governing Council;  
(o) meetings of the Governing Council, Senate, or any Committee, the quorum at  such meetings 
and the procedure to be followed in the conduct of their business;  11 
 (p) any other matter which by this Act is to be or may be prescribed by the  Statutes.  
29. Statutes how to be made. —(1) The first Statutes of the Institute shall be framed by the 
Governing Council with  the previous approval of the Visitor and a copy of the same shall be laid as soon 
as may be  before each House of Parliament.  
(2) The Governing Council may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or  may amend or 
repeal the Statutes in the manner her einafter in this section provided.  
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of a  Statute shall require 
the previous approval of the Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold  assent therefrom or remit it to the 
Governing  Council for reconsideration.  
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no  validity unless 
it has been assented to by the Visitor.  
30. Ordinances. —Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinan ces of the  
Institute may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: –– 
(a) admission of the students to the Institute including Institute campus;  
(b) reservation in admission to various courses or programmes of the Institute  for the Scheduled 
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes;  
(c) courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of  the Institute;  
(d) conditions under which students shall be admitted to the degree, diploma  and certificate 
courses and to the examinations of the Institute and award of degrees,  diplomas and certificates;  
(e) conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and  prizes;  
(f) conditions and mode of appointment and duties of examining body, examiners  and 
moderators;  
(g) conduct of examinations;  
(h) maintenance of discipline among the students of the Institute; and  
(i) any other matter which by this Act or the Statutes is to be or may be provided  for by the 
Ordinances.  
31. Ordinances how to be made. —(1) Save as otherwise provided in th is section, Ordinances shall 
be made by the  Senate.  
(2) All Ordinances made by the Senate shall have effect from such date as it may direct,  but every 
Ordinance so made shall be submitted, as soon as may be, to the Governin g Council and shall be 
considered by the Governing Council at its next meeting.  
(3) The Governing Council shall have power by resolution to modify or cancel any  such Ordinance 
and such Ordinance shall from the date of such resolution stand modified  accordingly or cancelled, as the 
case may be.  
32. Arbitral Tribunal. —(1) Any dispute arising out of a contract between the Institute and any of its  
employees shall, at the request of the employee concerned or at the instance of the Institute,  be referred t o 
an Arbitral Tribunal consisting of one member appointed by the Institute, one  member nominated by the 
employee and an umpire appointed by the Visitor.  
(2) The decision of the Arbitral Tribunal shall be final and shall not be questioned in  any court.  
(3) No suit or proceeding shall lie in any court in respect of any matter which is  required by sub -
section ( 1) to be referred to the Arbitral Tribunal.  
(4) The Arbitral Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own procedure.  
(5) Nothing in any law for the tim e being in force relating to arbitration shall apply to  arbitration 
under this section.  
  12 
 CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
33. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies , etc .—No ac t of the Institute or 
Governing Council or Senate or any other authority, set  up under this Act or the Statutes, shall be invalid 
merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution thereof; or  
(b) any defect in the election, nomination or appointment of a person acting as a  member thereof; 
or 
(c) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the case.  
34. Sponsored schemes. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, whenever the Institute 
receives  funds from any Government, the University Grants Commission or any other agency in cluding  
industry sponsoring a research scheme or a consultancy assignment or a teaching programme  or a Chaired 
Professorship or a scholarship, etc., to be executed or endowed at the Institute, — 
(a) the amount received shall be kept by the Institute separat ely from the Fund  of the Institute and 
utilised only for that purpose; and  
(b) the staff required to execute the same shall be recruited in accordance with  the terms and 
conditions stipulated by the sponsoring organisations:  
Provided that any money remaining unutilised shall be transferred to the Endowment  Fund set up 
under section 24 of this Act.  
35. Power of Institute to grant degrees, etc. —The Institute shall have the power to grant degrees, 
diplomas, certificates and  other academic distinctions u nder this Act, which shall be equivalent to such 
corresponding  degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions granted by any University 
or Institute established or incorporated under any other law for the time being in force.  
36. Powers of Central Government to issue directions. —The Central Government may give such 
directions as it may deem necessary to the  Institute for effective administration of this Act and the 
Institute shall comply with such  directions.  
37. Institute to be p ublic authority under Right to Information Act, 2005. —The provisions of the 
Right to Information Act, 2005  (22 of 2005) shall apply to the Institute, as  if it were a public authority as 
defined in clause ( h) of section 2 of the Right to Information  Act, 20 05. 
38. Power  of Central Government to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make rules to carry out the  purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such  rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of appointment of the Director and terms and conditions of his  service under sub -
section ( 1) of section 18;  
(b) the form and the manner in which the books of account of the Institute shall  be maintained 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 25;  
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it  is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it  is in session, for a total period of thirty  days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,  before the expiry of the session, 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions  aforesaid, both Houses agr ee in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree  that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified  form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or  annulment s hall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.  13 
 39. Transitional provisions. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act –– 
(a) the Governing Council of the Institute functioning as such, immediately  before the 
commencement of this Act, shall continue to so function until a new  Governing Council is constituted 
for the Institute under this Act, but on the constitution  of a new Governing Council under this Act, the 
members of the Governing Council  holding office be fore such constitution shall cease to hold office;  
(b) the Policy and Planning Committee of the Society, functioning as such before  the 
commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to be the Senate constituted under this  Act and continue 
to so function until a new Senate is constituted for the Institute  under this Act;  
(c) until the first Statutes and Ordinances are made under this Act, the rules and  regulations, 
instructions, guidelines and bye -laws of the Society, in force immediately  before the commencement  
of this Act, shall continue to apply to the Institute and  Institute campuses located at Bengaluru or 
Gandhinagar, as the case may be, in so far  as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.  
40. Statutes and Ordinances to be published in th e Official Gazette and to be laid before 
Parliament. —(1) Every Statute or Ordinance made under this Act shall be published in the  Official 
Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute or Ordinance made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be  after it is made, 
before  each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of  thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,  and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive  sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the Statute or Ordinance  or both Houses agree that the Statute or Ordinance should not be 
made, the Statute or  Ordinance shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 
as the  case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice  to 
the validity of anything previously done under that Statute or Ordinance.  
(3) The power to make Statutes or Ordinances shall include the power to  give retrospective effect 
from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act to  Statutes or Ordinances or any of 
them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any  Statute or Ordinance so as to prejudicially affect the 
interests of any person to whom such  Statutes or Ordinances may be applicable.  
41. Power  to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central  Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such p rovisions 
or give  such directions not inconsistent with the purposes of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary  or 
expedient for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the  appointed day.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,  before each 
House of Parliament.  
--------------------------The National Judicial Appointments Commission Act, 2014--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL JUDICIAL APPOINTMENTS  COMMISSION ACT, 2014  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Headquarters of Commission . 
4. Reference to Commission for filling up of vacancies.  
5. Procedure for selection of Judge of Supreme Court . 
6. Procedure for selection of Judge of High Court.  
7. Power of President to require reconsideration . 
8. Officers and employees of Commission.  
9. Procedure for transfer of Judges . 
10. Procedure to be followed by Commission in discharge of its functions . 
11. Power to make rules.  
12. Power to make regulations.  
13. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament . 
14. Power to remove difficulties . 
 
  2 
 THE NATIONAL JUDICIAL APPOINTMENTS  COMMISSION ACT, 2014  
ACT NO. 40 OF 2014  
[31st December , 2014.]  
An Act to regulate the procedure to be followed by the National Judicial Appointments 
Commission for recommending persons for appointment as the Chief Justice of India and 
other Judges of the Supreme Court and Chief Justices and other Judges of High Courts and 
for their transfers and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the National Judicial  Appoint ments 
Commission Act, 2014.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) ―Chairperson‖ means the Chairperson of the Commission;  
(b) ―Commission‖ means the National Judicial Appointments Commission referred to in article 
124A of the Constitution;  
(c) ―High Court‖ means the High Court in respect of which recommendation for appointment of a 
Judge is prop osed to be made by the Commission;  
(d) ―Member‖ means a Member of the Commissio n and includes its Chairperson;  
(e) ―prescribed‖ means prescribed by the rules made under this Act;  
(f) ―regulations‖ means the regulations made by the Commission under this Act . 
3. Headquarters of Commission .—The Headquarters of the Commission shall be at Delhi.  
4. Reference to Commission for filling up of vacancies .—(1)The Central Government shall, within 
a period of thirty days from the date of coming into force of this Act, intimate the vacancies existin g in 
the posts of Judges in the Supreme Court and in a High Court to the Commission for mak ing its 
recommendations to fill up such vacancies.  
(2) The Central Government shall, six months prior t o the date of occurrence of any vacancy by 
reason of completion of the term of a Judge of  the Supreme Court or of a High Court, make a reference to 
the Commission for making its  recommendation to fill up such vacancy.  
(3) The Central Government shall, within a period of thirty days from the date of occurrence of any 
vacancy by reason of death or resign ation of a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court, make a 
reference to the Commission  for making its recommendations to fill up such vacancy.  
5. Procedure for selection of Judge of Supreme Court. —(1) The Commission shall recommend for 
appointme nt the senior -most Judge of the Supreme Court as the Chief Justice of India if he is considered 
fit to hold the office:  
Provided that a member of the Commis sion who se name is being considered for recommendation 
shall not participate in the meeting.  
(2) The Commission shall, on the basis of ability, merit and any other criteria of suitability as may be 
specified by regulations, recommen d the name for appointme nt as a Judge of the Supreme Court from 
amongst persons who are e ligible to be appointed as such under clause ( 3) of article 124 of the 
Constitution:  
Provided that while making recommendation for appointment of a High Co urt Judge, apart from 
seniority, the  ability and merit of such Judge shall be considered:  
                                                           
1. 13th April, 2015, vide notification No. S.O. 1001(E), dated  by 13th April, 2015, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,            
Part II, s ec. 3( ii). 3 
 Provided further that the Commission shall not rec ommend a person for appointment if any two 
members of the Commission do not agree for such recommendation.  
(3) The Commission may, by regulations, speci fy such  other procedure and conditions for selection 
and appointment of a Judge of the Supreme Court as it may consider necessary.  
6. Procedure for selection of Judge of High Cour t.—(1) The Commission shall recommend for 
appointmen t a Judge of a High Court to be the Chief Justice of a High Court on the basis of inter se 
seniority of High Court Judges and ability, merit and any other criteria of suitability as may be specified 
by regulations.  
(2) The Commission shall seek nomination from the Chief Justice of the concern ed High Court for 
the purpose of recommending for appointment a person to be a Judge of that . 
(3) The Commission shall also on the basis of ability, merit and any other criteria of suitability as may 
be specified by regulations, nominate nam e for appointment as a Judge of a High Court from amongst 
persons who are eligible to be app ointed as such under clause ( 2) of article 217 of the Constitution and 
forward such names to the  Chief Justice of the concerned High Court for its views.  
(4) Before making any nomination under sub -section ( 2) or giving its views under sub-section ( 3), the 
Chief Justice of the concerned High Cour t shall consult two senior -most Judges of that High Court and 
such other Judges and eminent advocat es of that High Co urt as may be specified by regulations.  
(5) After receiving views and nomination under sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), the Commission may 
recommend for appointment the person who is found su itable on the basis of ability, merit and any other 
criteria of suitability as may be specified by regulations.  
(6) The Commission shall not recommend a person for  appointment under this section if any two 
members of the Commission do not agree for such recommendation.  
(7) The Commission shall elicit in writi ng the views of th e Governor and the Chief Minister of the 
State concerned before making suc h recommendation in such manner as may be specified by regulations.  
(8) The Commission may, by regulations, specify such  other procedure and conditions for selection 
and appointment of a Chief Justice of a High Co urt and a Judge of a High Court as it may consider 
necessary.  
7. Power of President t o require reconsideration .—The President shall, on the recommendations 
made by the Commission, appoint the Chief Justice of India or a Judge of the Supreme Co urt or, as the 
case may be, the Chief Justice of a High Court or the Judge of a High Court:  
Provided that the President may, if considers neces sary, require the Commission to reconsider, either 
generally or othe rwise, the recommendation made by it:  
Provided further that if the Commission makes a recom mendation after reconsideration in accordance 
with the provisions contained in sections 5 or 6, the President shall make the appointment accordingly.  
8.Officers and employees of Commission .—(1) The Central Government may, in consultati on with 
the Commission, appoint such number of officers and other employees for the discharge  of functions of 
the Commission under this Act.  
(2) The terms and other conditions of service  of officers and other empl oyees of the Commission 
appointed under sub -section ( 1) shal l be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Conveyor  of the Commission shall be the Secre tary to the Government of India in the 
Department of Justice.  
9. Procedure for trans fer of Judge s.—The Commission shall recommend for transfer of Chi ef 
Justices and other Judges of High Courts from one High Court to any other High Court, an d for this 
purpose, specify, by regulations, the procedure for such transfer.  
10. Procedure to be followed by Commission in discharge of its  functions. —(1) The Commission 
shall have the power to specify, by regulations, the procedu re for the discharge of its functions.  4 
 (2) The Commission shall meet at such time and plac e as the Chairper son may direct and observe 
such rules of procedure in regard to the transact ion of business at its meetings (including the quorum at its 
meeting), as it may specify by regulations.  
11. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in  the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generali ty of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: –– 
(a) the fees and allowances payable to the eminent persons nominated under sub-clause ( d) of 
clause ( 1) of article 124A of the Constitution;  
(b) the terms and other conditions of service of officers and other employees of the Commission 
under  sub-section ( 2) of section 8;  
(c) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, in respect of which provision is to be 
made by the rules.  
12. Power to make regulations. —(1) The Commission may,  by notification in the Off icial Gazette, 
make regulations consistent  with this Act, and the rules made thereunder, to c arry out the provisions of 
this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generali ty of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the criteria of suitability with respect to appointment of a Judge of the  Supreme Court under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 5 ; 
(b) other procedure and conditions for selection  and appointment of a Judge of the Supreme Court 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 5;  
(c) the criteria of suitability with respect t o appointment of a Judge of the High Court under           
sub-section ( 3) of section 6;  
(d) other Judges and eminent advocates who may  be consulted by the Chief Justice under        
sub-section ( 4) of section 6 ; 
(e) the manner of eliciting views of the Govern or and the Chief Minister under sub-section ( 7) of 
section 6;  
(f) other procedure and conditions for selection and appointment of a Judge of the High Court 
under sub -section ( 8) of section 6;  
(g) the procedu re for transfer of Chief Jus tices and other Judges from one High Court to any ot her 
High Court under section 9 ; 
(h) the procedure to be followed by the Com mission in the discharge of its functions under            
sub-section ( 1) of section 10;  
(i) the rul es of procedure in regard to the transact ion of business at the meetings of Commission, 
including the quorum at its meeting, under sub -section ( 2) of section 10;  
(j) any other matter which is required to be, or m ay be, specified by regulations or in respect of 
which provision is to be made by regulations.  
13.Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and regulation made under this 
Act shall b e laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in  
sessio n, for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or mo re 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the ses sion or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in  the rule or regulation or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be mad e, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the  case may be; so, however, that any such 5 
 modification or annulment shall be wi thout prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation.  
14. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Ce ntral Government may, after consultation with the Commissio n, by an order published in 
the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent wit h the provisions of this Act as appear to it 
to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry  of a period of five years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as m ay be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
 
_____ ________  
--------------------------The Rani Lakshmi Bai Central Agricultural University Act, 2014--------------------------
1 
 THE RANI LAKSHMI BAI CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL  UNIVERSITY ACT, 2014  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration of Rani Lakshmi Bai  Centra l Agricultural University as an  institution of national 
importance.  
3. Definitions.  
4. The University.  
5. Objects of the University.  
6. Powers of the University.  
7. Jurisdiction.  
8. University open to all classes, castes and creed.  
9. The Visitor.  
10. Officers of the University.  
11. The Chancellor.  
12. The Vice -Chancellor.  
13. Deans and Directors.  
14. The Registrar.   
15. The Comptroller.  
16. Other o fficers.  
17. Authorities of the University.  
18. The Board of Management.  
19. The Academic Council.  
20. The Research Council.  
21. The Extension Education Council.  
22. The Finance Committee.  
23. Faculties.  
24. The Board of Studies.  
25. Other authorities.  
26. Power to make Statut es. 
27. Statutes how to be made.   
28. Power to make Ordinances . 
29. Regulations.  
30. Annual report.  
31. Annual accounts.  
32. Conditions of service of employees.  
33. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students.  
34. Right to appeal.  
35. Provident and pension funds.  
36. Disputes as to constitution of University authorities.  
37. Constitution of Committees.  
38. Filling of casual vacancies.  
39. Proceedings of the University authorities not invalidated by vacancy.  
40. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
41. Mode of proof of University records.  
42. Power to remove difficulties.  
43. Transitional provisions.  
44. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid 
before  Parliament.  
THE SCHEDULE.  2 
 THE RANI LAKSHMI BAI CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL  UNIVERSITY  
ACT, 2014  
ACT NO. 10 OF 2014  
[4th March,  2014.]  
An Act to provide for the establishment and incorporation of a University in the  Bundelkhand 
region for the development of agriculture and for the furtherance  of the advancement of 
learning and pursuit of research in agriculture and  allied sciences and declare it to be an 
institution of national importance.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -fifth Year of the  Republic of  India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be call ed the Rani Lakshmi Bai Central 
Agricultural University Act,  2014.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification  in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration of Rani Lakshmi Bai Ce ntral Agricultural University as an  institution of 
national importance. —Whereas the objects of the institution known as the Rani Lakshmi Bai Central  
Agricultural University are such as to make the institution one of national importance, it is  hereby 
declared that the institution known as the Rani Lakshmi Bai Central Agricultural  University is an 
institution of national importance.  
3. Definitions. —In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unle ss the context otherwise  
requires, — 
(a) ―Academic Council‖ means the Academic Council of the University;  
(b) ―Academic staff‖ means such categories of staff as are designated as  academic staff by the 
Ordinances;  
(c) ―agriculture‖ means the basic and applied sciences of the soil and water  management,  crop 
production including production of all garden crops, control of  plants, pests and diseases, 
horticulture including floriculture, animal husbandry  includin g veterinar y and dairy science, 
fisheries, fo restry including farm forestry, home -science, agricultu ral engineering and technology, 
marketing and processing of  agricultural and animal husbandry products, land use and management;  
(d) ―Board‖ means the Board of Managem ent of the University;  
(e) ―Board of Studies‖ means the Board of Studies of the University;  
(f) ―Bundelkhand‖ means the area covering six districts, namely Chhatarpur,  Damoh, Datia, 
Panna, Sagar and Tikamgarh of Madhya Pradesh and seven districts,  namely B anda, Chitrakoot, 
Hamirpur, Jalaun, Jhansi, Lalitpur and Mahoba of Uttar  Pradesh;  
(g) ―Chancellor‖ means the Chancellor of the University;  
(h) ―college‖ means  a constituent  college of the University whether located at  the headquarters, 
campus or elsewhere;  
(i) ―Department‖ means a Department of Studies of the University;  
(j) ―employee‖ means any person appointed by the University and includes  teachers and other 
staff of the University;  
(k) ―extension education‖ means the educational activities concerned wit h the  training of 
orchardists, farmers and other groups serving agriculture, horticulture,  fisheries and improved 
practices related thereto and the various phases of scientific  technology related to agriculture and 
agricultural production including post harvest  technology and marketing;  
(l) ―Faculty‖ means Faculty of the University;  3 
 (m) ―Ordinances‖ means the Ordinances of the University;  
(n) ―Regulations‖ means the Regulations made by any authority of the University;  
(o) ―Research Advisory Committee‖ mea ns the Research Advisory Committee  of the 
University;  
(p) ―Statutes‖ means the Statutes of the University;  
(q) ―Student‖ means a person enrolled in the University for undergoing a course  of studies for 
obtaining a degree, diploma or other academic distinct ion duly instituted;  
(r) ―teachers‖ means Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant Professors,  Teaching Faculty 
Members and their equivalent appointed for imparting instruction or  conducting research or 
extension education programmes or combination of these in  the University, college or any institute 
maintained by t he University and designated as teachers by  the Ordinances;  
(s) ―University‖ means the Rani Lakshmi Bai Central Agricultural University  established under 
this Act;  
(t) ―Vice -Chancellor‖ mean s the Vice -Chancellor of the University;  
(u) ―Visitor‖ means the Visitor of the University.  
4. The University. —(1) There shall be established a University by the name of the ―Rani Lakshmi 
Bai Central Agricultural University‖.  
(2) The headquarters of the University shall be at Jhansi in the State of Uttar Pradesh  and it may also 
establish campuses at such other places within its jurisdiction as it may deem  fit: 
Provided that the University shall establish two colleges in the State of Madhya Pradesh and two 
colleges at Jhansi in the State of Uttar Pradesh in the Bundelkhand  Region.  
(3) The first Chancellor and the first Vice -Chancellor and the first members of the  Board, the 
Academic Council and all persons who may hereafter become s uch officers or  members, so long as they 
continue to hold such office or membership are hereby constituted  a body corporate by the name of the 
Rani Lakshmi Bai Central Agricultural University.  
(4) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common  seal and shall sue  and be sued by 
the said name.   
5. Objects of the Univ ersity. —The objects of the University shall be — 
(a) to impart education in different branches of agriculture and allied sciences  as it may deem 
fit; 
(b) to further the advancement of learning and conducting of research in  agricultural and allied 
sciences;  
(c) to undertake programmes of extension education in Bundelkhand in the  districts of  the 
States under its jurisdiction;  
(d) to promote partnership and li nkages with national and international  educational institutions; 
and 
(e) to undertake such other activities as it may, from time to time, determine.  
6. Powers of the University. —The University shall have the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to make provisions for instructions in agriculture and allied sciences;  
(ii) to make provisions for conduct of research in agriculture and allied branches  of learning;  
(iii) to make provisions for dissemination of the findings of research and technical  infor mation 
through extension programmes;  
(iv) to grant, subject to such conditions as it may determine, diplomas or  certificates to, and 
confer degrees or other academic distinctions on the basis of  examination, evaluation or any other 
method of testing, on pe rsons, and to withdraw  any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or other 
academic distinction for good and  sufficient cause;  4 
 (v) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner prescribed by  the Statutes;  
(vi) to provide lectures and instructions for field workers, village leaders and  other persons not 
enrolled as regular students of the University and to grant certificates  to them as may be prescribed 
by the Statutes ; 
(vii) to co -operate or collaborate or asso ciate with any other University or  authority or institution 
of higher learning in such manner and for such purpose as the  University may determine;  
(viii) to establish and maintain colleges relating to agriculture, horticulture,  fisheries, forestry, 
veteri nary and animal science, dairying, home -science and allied  sciences, as necessary;  
(ix) to establish and maintain such campuses, special centres, specialised  laboratories, libraries, 
museums or other units for research and institution as are, in its  opinion, necessary for the 
furtherance of its objects;  
(x) to create teaching, research and extension education posts and to make  appointments thereto;  
(xi) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make appointments  thereto;  
(xii) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and  prizes;  
(xiii) to determine standards of admission to the University which may include  examination, 
evaluation or any other method of testing;  
(xiv) to provide and maintain residentia l accommodation for students and  employees;  
(xv) to supervise the residential accommodation of the students and employees of  the University 
and to make arrangements for promoting their health and general welfare;  
(xvi) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, including  their code of 
conduct;  
(xvii) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the employees  and to take such 
disciplinary measures in this regard as it may deem necessary;  
(xviii) to fix, demand and receive such fees and other charges as may be  prescribed by the 
Statutes;  
(xix) to borrow, with the approval of the Central Government on the security of  its property, 
money for the purpose of the University;  
(xx) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold, manage  and dispose of any 
property, movable or immovable including trust and endowment  properties, for its purposes;  
(xxi) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or  conducive to the 
attainment of all or any of its objects.  
7. Jurisdiction. —(1) The jurisdiction and responsibility of the University with respect to teaching,  
research and programmes of extension education at the Un iversity level, in the field of agriculture shall 
extend to whole country and priority shall b e laid on the issues related to  Bundelkhand region.  
(2) All colleges, research and experimental stations or other institutions to be  established under the 
authority of the University shall come in as constituent units under  the full management and control of 
the officers and authorities and no such units shall be  recognised as affiliated units.  
(3) The University may assume responsibility for the training of field extension workers  and others 
and may develop such training centres as may be required in various parts of  Bundelkhand under its 
jurisdiction.  
8. University open to all classes, castes and creed. —The University shall be open to persons of 
either sex and of whatever caste, creed,  race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to  
adopt or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to enti tle 
him to be appointed as  a teacher of the University or to hold any other office therein  or be admitted as a 
student in the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof:  5 
 Provided that nothing in this section shall be de emed to prevent the University from  making special 
provisions for the employment or admission of women, persons with disabilities  or of persons belonging 
to the weaker sections of the soc iety and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribe s 
and the other socially and educationally backward  classes of citizens.  
9. The Visitor .—(1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections (3) and (4), the Visitor shall have the right to cause  an 
inspection to be made, by such person or persons as he may direct, of the  University, its buildings, 
laboratories, libraries, museums, work shops and equipments , and of any institution or college and also 
of the examination, instruction and other work c onducted  or done by the University, and to cause an 
inquiry to be made i n like manner in respe ct of any matter connected with the administration and 
finances of the University.  
(3) The Visitor shall, in every case, give notice to the University of his inte ntion to  cause, an 
inspection or inquiry to be made and the University shall, on receipt of such notice,  have the right to 
make, within thirty days from the date of receipt of the notice or such other  period as the Visitor may 
determine, such representatio ns to him as it may consider necessary.  
(4) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University, the Visitor  may cause to be 
made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in sub -section (2). 
(5) Where an inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the  University shall 
be entitled to appoint a representative who shall have the right to appear in  person and to be heard on 
such inspection or inquiry.  
(6) The Visitor may address the Vice -Chancellor with reference to the results of such  inspection or 
inquiry together with such views and advice with regard to the action to be  taken thereon as the Visitor 
may be pleased to offer and on receipt of the address made by the  Visitor, the Vice -Chancellor shall 
communicate forthwith to the Board, the results of the  inspection or inquiry and the views of the Visitor 
and the advice tendered by him upon the  action to be taken thereon.  
(7) The Board shall communicate through the Vice -Chancellor to the Visitor such  action, if any, as 
it proposes to take or has been taken by it upon the results of such  inspection or inquiry.  
(8) Where the Board does not, within reasonable time, take action to the satisfaction of  the Visitor, 
the Visitor may, after considering any explanation furnished or representation  made by the Board, issue 
such directions as he may think fit and the Board shall be bound to comply with such directions.  
(9) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Visitor  may, by an  order in 
writing, annul any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with this  Act, the Statutes or 
the Ordinances:  
Provided that before making any such order, he shall call upon the University to show  cause why 
such an order sho uld not be made and, if any cause is shown within a reasonable  time, he shall consider 
the same.  
(10) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
10. Officers of the University. —The following shall be the officers of the University, namely: — 
(1) the Chancellor;  
(2) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(3) the Deans;  
(4) the Directors;  
(5) the Registrar;  
(6) the Comptroller;  
(7) the University Librarian; and  6 
 (8) such other officers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
11. The Chancellor .—(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner as may 
be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the Head of the University.  
(3) The Chancellor shall, if present, preside at the convocations of the University held  for conferring 
degrees.  
12. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appoin ted by the Visitor in such 
manner as may be  prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of the  University and 
shall exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of the University  and give effect to the 
decisions of all the authorities of the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may, if he is of the opinion that immediate action is necessary  on any 
matter, exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under  this Act and shall 
report to such authority the action taken by him on such matter:  
Provided that if the authority concerned is of opinion that such action ought not to  have been taken, 
it may refer the matter to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be f inal: 
Provided further that any person in the service of the University who is aggrieved by  the action 
taken by the Vice -Chancellor under this sub -section shall have the right to appeal  against such action to 
the Board within three months from the date on which decision on  such action is communicated to him 
and thereupon the Board may confirm, modify or reverse  the action taken by the Vice -Chancellor.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that any decision of any authority of the  University 
is be yond the powers of the authority conferred by the provisions of this Act, the  Statutes or the 
Ordinances or that any decision taken is not in the interest of the University,  may ask the authority 
concerned to review its decision within sixty days of such d ecision  and if the authority refuses to review 
the decision either in whole or in part or no decision is  taken by it within the said period of sixty days, 
the matter shall be referred to the Visitor  whose decision thereon shall be final.  
(5) The Vice -Chanc ellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other  duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
13. Deans and Directors. —Every Dean and every Director shall be appointed in such manner and 
shall exercise  such powers and perform  such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
14. The Registrar. —(1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner as may be prescribed by 
the Statutes.  
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreements, sign documents and  authenticate  
records on behalf of the University and shall exercise such powers and perform  such duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
15. The Comptroller .—The Comptroller shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise such 
powers  and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
16. Other officers .—The manner of appointment and powers and duties of the other officers of the  
University shall be as prescribed by the Statutes.  
17. Authorities of the University. —The following shall be the authorit ies of the University, 
namely: – 
(1) the Board of Management;  
(2) the Academic Council;  
(3) the Research Council;  
  7 
 (4) the Extension Education Council;  
(5) the Finance Committee;  
(6) the Faculties and Board of Studies; and  
(7) such other authorities as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
18. The Board of Management .—(1) The Board of Management shall be the principal executive 
body of the University.  
(2) The constitution of the Board, the term of office of its members and its powers and  functions 
shall  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
19. The Academic Council .—(1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of 
the University  and shall, subject  to the provisions of this Act, the St atutes and Ordinances, have the 
control and general regulation of, and be responsible for, the maintenance of standards of  learning, 
education, instruction, evaluation and examination within the University and shall exercise such other 
powers and perform such other functions  as may be conferred or imposed upon it by the Statutes.  
(2) The constitution of the Academic Council and the term of office of its members  shall be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
20. The Research Council. —The constitution, powers and functions of the Research Council shall 
be prescribed  by the Statutes.  
21. The Extension Education Council .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Extension 
Education Council shall  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
22. The Finance Committee .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee 
shall be prescribed  by the Statutes.  
23. Faculties .—The University shall have such Faculties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
24. The Board of Studies .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Studies shall be 
prescribed  by the Statutes.  
25. Other authorities .—The constitution, powers and functions of other authorities of the 
University  referred to in clause (7) of section 17 shall be such as m ay be prescribed by the Statutes.  
26. Power to make Statut es.—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all 
or any of the  following matters, namely: — 
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of the authorities of the University,  as may be  
constituted from time to time;  
(b) the appointment and continuance in office of the members of the said  authorities, the filling 
up of vacancies of members, and all other matters relating to  those authorities for which it may be 
necessary or des irable to provide;  
(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the University and  their emoluments;  
(d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees of the  University and their 
emoluments;  
(e) the appointment of teachers an d academic staff working in any other  University or 
organisation for a specific period for undertaking a joint project;  
(f) the conditions of service of employees including provision for pension,  insurance and 
provident fund, the manner of termination of s ervice and disciplinary  action;  
(g) the principles governing the seniority of service of employees of the  University;  
(h) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or  students and the 
University;  8 
 (i) the procedure for appeal to the Board by any employee or student against  the action of any 
officer or authority of the University;  
(j) the establishment and abolition of Departments, centres, colleges and  institutions;  
(k) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(l)  the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic  distinctions;  
(m) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and  prizes;  
(n) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the University;  
(o) the maintenance of discipline among the employees and students;  
(p) all other matters which are to be, or may be, prescribed by the Statutes.  
27. Statutes how to be made .—(1) The first Statutes are those set out in the Schedule.  
(2) The Board may from time to time make Statutes or may amend or repeal the Statutes  referred to 
in sub -section (1): 
Provided that the Board shall not make, amend or repeal any Statute affecting the  status, powers or 
constitution of any authority of the University until such authority has  been given an opportunity of 
expressing an opinion in writing on the proposed changes, and  any opinion so expressed shall be 
considered by the Board.  
(3) Every Statute or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall requir e the assent of the  Visitor who 
may assent thereto or withhold assent therefrom or remit it to the Board for  consideration.  
(4) A Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no  validity unless it 
has been assented to by the Vi sitor.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor  may amend or 
repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section (1) during the period of three  years immediately after the 
commencement of this Act.  
(6) Notwithstanding an ything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor  may direct the 
University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified  by him and if the Board 
is unable to implement such direction within sixty days of its receipt,  the Visitor may, after considering 
the reasons, if any, communicated by the Board for its  inability to comply with such direction, make or 
amend the Statutes suitably.  
28. Power to make Ordinances .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and Statutes, the 
Ordinances may provide  for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates  of the  
University;  
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;  
(d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions,  the 
qualifications for the same and the means to be taken relating to the  granting and  obtaining of the 
same;  
(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission  to the 
examinations, degrees, diplomas and certificates of the University;  
(f) the conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships, s tudentships, medals  and prizes;  
(g) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and manner of  appointment and the 
duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators;  
 (h) the conditions of residence of the students;  9 
 (i) the special arrangem ents, if any, which may be made for the residence, discipline  and 
teaching of women students and the prescribing of special courses of studies for  them;  
(j) the appointment and emoluments of employees other than those for whom  provision has been 
made in th e Statutes;  
(k) the establishment of special centres, specialised laboratories and other  committees;  
(l) the manner of co -operation and collaboration with other Universities and  authorities 
including learned bodies or associations;  
(m) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is considered  necessary for 
improving the academic life of the University;  
(n) such other terms and conditions of service of teachers and other academic  staff as are not 
prescribed by the Statute s; 
(o) the management of colleg es and institutions established by the University;  
(p) the setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances of employees; and  
(q) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes may be provided for by the  Ordinances.  
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice -Chancellor with the previous  approval of the 
Central Government and the Ordinances so made may be amended or repealed  at any time by the Board 
in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.  
29. Regulations . —The authorities of the University may make Regulations, consistent with this 
Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business and that of the  Committees 
appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordin ances  in the manner 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
30. Annual report .—(1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction 
of the  Board, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the University towards the 
fulfilment of its objects and shall be submitted to the Boa rd on or after such date as may be prescribed 
by the Statutes and the Board shall consider the report in its annual meeting.  
(2) The Board shall submit the annual report to the Visitor along with i ts comments, if  any. 
(3) A copy of the annual report as prepared under sub -section (1) shall also be submitted  to the 
Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before  both the Houses 
of Parliament.  
31. Annual acco unts.—(1) The annual accounts of the University shall be prepared under the 
directions  of the Board and shall, once at least every year and at int ervals of not more than fifteen 
months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General  of India or by such persons as he may 
authorise in this behalf.  
(2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report thereon shall be  submitted to the 
Board and the Visitor along with the observations of the Board.  
(3) Any observations made by  the Visitor on the annual accounts shall be brought to  the notice of 
the Board and observations of the Board, if any, shall be submitted to the  Visitor.  
(4) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report as submitted to the  Visitor, shall 
also be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be,  cause the same to be laid 
before both the Houses of Parliament.  
(5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before both the Houses of  Parliament shall be 
published in the  Official Gazette.  
32. Conditions of service of employee .—(1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed 
under a written contract,  which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be 
furnished to the employee concerned.  10 
 (2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any employee  shall, at the 
request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of  one member appointed by 
the Board, one member nominated by the employee concerned  and an umpire appointed by the Visitor.  
(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final, and no suit shall lie in any civil court in  respect of the 
matters decided by the Tribunal.  
(4) Every request made by the employee under sub -section ( 2) shall be deemed to be  a submission to 
arbitration upon the terms of this section within the meaning of the Arbitration  and Conciliation Act, 
1996  (26 of 1996) . 
(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall be prescribed by the  Statutes.  
33. Proced ure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students .—(1) Any 
student or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed  from the rolls of the University 
by the orders or resolution of the Vice -Chancellor, Discipline Committee or Examination Committee, as 
the case may be,  and who has been debarred from appearing at the examinations of the University for 
more than one year, may, within ten days  of the date of receipt of such orders or copy of such resolut ion 
by him, appeal to the Bo ard and the Board may confirm, modify or reverse the decisio n of the Vice -
Chancellor or the Committee, as the case may be.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against  a student shall, 
at the request of such studen t, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the  provisions of sub -sections 
(2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 32 shall, as far as may be, apply to  a reference made under this sub -
section.  
34. Right to appeal. —Every employee or student of the University or of a college or institution 
maintained  by the University shall, notwithstanding anything contain ed in this Act, have a right to 
appeal, within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes, to the Board against the  decision of any 
officer or authority of the University or any college or an institution, as the  case may be, and thereupon 
the Board may confirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed  against.  
35. Provident and pension funds. —(1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its 
employees such provident  or pension fund or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit in such 
manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Where such provide nt fund or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central  Government 
may declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925  (19 of 1925) , shall apply to  such fund, 
as if it were a Government provident fund.  
36. Disputes as to constitution of U niversity authorities .—If any question arises as to whether 
any person has been duly appointed as, or is  entitled to be, a member of any authority of the University, 
the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.  
37. Constitution of Commi ttees.—Where any authority of the University is given power by this 
Act or the Statutes  to appoint Committees, such Committees shall, save as oth erwise provided, consist 
of the members of the authority concerned and of such persons, i f any, as the authority in each case may 
think fit.  
38. Filling of casual vacancies .—All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio  
members) of any  authority of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the person who 
appointed or co -opted the member whose place has become vac ant and the person appointed or co-opted 
to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such autho rity or body for the residue of the term, for which 
the person whose place he fills would have been a member.  
39. Proceedings of the University authorities not invalidated by vacancy .—No act or 
proceedings of any authority of the University shall be invalid merely by  reason of the existence of a 
vacancy or vacancies among its members.  
40. Protectio n of action taken in good faith. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Board, Vice -Chancellor, any authority or officer or other employee of th e University for 11 
 anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of any  of the provisions of this 
Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
41. Mode  of proof of University records. —A copy of any receipt, application, notice, order, 
proceeding, resolution of any  authority or Committee of the University, or other documents i n 
posses sion of the University, or any entry in any register duly maintained by the University , if verified 
by the Registrar, shall be received as prima facie  evidence of such receip t, application, notice, order, 
proceeding,  resolution or documents or the existenc e of entry in the re gister and shall be admitted as 
evidence of the matters and transactions therein where the origi nal thereof would, if produced, have 
been admissible in evidence, notwithstanding anything c ontained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872       
(1 of 1872) or in any other law for the time being in force.  
42. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central  Government may, by order published in the Official Gaz ette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it t o be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulties:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three  years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,  before each 
House of Parliament.  
43. Transitional provisions .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, and the Statutes, — 
(a) the first Chancellor and the first Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the  Visitor and shall 
hold office for a term of five years;  
(b) the first Registrar and the first Comptroller shall be appointed by the Visitor  and each of the 
said officers shall hold o ffice for a term of three years;  
(c) the first members of the Board shall be nominated by the Visitor and shall  hold office for a 
term of three years;  
(d) the first members of the Academic Council shall be nominated by the Visitor  and shall hold 
office for  a term of three years:  
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or authorities, the same shall  be filled by 
appointment or nomination, as the case may be, by the Visitor, and the person so  appointed or 
nominated shall hold office for so long as the officer or member in whose place  he is appointed or 
nominated would have held office, if such vacancy had not occurred.  
44. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid 
before Parliament .—(1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be 
published  in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon  as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while  it is in session for a total  period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive  sessions, and if, before the expiry 
of the session immediately following the session or the  successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses ag ree 
in making any modification in the Statute,  Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree that the 
Statute, Ordinance or Regulation  should not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall 
thereafter have effect only in  such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such  modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously  
done under that Statute, Ordinance or Regulation.  
(3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shall include the power to  give 
retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act,  to the Statutes, 
Ordinances or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective ef fect shall be  given to any Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation so as to prejudicially affect the interests of  any person to whom such Statutes, 
Ordinances or Regulations may be applicable.   12 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 27)  
THE STATUTES  OF THE UNIVERSITY  
The Chancellor  
1. (1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less than  three persons 
recommended by the Board from amongst persons of eminence in education in  general and agric ultural 
sciences in particular:  
Provided that if the V isitor does not approve any of the persons so recommended, he  may call for  
fresh recommendations from the Board.  
(2) The Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years and shall not be eligible for  
reappointment:  
Provided that in exceptional circums tances, the chancellor may continue to hold office  until his 
successor enters upon his office.  
The Vice -Chancellor  
2. (1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less  than three 
persons who  shall be recommended by a Committee as constituted under clause (2). 
(2) The Committee referred to in clause (1) shall consist of the following: — 
(i) Secretary, Department of Agricultural Research and Education, Government  of India who 
shall be the Chairma n; 
(ii) one nominee of the Visitor as Member, who shall also be the Convener;  
(iii) one nominee of the Central Government.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which  he enters 
upon his office, or until he attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier,  and he shall be eligible 
for reappointment for a further term of five year s, or until he attains  the age  of seventy years whichever 
is earlier:  
Provided that in exceptional circumstances, the Vice -Chancellor may continue in office  for a period 
not exceeding one year or until his successor i s appointed and enters upon his office . 
(5) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Vice -Chancellor shall be as  follows: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor shall be paid a monthly salary and allowances other than  the house rent 
allowance, at the rate fixed by the Central Government from ti me to time  and he shall be entitled, 
without payment of rent, to use a furnished residence throughout  his term of office and no charge 
shall fall on the Vice -Chancellor in respect of the  maintenance of such residence;  
(ii) the Vice -Chancellor shall be enti tled to such terminal benefits and allowances  as may be 
fixed by the Board with the approval of the Visitor from time to time:  
Provided that where an employee of the University or a college or an institution  maintained by 
it, or of any other University or any institution maintained by or affiliated  to such other University, 
is appointed as the Vice -Chancellor, he   may be allowed to  continue to contribute to any provident 
fund of which he i s a member and the University shall contribute to the account of suc h person in 
that provident fund at the same rate  at which the person had been contributing immediatel y before 
his appointment as the Vice-Chancellor:  
Provided further that where such employee had been a member of any pension  scheme, the 
University shall ma ke the necessary contribution to such scheme;  13 
 (iii) the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to travelling and other allowances as  per the rate fixed 
from time to time by the Government of India for the officers equivalent  to the rank of Secretary to 
the Gove rnment of India. Further, he shall be entitled to  transfer travelling allowances and other 
allowances as admissible to officers of the  rank of Secretary to the Government of India for joining 
and after relinquishing the post;  
(iv) the Vice -Chancellor shall  be entitled to leave on full pay at the rate of thirty  days in a 
calendar year and the leave shall be credited to his account in advance in two  half-yearly instalments 
of fifteen days each on the first day of January and July every  year:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor assumes or relinquishes charge of the office  of the Vice -
Chancellor during the currency of a half year, the leave shall be credited  proportionately at the rate 
of two and a half days for each completed month of service;  
(v) in addition to the leave referred to in sub -clause ( iv), the Vice -Chancellor shall  also be 
entitled to half pay leave at the rate of twenty days for each completed year of  service. This half pay 
leave may also be availed of as commuted leave on full pay on  medical certificate. When commuted 
leave is available, twice the amount of half pay  leave shall be debited against half pay leave due;  
(vi) the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to Leave Travel Concession and Home  Travel 
Concession as per rules of Government of India;  
(vii) the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to the benefit of leave encashment at  the time of 
laying down the office as per rules of Government of India.  
(6) If the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or  otherwise,  or if 
he is unable to perform his duties due to ill health or any other cause, the  senior -most Dean or Director, 
as the case may be, shall perform the duties of the Vice -Chancellor until a new Vice -Chancellor assumes 
office or until the Vice -Chancellor at tends to  the duties of his office, as the case may be.  
Powers and duties of the Vice -Chancellor  
3. (1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be ex officio  Chairman of the Board, the Academic  Council, the 
Finance Committee, the Research Council and the Extension Education Council  and shall in the absence 
of the Chancellor, preside over the Convocation held for conferring  degrees.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and address any meeting of  any authority 
of the University, but shall not be  entitled to vote thereat unless he is a member  of such authority.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice -Chancellor to see that this Act, the Statutes, the  Ordinances and 
the Regulations are duly observed, and he shall have all the powers necessary  to ensur e such observance.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise control over the affairs of the University and  shall give effect 
to the decisions of all the authorities of the University.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall have all the powers necessary for the proper  mainte nance of 
discipline in the University and he may delegate any such powers to such person  or persons as he may 
deem fit.  
(6) The Vice -Chancellor shall have the power to convene or cause to be convened the  meetings of 
the Board, the Academic Council, the Research Council, the Extension  Education Council and the 
Finance Committee.  
The Dean of colleges and Faculties  
4. (1) Each Faculty shall have a Dean who shall also be the head of the college concerned.  If any 
Faculty has more than one college, the Vic e-Chancellor may nominate one of the  Deans as Dean of the 
Faculty.  
(2) The Dean of the college shall be appointed by the Board on the recommendations  of the 
Selection Committee constituted for the purpose as per Statute 18 and he shall be a  whole -time sala ried 
officer of the University.  
(3) The Dean shall be entitled to rent free and unfurnished residential accommodation.  14 
 (4) The Dean shall hold the office for a term of five years and shall be eligible for  reappointment:  
Provided that a Dean on attaining the age of sixty -five years shall cease to hold office  as such.  
(5) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness,  absence or any 
other cause, unable to perform duties of his office, the duties of the office  shall be perfo rmed by such 
persons as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(6) The Dean shall be responsible to the Vice -Chancellor for the conduct and  maintenance of the 
standards of teaching in the college and Faculty and shall perform such  other functions  as may be 
prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(7) The Dean shall be the ex officio  Chairman of the Board of Studies of the Faculty, a  member of 
the Academic Council, the Research Council and the Extension Education Council  of the University.  
The Director of Education  
5. (1) The Director of Education shall be appointed by the Board on the  recommendations of the 
Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a  whole -time salaried officer of the 
University.  
(2) The Director of Education shall be  entitled to rent free and unfurnished residential  
accommodation.  
(3) The Director of Education shall hold office for a term of five years and shall be  eligible for 
reappointment:  
Provided that Director of Education on attaining the age of sixty -five years  shall cease  to hold office 
as such.  
(4) The Director of Education shall be responsible for planning, co -ordination and  supervision for all 
educational programmes in the various Faculties of the University.  
The Director of Research  
6. (1) The Director of Research shall be appointed by the Board on the recommendations  of the 
Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time salaried  officer of the 
University.  
(2) The Director of Research shall be entitled to rent free and unfurnished  accommodation.  
(3) The Director of Research shall hold office for a term of five years and shall be  eligible for 
reappointment:  
Provided that the Director of Research on attaining the age of sixty -five years shall  cease to hold 
office as such.  
(4) The Director of Research shall be responsible for supervision and co -ordination of  all research 
programmes of the University and shall be responsible to the Vice -Chancellor for  performance of his 
duties.  
(5) The Director of Research shall be ex officio  Member -Secretary of the Research  Council of the 
University.  
The Director of Extension Education  
7. (1) The Director of Extension Education shall be appointed by the Board on the  recommendations 
of the Selection Committee constituted for the purp ose and he shall be a  whole -time salaried officer of 
the University.  
(2) The Director of Extension Education shall be entitled to rent free and unfurnished  
accommodation.  
(3) The Director of Extension Education shall hold office for a term of five years and shall be 
eligible for reappointment:  15 
 Provided that the Director of Extension Education on attaining the age of sixty -five years shall cease 
to hold office as such.  
(4) The Director of Extension Education shall be responsible for supervision and co -ordination of all 
Extension Education Programmes in the University and shall be responsible  to the Vice -Chancellor for 
performance of his duties.  
(5) The Director of Extension  Education shall be ex officio  Member -Secretary of the  Extension 
Education Council of the University.  
The Registrar  
8. (1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Board on the recommendations of a duly  constituted 
Selection Committee under Statute 18 and h e shall be a whole -time salaried  officer of the University. He 
shall be responsible to the Vice -Chancellor for performance of  his duties.  
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for reappointment.  
(3) He may also be appoint ed on deputation for a specified period not exceeding five  years.  
(4) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Registrar shall be  such as may 
be prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that the Registrar shall retire on attaining the age of sixty -two years.  
(5)  In case of a person appointed on deputation, his tenure, emoluments and other  terms of service 
shall be according to the terms of deputation.  
(6)  When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar is, by reason o f illness, absence, 
or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of  the office shall be performed 
by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the  purpose.  
(7) (a) The Registrar shall have the power to take disciplina ry action against such of  the employees 
excluding teachers, as may be specified in the order of the Board and to  suspend them pending inquiry, 
to administer warnings to them or to impose on them the  penalty of censure or the withholding of 
increment:  
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person concerned has been  given a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in  regard to him.  
(b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice -Chancellor against any order o f the Registrar imposing  any of the 
penalties specified in sub -clause (a). 
(c) In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the power of the  Registrar is 
called for, the Registrar shall, upon conclusion of the inquiry, make a report to th e Vice -Chancellor 
along with his recommendations:  
Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Board against an order of the Vice -Chancellor  imposing any 
penalty.  
(8) The Registrar shall be the Secretary ex officio  of the Board and the Academic  Council, but sh all 
not be deemed to be a member of any of these authorities.  
(9) It shall be the duty of the Registrar — 
(a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such other property  of the University 
as the Board shall commit to his charge;  
(b) to issue all notice convening meeting of the Board, the Academic Council  and of any 
Committee appointed by those authorities;  
(c) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Board, the Academic Council  and of any 
committees appointed by those authorities;  
(d) to conduct the official correspondence of the Board and the Academic  Council;   
(e) to arrange for the examinations of the University in accordance with the  manner prescribed 
by the Ordinances or notifications;  16 
 (f) to supply to the Visitor, copies of t he agenda of the meetings of the authorities  of the 
University as soon as they are issued and the minutes of such meetings;  
(g) to represent the University in suits or proceedings by or against the University,  sign powers -
of-attorney and verify pleadings o r depute his representatives for the  purpose; and  
(h) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances  or the 
Regulations or as may be required, from time to time, by the Board or the  Vice -Chancellor.  
The Comptroller  
9. (1) The Comptroller shall be appointed by the Board on the recommendations of a  duly 
constituted Selection Committee under Statute 1 8 and he shall be a whole -time salaried  officer of the 
University.  
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall  be eligible for reappointment.  
(3) The Comptroller may also be appointed on deputation for a specified period not  exceeding five 
years.  
(4) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Comptroller shall  be such as 
may be prescribed by t he Ordinances. In case of a person being appointed on  deputation, his tenure, 
emoluments and other terms of service shall be according to the  standard of deputation:  
Provided that the Comptroller shall retire on attaining the age of sixty years.  
(5) When t he office of the Comptroller is vacant or when the Comptroller is, by reason  of illness, 
absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties  of the office shall be 
performed by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the  purpose.  
(6) The Comptroller shall be the Secretary ex officio  of the Finance Committee, but  shall not be 
deemed to be a member of such Committee.  
(7) The Comptroller shall — 
(a) exercise  general supervision over the funds of the University and shall advise  it as regards its 
financial policy; and  
(b) perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances  or as may be 
required, from time to time, by the Board or the V ice-Chancellor.  
(8) Subject to the control of the Board, the Comptroller shall — 
(a) hold and manage the property and investments of the University including  trust and endowed 
property;  
(b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Board for recurring and non -recurring  expenditure for a 
year are not exceeded and that all moneys are expended on the  purpose for which they are granted or 
allotted;  
(c) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget of the  University and 
for their presentation to the Board;  
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank balances and  on the  state of 
investments;  
(e) watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advise on the methods of  collection 
employed;  
(f) ensure that the registers of buildin gs, land, furniture and equipment are  maintained up -to-date 
and that stock -checking is conducted, of equipment and other  consumable materials in all offices, 
specialised laboratories, colleges and institutions  maintained by the University;  
(g) bring to the  notice of the Vice -Chancellor unauthorised expenditure and  other financial 
irregularities and suggest disciplinary action against persons at fault;  and 
(h) call for from any office, laboratory, college or institution maintained by the  University and 
information or returns that he may consider necessary for performance  of his duties.  17 
 (9) Any receipt given by the Comptroller or the person or persons duly authorised in  this behalf by 
the Board for any money payable to the University shall be sufficient d ischarge  for payment of such 
money.  
Heads of Departments  
10. (1) Each Department shall have a Head appointed by the Vice -Chancellor who shall  be not 
below  the rank of an Associate Professor and whose duties and functions and terms  and conditions of 
appoint ment  shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(2) He shall be responsible to the Dean for teaching, to Director of Research for  research, to Director  
of Extension Education for extension education work. However, the  Dean shall be the administrative 
controlling officer of the Heads of Departments in college  concerned:  
Provided that if there is more than one Professor in any Department, the Head of the  Department 
shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor from amongst the Professors:  
Provided further th at in the case of Department where there is only one Professor, the  Vice -
Chancellor shall have the option, to appoint either the Professor or an Associate Professor  as the Head of 
the Department:  
Provided also that in a Department where there is no Professor or Associate Professor,  the Dean of 
the college shall act as the Head of the Department or with the approval of the  Vice -Chancellor assign 
the duty to any other Head of the Department of the college.  
(3) It shall be open to a Professor or an Asso ciate Professor to decline the offer of  appointment as 
the Head of the Department.  
(4) A Professor or an Associate Professor appointed as Head of the Department shall  hold office as 
such for a period of three years and shall be eligible for reappointment.  
(5) A Head of the Department may resign his office at any time during his tenure of  office.  
(6) A Head of the Department shall perform such functions as may be prescribed by the  Ordinances.  
(7) The Head of the Department shall retire at the age of sixty -five years.  
Librarians  
11. (1) The University Librarian shall be appointed by the Board on the  recommendations of  the 
Selection Committee constituted for the purpose under Statute 18  and he shal l be a whole -time salaried 
officer of the University.  
(2) The Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned  to him by 
the Vice -Chancellor.  
Constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Management  
12. (1) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor, ex officio  Chairman;  
(ii) Four Secretaries, from amongst the Secretaries in charge of the Departments  of Agriculture 
and Animal Husbandry, Fishery and Horticulture of the States of Madhya  Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh 
to be nominated by the Visitor by rotation:  
Provided that there shall not be more than two Secretaries from a State in the  Board at a 
particular time;  
(iii) three eminent scientists to be nominated by the Visitor;  
(iv) one distinguished person representing Agro -based industries or a  manufacturer having a 
special knowledge in agricultural development to be nominated  by the Visitor;  
(v) the Deputy Director -General (Education) representing the Indian Council of  Agricultural 
Research;  
(vi) one Dean of college and one Director to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor  on rotational 
basis;  18 
 (vii) three persons including at least a woman representing farmers in  Bundelkhand to be 
nominated by the Vice -Chancellor by rotati on in the States of  Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh:  
Provided that there shall not be more than two representatives from a State in the  Board at a 
particular time;  
(viii) an Advisor (Agriculture), Planning Commission;  
(ix) a distinguished authority on natural resource or environment management  to be nominated 
by the Visitor;  
(x) two persons not below the rank of Joint Secretary representing respectively  the Departments 
of Government of India dealing with the Agriculture and A nimal  Husbandry to be nominated by the 
concerned Secretary to the Government of India;  
(xi) nominee of the Secretary representing the Department of Agricultural  Research and 
Education, Government of India;  
(xii) the Registrar of the University –Secretary.  
(2)  The term of office of the members of the Board, other than ex officio  members, shall  be three 
years.  
(3) The Board shall have the power of management and administration of the revenue  and property 
of the University and the conduct of all administrative  affairs of the University  not otherwise provided 
for. 
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Board  shall in addition 
to all other powers vested in it, have the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to create teaching and academic posts, to determine the number and emoluments  of such 
posts and to define the duties  and conditions of service of University staff,  subject to the approval 
of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research;  
(ii) to appoint such teachers and other academic staff, as may be necessary, and  Deans of  
colleges, Director and Heads of other institutions maintained by the University  on the 
recommendations of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and  to fill up temporary 
vacancies therein;  
(iii) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts and to make  appointments 
thereto in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(iv) to regulate and enforce discipline among employees in accordance with the  Statutes and 
Ordinances;  
(v) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, investments, property, business  and all other 
administrative affairs of the University, and for that purpose to appoint  such agents as it may think 
fit; 
(vi) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non -recurring expenditure for  one year on the 
recommendations of the Finance Committee;  
(vii) to invest any money belonging to the University, including any unapplied  income, in such 
stocks, funds, shares or  securities, from time to time, as it may think fit  or in the purchase of 
immovable property in India, with the like powers of varying such  investment from time to time;  
(viii) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immovable property on  behalf of the 
University;  
(ix) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus and other means  needed for  carrying 
on the work of the University;  
(x) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on behalf of the University;   
(xi) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and, if thought fit, to redress any grievances  of the employees 
and students of the University;  
(xii) to fix fees, honorarium, emoluments and travelling allowances of examiners  or experts or 
consultants, advisors and officers o n special duty;  19 
 (xiii) to select a common seal for the University and provide for the custody and  use of such 
seal; 
(xiv) to make such special arrangements as may be necessary for the residence  and discipline of 
women students;  
(xv) to delegate any of its powers to the Vice -Chancellor,  Deans, Directors,  Registrar or  
Comptroller or such other employee or authority of the University or to a  Committee appointed by it 
as it may deem fit;  
(xvi) to institute fellowships, scholarships, st udentships, medals and prizes;  
(xvii) to provide for appointment of Visiting Professor, Emeritus Professor,  Consultant and 
Officers on Special Duty and Scholars and to determine the terms and  conditions of such 
appointment;  
(xviii) to exercise such other power and perform such other duties as may be  conferred on it by 
the Act, or the Statutes.  
Quorum for meetings of the Board  
13. Six members of the Board shall form the quorum for a meeting of the Board.  
Constitution and powers of the A cademic Council  
14. (1) The Academic Council shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor, ex officio  Chairman;  
(ii) all the Deans of the colleges of the University;  
(iii) the Director of Research of the University;  
(iv) the Director of Extension Education of the University;  
(v) the Director of Education;  
(vi) a Librarian to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor on rotational basis;  
(vii) two eminent scientists to be co -opted from outside the University to be  nominated by the 
Vice-Chancellor;  
(viii) seven Heads of the Departments, at least one from each Faculty to be  nominated by the 
Vice -Chancellor;  
(ix) the Registrar of the University, ex officio  Secretary.  
(2)  The term of office of the members of the Academic Council other than ex officio  members shall 
be three years.  
(3) Subject to the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Academic Council shall, in  addition to 
all other powers vested in it, have the foll owing powers, namely: — 
(a) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University  and to give 
directions regarding methods of instruction, co -operative teaching among  colleges and institutions, 
evaluation and improvements in academic standards;  
(b) to bring about inter -college co -ordination and establish or appoint Committee  on academic 
matters;  
(c) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own initiative or  on a reference 
by a college or the Board and to take appr opriate action thereon; and  
(d) to frame such regulations and rules consistent with the Statutes and the  Ordinances regarding 
the academic functioning of the University, discipline, residences,  admissions, award of fellowships 
and studentships, fees, concessions, corporate life  and attendance.  
Quorum for meetings of the Academic Council  
15. One -third members of the Academic Council shall form the quorum for a meeting of  the 
Academic Council.  
Board of Studies  
16. (1) Each Faculty shall have a Board of S tudies.  20 
 (2) The Board of Studies of each Faculty shall be constituted as under: — 
(i) Dean of Faculty — Chairperson;  
(ii) Director of Research — Member;  
(iii) Director of Extension Education —Member;  
(iv) all Heads of Departments of the Faculty not below the rank of Associate  Professor —
Member;  
(v) one representative of the Academic Council not belonging to the particular  Faculty to be 
nominated by the Vice -Chancellor;  
 (vi) two eminent scientists from agricultural education system not belonging to  the University 
to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor;  
(vii) one final year Post -Graduate student with Highest Overall Grade Point  Average (OGPA) – 
Member;  
(viii) Assistant Registrar ( Academic) of the Faculty – Member;  
(ix) Director of Education —Member.  
(3) The functions of the Board of Studies shall be to recommend to the Academic  Council,  the 
course curriculum to be prescribed for various degrees to be offered by the  concerned Faculty  and to 
make suitable recommendations for the teaching of the prescribed  approved course, namely: — 
(a) courses of studies and appointment of examiners for courses, but excluding  research degrees;  
(b) appointment of supervisors of research; and  
(c) measures  for the improvement of the standard of teaching and research.  
Finance Committee  
17. (1) The Finance Committee shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor — Chairman;  
(ii) Financial Advisor, Department of Agricultural  Research  and Education or  his nominee  not 
below the rank of  Deputy Secretary;  
(iii) three persons to be nominated by the Board, out of whom at lea st one shall  be a member of 
the Board;  
(iv) three persons to be nominated by the Visitor; and  
(v) the Comptroller of the University —Member -Secretary.  
(2) Three members of the Finance Committee shall form the quorum for meeting of the  Finance 
Committee.  
(3) The members of the Finance Committee, other than ex officio members, shall hold  office for a 
term of  three years.  
(4) A member of the Finance Committee shall have the right to record a minute of  dissent if he does 
not agree with any decision of the Finance Committee.  
(5) The Finance Committee shall meet at least twice a year to examine the accounts and  to scrutinise 
proposals for expenditure.  
(6) Every proposal relating t o creation of posts, and those items which have not been  included in the 
Budget, shall be examined by the Finance Committee before they are considered  by the Board.  
(7) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University prepared by the  Comptroller, 
shall be laid before the Finance Committee  for consideration and comments and thereafter submitted to 
the Board for approval.  
(8) The Finance Committee shall re commend limits for the total recurring expenditure  and the total 
non-recurring expenditure for the year, based on the income and resources of  the University (which, in 
the case of productive works, may include the proceeds of loans).  
  21 
 Selection Committee  
18. (1) There shall be a Selection Committee for making recommendations to the Board  for 
appointment to the posts of teachers, Comptroller, Registrar, Librarians, Deans of colleges,  Directors 
and Heads of other institutions maintained by the University.  
(2)  The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts specified in column 1 of the  Table below 
shall consist of members as specified in the corresponding entries in column 2  of the said Table:  
TABLE  
1              2                                 3 
A. Directors/Deans     
(i)   Vice -Chancellor or his nominee —Chairman.  
  (ii)   One nominee of the Visitor —Member.  
  (iii)  Three  eminent scientists not below the rank of Vice -Chancellor or 
equivalent (serving or retired) to be  nominated by the               
Vice -Chancellor from a panel of six names approved by the 
Board —Member.  
B. Professors/Equivalent  (i)   Vice -Chancellor or his nominee –Chairman.  
  (ii)   One nominee of the Visitor —Member.  
  (iii)  Dean of the concerned Faculty —Member.  
  (iv)  Director of Research or Director of Extension Edu cation or 
Director of Education to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor — 
Member.  
  (v)   Three eminent subject specialists not below the     rank of Head of 
Department or equivalent (serving or retired) to be nominate d by 
the Vice -Chancellor out of a panel of six names approved by the 
Board —Members.  
C. Associate  Professor/Assistant 
Professor/Equivalent  (i)    Vice -Chancellor or his nominee —Chairman.  
  (ii)    One nominee of the Visitor —Member.  
  (iii)   Dean of the concerned faculty —Member.  
 
  (iv)   Director of Ed ucation or Director of Research or Director of 
Extension Education to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor —
Member.  
  (v)  Head of the concerned Department not below the rank of 
Professor —Member.  
  (vi)   Two eminent teachers or scientists not below the rank of Professor 
or equivalent (serving or retired) to be nominated by the Vice -
Chancellor out of a panel of six names approved by the Board —
Members.  
D. Registrar/Comptroller/Librarian  (i)     Vice -Chancellor or his nominee —Chairman.  
  (ii)    One nominee of the Visitor —Member.  
  (iii)  One Director/Dean to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor — 
Member.  
  (iv)   Two experts in the concerned subject to be nominated by the Vice -
Chancellor, out  of a panel of six names approved by the Board —
Members.  
  22 
 (3) The Vice -Chancellor, or in his absence, his nominee shall preside at the meetings of  the election  
Committee:  
Provided that the meetings of the Selection Committee shall be fixed after prior  consultation with 
the nominees of the Visitor:  
Provided further that the proceedings of the Selection Committee shall not be valid  unless at least 
two members, not in the service of the University are present in the meeting.  
(4) The meeting of the Selectio n Committee shall be convened by the Vice -Chancellor  or in his 
absence  by his nominee.  
(5) The procedure to be followed by the  Selection Committee in making recommendations  shall be 
decided by the Committee prior to the interview.  
(6) If the Board is unable to accept the recommendations made by the Selection  Committee, it shall 
record its reasons and submit the case to the Visitor for final orders.  
(7) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made in the manner indicated below: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor shall have the authority to appoint a person on ad hoc  basis for a period 
not exceeding six months extendable by a further period of  six months with the approval of the 
Board:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor is satisfied that in the interest of work it is  necessary to fill 
the vacancy, the appointment may be made on a purely temporary  basis by the local Selection 
Committee referred to in sub -clause (ii) for the period not  exceeding six months;  
(ii) if the temporary vacancy is for a period less than one year, an appointment to  such vacancy 
shall be made on the recommendation of the local Selection Committee  consisting of the Dean of 
the college concerned, the Head of the Department and a  nominee of the Vice -Chancellor:   
Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and the  Head of the Department, 
the Selection Committee may contain two nominees of the  Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that in case of sudden casual vacancies of teaching p osts caused by death or 
any other reason, the Dean may, in consultation with the Head of  the Department concerned, make a 
temporary appointment for one month and report to  the Vice -Chancellor and the Registrar about 
such appointment;  
(iii) no teacher appoi nted temporarily shall, if he is not recommended by the  regular Selection 
Committee for appointment under the Statutes, be continued in service  on such temporary 
employment, unless he is subsequently selected by the local  Selection Committee or the regular  
Selection Committee, for a temporary or permanent  appointment, as the case may be.  
(8) Mode of constitution of the Selection Committee for non -academic staff, not  prescribed in the 
Statutes, shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
Special mode of appointme nt 
19. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 18, the Board may invite a  person of high 
academic distinction and professional attainments to accept a post of Professor  or Associate Professor or 
any other academic post in the University, as the c ase may be, on  such terms and conditions as it deems 
fit, and on the person agreeing to do so, appoint him  to the post.  
(2) The Board may appoint a teacher or any other academic staff working in any other  University or 
organisation for undertaking a joint project in accordance with the manner laid  down in the Ordinances.  
Appointment for a fixed tenure  
20. The Board may appoint a person selected in accordance with the procedure laid  down in Statute 
18 for a fixed tenure on such terms and conditions as it deems fit.  
Qualifications of Director , Dean , Professor , etc. 
21. (1) Qualifications of Director, Dean, Professor, Associate Professor and Assistant  Professor of 
different Faculties and their equivalents in Research and Extension Education  shall be as presc ribed by 
the Ordinances.  
(2) Qualification of non -academic staff shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  23 
 Committees  
22. (1) The authorities of the University specified in section 16 may appoint as many  standing or 
special Committees as it may deem fit, and may appoint to such committees  persons who are not 
members of such authority.  
(2) Any such Committee appointed under clause ( 1) may deal with any subject delegated  to it 
subject to confirmation by the authority appointing it.  
Terms and conditions of servic e and code o f conduct of the teachers, etc.  
23. (1) All the teachers and other academic staff of the University shall, in the absence  of any 
agreement to the contrary, be governed by the term s and conditions of service and  code of conduct as 
are specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations.  
(2) Every teacher and other staff of the University shall be appointed on a written  contract, the term 
of which shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(3) A copy of every  contract referred to in clause (2) shall be deposited with the  Registrar.  
Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of other employees  
24. All the non -academic employees of the University, shall in the absence of any  contract to the 
contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of  conduct as are specified in the 
Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations as made from  time to time.  
Seniority list  
25. (1) Whenever, in accordance with the Statutes, any person is to hold an office or be  a member of 
an authority of the University by rotation according to seniority, such seniority  shall be determined 
according to the length of continuous service of such person in his grade  and, in accordance with such 
other principles as the Board may, from time to time,  prescribe.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain, in respect of each class  of persons to 
whom the provisions of these Statutes apply, a complete and up -to-date seniority list in accordance with 
the provisions of clause (1). 
(3) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous service in a particular grade  or the 
relative seniority of any persons is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar may, on his own  motion and shall, 
at the request of any person, submit the matter to the Boa rd whose decision  thereon shall be final.  
Removal of employees of the University  
26. (1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct against a teacher, a member of the  academic staff 
or other employee of the University, the Vice -Chancellor, in the case of the teacher or member of the 
academic staff and the authority competent to appoint (hereinafter  referred to as the appointing 
authority) in the case of other employee, may, by order in  writing, place such teacher, member of the 
academic staff or other empl oyee, as the case may  be, under suspension and shall forthwith report to the 
Board, the circumstances in which the  order was made:  
Provided that the Board may, if it is of the opinion, that the circumstances of the case  do not warrant 
the suspension of the  teacher or a member of the academic staff, revoke such  order.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of the contract of appointment  or of any other 
terms and conditions of service of the employees, the Board in respect of  teacher and other academic 
staff and the appointing authority, in respect of other employees,  shall have the power to remove a 
teacher  or  a member of the academic staff, or other  employees, as the case may be, on grounds of 
misconduct.  
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Board or the appointing authority, as the case may be, shall  not be entitled 
to remove any teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee except  for a good cause and 
after giving three months, notice or on payment of three months salary  in lieu thereof.  24 
 (4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall be removed under  clause (2) 
or clause (3) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause  against the action 
proposed to be taken in regard to him.  
(5) The removal of a t eacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall take  effect from 
the date on which the order of removal is made:  
Provided that where the teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee is  under 
suspension at the time of his removal, su ch removal shall take effect from the date on  which he was 
placed under suspension.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Statute, a  teacher, 
member of the academic staff or other employee may resign, — 
(a) if he is a permanent employee, only after giving three months’ notice in  writing to the Board 
or the appointing authority, as the case may be, or by paying three  months’ salary in lieu thereof;  
(b) if he is not a permanent employee, only after giving one month’s notice in  writing to the 
Board or, the appointing authority, as the case may be, or by paying one  months’ salary in lieu 
thereof:  
Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date from which the  resignation is 
accepted by the Board or the appointing authority, as the case may be.  
Honorary degrees  
27. (1) The Board may, on the recommendation of the Academic Council and by a  resolution passed 
by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and  voting, make proposals to  the 
Visitor for the conferment of honorary degrees:  
Provided that in case of emergency, the Board may, on its own motion, make such  proposals.  
(2) The Board may, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of  the members 
present and v oting, withdraw, with the previous sanction of the Visitor, any  honorary degree conferred 
by the University.  
Withdrawal of degrees, etc.  
28. The Board may, by a special resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the 
members present and voting, withdraw any degree or academic distinction  conferred on, or any 
certificate or diploma granted to, any person by the University for good  and sufficient cause:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been  given to that 
person calling upon him to show cause within such time as may be specified in  the notice why such a 
resolution should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and  any evidence he may produce in 
support of them, have been considered by the Board.  
Maintenance of discipline among students of the University  
29. (1) All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in relation to students of  the 
University shall vest in the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor may delegate all or any of his powers as he deems proper to  such officers 
as he may specify in this behalf.  
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to the maintenance of  discipline and 
taking such action, as may seem to him appropriate for the maintenance of  discipline, the Vice -
Chancellor may, in exercise of his powers, by order, direct that any student  or students be expelled, or 
rusticated, for a specified period, or be not admitted to a course or  courses of st udy in a college, 
institution or Department of the University for a stated period,  or be punished with fine for an amount to 
be specified in the order, or be debarred from taking  an examination or examinations conducted by the 
University, college, institut ion or Department  for one or more years, or that the results of the student or 
students concerned in the  examination or examinations in which he or they have appeared be cancelled.  25 
 (4) The Dean of colleges, institutions and Heads of the teaching Department s in the  University shall 
have the authority to exercise all such disciplinary powers over the students  in their respective colleges, 
institutions and teaching Departments in the University as may  be necessary for the proper conduct of 
such colleges, insti tutions and teaching in the  Departments.  
(5) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice -Chancellor, the Deans and other persons  specified 
in clause (4), detailed rules of discipline and proper conduct shall be made by the  University. The Deans 
of the colleges, institutions and Heads of the teaching Departments  in the University may also make the 
supplementary rules as they deem necessary for the  aforesaid purposes.  
(6) At the time of admission, every student shall be required to sign a declaration to t he effect that 
he submits himself to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Vice -Chancellor and other  authorities of the 
University.  
Maintenance of discipline among students of colleges, etc.  
30. All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in r elation to the students  of the college 
or an institution maintained by the University, shall vest in the Dean of the  College or institution, as the 
case may be, in accordance with the procedure prescribed by  the Ordinances.  
Convocations  
31. Convocations of  the University for the conferring of the degrees or for other  purposes shall be 
held in such manner as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
Acting Chairman  
32. When no provision is made for a Chairman to preside over a meeting of any  Committee or when 
the Chairman so provided for is absent, or the Vice -Chancellor has not in  writing made any 
arrangement, the members shall elect one from among themselves to preside  over meeting.  
Resignation  
33.  Any member, other than an ex officio  member of the Board, Acade mic Council or  any other 
authority of the Unive rsity or any committee of such authority may resign by letter  addressed to the 
Registrar and the resignation shall take effect as soon as such letter is  received by the Registrar.  
Disqualifications  
34. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of  any of the 
authorities of the University, — 
(i) if he is of unsound mind;  
(ii) if he is an undischarged insolvent;  
(iii) if he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence  involving moral  turpitude and 
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for a period of not less  than six months.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or has been subjected to any of the  
disqualifications mentioned in clause (1), the qu estion shall be referred to the Visitor and his  decision 
thereon shall be final and no suit or other proceedings shall lie in any civil court  against such decision.  
Residence condition for membership and office  
35. Notwithstanding anything contained in the  Statutes, a person who is not ordinarily  resident in 
India shall not be eligible to be an officer of the University or a member of any  authority of the 
University.  
Membership of authorities by virtue of membership of other bodies  
36. Notwithstanding anyth ing contained in the Statutes, a person who holds any post  in the 
University or is a member of any authority of the University in his capacity as a member  of a particular 
authority or as the holder of a particular appointment shall hold such office or  memb ership only for so 26 
 long as he continues to be a member of that particular authority or  the holder of that particular 
appointment, as the case may be.  
Alumni Association  
37. (1) There shall be an Alumni  Association for the University.  
(2) The subscription for membership of the Alumni  Association shall be prescribed by  the 
Ordinances.  
(3) No member of the Alumni  Association shall be entitled to vote or stand for election  unless he  has 
been a member of the said Association for at least one y ear prior to the date of  the election and is a 
degree holder of the University of at least five years standing:  
Provided that the condition relating to the completion of one year’ s membership shall  not apply in 
the case of the first election.  
Students’ Cou ncil 
38. (1) There shall be, in each College of the University, a Students’ Council for each  academic 
session for the purpose of making recommendations to the authorities of the  University with regard to 
various activities relating to students welfare, including games,  sports, dramatics, debates, cultural 
activities, etc., and such Council shall consist of: —  
(i)  the Dean of the College -Chairperson;  
(ii) all Hostel Wardens;  
(iii) Campus Estate Officer;   
(iv) five Heads of the Departments to be nominated  by the Dean;   
(v) Hostel Prefects;   
(vi) one student from each class or year who has secured the Highest Overall  Grade Point 
Average (OGPA) in the previous academic session;  
(vii) Students Welfare Officer —Member -Secretary.  
(2) The Students Council shall meet at least once in each semester.  
Ordinances how made  
39. (1) The first Ordinances made under sub -section ( 2) of section 27 may be amended  or repealed 
at any time by the Board in the manner specified below.  
(2) No Ordinances in respect of the matters enumerated in section 27, other than those  enumerated 
in clause ( n) of sub -section (1) thereof shall be made by the Board unless a draft  of such Ordinance has 
been proposed by the Academic Council.  
(3) The Board sha ll not have power to amend any draft of any Ordinance proposed by  the Academic 
Council under clause (2), but may reject the proposal or return the draft to the  Academic Council for 
reconsideration either in whole or in part, together with any amendment  which the Board may suggest.  
(4) Where the Board has rejected or returned the draft of an Ordinance proposed by  the Academic 
Council, the Academic Council may consider the question afresh and in case  the original draft is 
reaffirmed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members  present and voting and more than 
half the total number of members of the Academic Council,  the draft may be sent back to the Board 
which shall either adopt it or refer it to the Visitor  whose decision shall be final.  
(5) Ever y Ordinance made by the Board shall come into effect immediately.  
(6) Every Ordinance made by the Board shall be submitted to the Visitor within  two weeks from the 
date of its adoption. The Visitor shall have the power to direct the  University within four weeks of the 
receipt of the Ordinance to suspend the operation of any  such Ordinance and he shall, a s soon as 
possible, inform the Board about his objection to  the proposed Ordinance. The Visitor may, after 27 
 receiving the comments of the University,  either withdraw the order suspending the Ordinance, or 
disallow the Ordinance and his  decision shall be final.  
Regulations  
40. (1) The authorities of the University may make Regulations consistent with the  Act, the Statutes 
and the Ordinances for the following matters, namely: — 
(i) laying down the procedure to be observed at their meeting and the number of  members 
required to form a quorum;  
(ii) providing for all matters which are required by the Act, the Statutes or the  Ordinances to be 
specified by the Regulat ions;  
(iii) providing for all other matters concerning such authority or committees  appointed by them 
and not provided for by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the giving  of notice to 
the members of such authorities of the dates of meetings and of the business to  be considered at 
meetings and for the keeping of a record of the proceedings of meetings.  
(3) The Board may direct the amendment in such manner as it may specify  of any  Regulation made 
under the Statutes or the annulment of any such Regulation.  
Delegation of Powers  
41. Subject to the provisions of the Act and the Statutes, any officer or authority of the  University 
may delegate his or its power to any other office r or authority or person under his  or its respective 
control and subject to the condition that overall responsibility for the  exercise of the powers so delegated 
shall continue to vest in the officer or authority delegating  such powers.  
Collaboration with other Institution and Organisations  
42. The University shall have the authority to enter into an agreement through a  Memorandum of 
Understanding with any research and/or academic institution of higher  learning to conduct collaborative 
Post Graduate Researc h Programme to fulfil the partial  requirement for the award of Master’s and Ph.D. 
degrees of the University.  
Constitution and Function of Research Council  
43. (1) There shall be a Research Council of the University to exercise general  supervision over the 
research policies and programmes of the University in the area of  Agriculture and allied disciplines. The 
Research Council shall consist of the following  members, namely: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor —Chairman;  
(ii) Director of Extension Education —Member;  
(iii) Director of Education —Member;   
(iv) all Deans of the colleges of the University —Members;  
(v) nominees of the State Governments not below the rank of Director —Members;   
(vi) all co -ordinators of the Research teams of the University —Members;   
(vii) two eminent agricultural scientists to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor  for three  
years —Members;  
(viii) Director of Research —Member -Secretary.  
(2) The Research Council shall meet at least once in a year.  
(3) One-third members of the Research Council shall form a quorum for the meeting of  
the Research Council.  28 
 (4) If a vacancy occurs due to resignation or otherwise the same shall be filled up for  the remaining 
period.  
Constitution and function of the Extension Education Council  
44. (1) There  shall be an Extension Education Council of the University to exercise  general 
supervision over the extension education policies and programmes of the University  in the area of 
Agriculture and allied disciplines. The Extension Education Council shall  consi st of the following 
members, namely: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor —Chairman;  
(ii) Director of Research —Member;  
(iii) Director of Education —Member;  
(iv) all Deans of the colleges of the University —Members;  
(v) nominees  of the State Governments not below the rank of Director —Members;   
(vi) farmers representatives from Bundelkhand and one woman social worker to  be nominated 
by the Vice -Chancellor for a term of three years —Members;  
(vii) two eminent scientists from outside  the University to be nominated by the  Vice -Chancellor 
for two years —Members;  
(viii) Director of Extension Education —Member -Secretary.  
(2) The Extension Education Council shall meet at least once in a year.  
(3) One-third members of the Extension Education Council shall form a quorum for  the meeting of 
the Extension Education Council.  
Application of the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972, etc.  
45. (1) All regular employees of the University shall be governed by the provisions of  the Central 
Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972, and General Provident Fund (Central Services)  Rules, 1960, in 
respect of grant of pension and gratuity and general provident fund.  
(2) Any amendment made by the Government of India in the Central Civil Services  (Pension) Rul es, 
1972, and the General Provident Fund (Central Services) Rules, 1960, shall  also be applicable to 
employees of the University.  
(3) In respect of commutation of pension, the provisions of the Central Civil Services  (Commutation 
of Pension) Rules, 1981, shall apply.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the pension sanctioning authority and the pension  authorisation 
authority.  
(5) Pension payment shall be centralised and controlled by Comptroller’s office.  
 
––––––––  
--------------------------The School of Planning and Architecture Act, 2014--------------------------
1 
 THE SCHOOL OF PLANNING AND ARCHITECTURE ACT, 2014  
_______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration of certain Schools as Institutions of national importance . 
3. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
THE SCHOOL  
4. Establishment and incorporation of Schools . 
5. Objects of School . 
6. Effects of incorporation of Schools . 
7. Powers and functions of Schools.  
8. Schools to be open to all races, creeds and classe s. 
9. Teaching at Schools . 
10. School to be a distinct legal entity not -for-profit.  
11. Visitor.  
 
CHAPTER III  
THE AUTHORITIES OF SCHOOLS  
12. Authorities of Schools.  
13. Board of Governors . 
14. Term of office of  vacancies among, and allowances payable to , Members of Board . 
15. Powers and functions of  Board . 
16. Senate . 
17. Functions of Senate . 
18. Chairperson  of Board . 
19. Director.  
20. Registrar.  
21. Other authorities and officers.  
22. Review of performance of School.  
23. Grants by Central Government.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
24. Fund of School . 
25. Accounts and audit.  
26. Pension and provident fund.  
27. Appointments . 
28. Statutes.  
29. Statutes how  made.  
30. Ordinances.  
31. Ordinances how  made.  2 
 SECTIONS  
32. Tribunal of Arbitra tion. 
 
CHAPTER V  
THE COUNCIL  
33. Establishment of Council for Schools . 
34. Term of office of vacancies among, and allowances payable to , Members of Council . 
35. Functions of Council . 
36. Chairperson of Council . 
37. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Chapter.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
 
38. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc . 
39. Returns and information to be provided to Central Government . 
40. Power to remove difficulties . 
41. School to be public authority under Right to Information, Act, 2005.  
42. Transitional provisions.  
 
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
  3 
 THE SCHOOL OF PLANNING AND ARCHITECTURE ACT, 2014  
ACT NO. 37 OF 2014  
[18th December , 2014.]  
An Act to establish and declare  Schools of Planning and Architecture as Institutions of  
national importance in order to promote education and research in architectural studies  
including planning of human settlements.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -fifth Year of the Republic of  India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the School of Planning and 
Architecture Act, 2014.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification  in the 
Offici al Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions  of this Act, and 
any reference to the commencement in any such provision of this Act shall  be construed as a reference 
to the commencement of that provision.  
2. Declaration o f certain Schools as Institutions of national importance. —Whereas the objects 
of the Schools mentioned in the Schedule are such as to make  them Institutions of national 
importance, it is hereby declared that each such School is an  Institution of national i mportance.  
3. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Board”, in relation to any School, means the Board of Governors thereof;  
(b) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Board;  
(c) “Corresponding School”, in relation to a  School mentioned in column (3) of  the Schedule, 
means the School as specified against the said School in column (5) of the  Schedule;  
(d) “Council” means the Council established under sub -section ( 1) of section 33;  
(e) “Director”, in relation to any School , means the Director thereof;  
(f) “existing School” means the School mentioned under column (3) of the  Schedule;  
(g) “Member” means a Member of the Board and includes the Chairperson;  
(h) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazett e and the  expression 
“notify” with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions shall be  construed accordingly;  
(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(j) “Registrar”, in relation to any School, means the Registrar thereof;  
(k) “Schedule” means the Schedule annexed to this Act;  
(l) “School” means any of the Schools mentioned in column (5) of the Schedule  and such 
other Schools established under this Act;  
(m) “Senate”, in relation to any School, means the Senate thereof;  
(n) “Society” means any of the societies registered under the Societies  Registration Act, 1860  
(21 of 1860) or under the societies of respective State Governments and  mentioned in column (3) 
of the Schedule;  
(o) “Statutes” and “Ordinances”, in relation to any School, means the Statutes  and Ordinances 
of that School made under this Act.   
                                                           
1. 22nd January, 2015, vide notification No. S.O. 212(E), dated 22nd January, 2015, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,     
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 4 
 CHAPTER II  
THE SCHOOLS  
4. Establishment and incorporation of Schools. —On and from the date of commencement of 
this Act, the Schools specified in  column (3) of the Schedule, shall be the body corporates having 
perpetual succession and  a common seal with the power subject to the provisions of this Act, to 
acquire, hold and  dispose of property, both movable and immovable and to contract and shall by their  
respective names mentio ned in column (5) of the Schedule, sue or be sued.  
5. Objects of Schools. —Each School shall have the following objects, namely: — 
(i) to support the establishment and development of Schools of Planning and  Architecture;  
(ii) to provide global leadership in the field of architecture, planning and allied  fields.  
6. Effect of incorporation of Schools. —On and from the commencement of this Act, — 
(a) any reference to any existing School in any contract or other instrument shall  be deemed 
as a reference to the corr esponding School;  
(b) all properties, movable and immovable, of or belonging to every existing  School shall vest 
in the corresponding School mentioned under column (5) of the  Schedule;  
(c) all the rights, debts and other liabilities of every existing School shall be  transferred to, 
and be the rights and liabilities of, the corresponding School;  
(d) every person employed by every existing School shall hold his office or  service in the 
corresponding School with the same tenure, at the same remuneration  and upon the same terms 
and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to  pension, leave, gratuity, provident 
fund and other matters as he would have held if this  Act had not been enacted and shall continue 
to do so unless and until his employmen t is terminated or until such tenure, remuneration and 
terms and conditions are duly  altered by the Statutes:  
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee, his  employment 
may be terminated by the School in accordance with the terms of the  contract with the employee 
or, if no provision is made therein in this behalf, on payment,  to him by the School, of 
compensation equivalent to three months‟ remuneration in  case of permanent employees and one 
month‟s remuneration in the case o f other  employees:  
Provided further that any reference, by whatever form of words, to the Director,  Registrar and 
other officers of an existing School in any law for the time being in force,  or in any instrument or 
other document, shall be construed as a r eference to the  Director, Registrar and other officers of 
the corresponding School;  
(e) every person pursuing, before the commencement of this Act, any academic  or research 
course in every existing School, shall be deemed to have migrated and  registered wi th the 
corresponding School on such commencement at the same level of  study in the School from 
which such person migrated;  
(f) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been  instituted by or 
against an existing School, immediatel y before the commencement of  this Act shall be continued 
or instituted by or against the corresponding School.  
7. Powers and functions of Schools. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every School 
shall exercise the powers and  perform the duties as specified below, namely: — 
(a) to organise and undertake research and innovations in architecture, planning,  design and 
allied activities in such manner as the School may think fit, including in  collaboration or 
association with any other School, educationa l institution, research  organisation or body 
corporate;  
(b) to hold examinations and grant degrees, diplomas, certificates and other  degrees;  5 
 (c) to institute fellowships, Scholarships and confer awards, honorary degrees  or other 
academic distinctions or t itles;  
(d) to fix, demand and receive fees and other charges;  
(e) to establish, maintain and manage halls and hostels for the residence of  students;  
(f) to supervise and control the residence and regulate the discipline of students  of the School 
and to mak e arrangements for promoting their health, general welfare and  culture and corporate 
life; 
(g) to notify academic and other posts with the prior approval of the Central  Government and 
to make appointment thereto excluding the post of Director;  
(h) to appoi nt persons working in any other School or educational institution or  involved in 
research of significance in any industry as adjunct, guest or visiting  teachers of the School on 
such terms and for such duration as the School may decide;  
(i) to frame Statut es and Ordinances and to alter, modify or rescind the same;  
(j) to establish and maintain such infrastructure as may be necessary;  
(k) to deal with any property belonging to or vested in the School in such  manner as the 
School may deem fit for advancing the objects of the School;  
(l) to manage the fund of the School and receive gifts, grants, donations or  benefactions from 
the Government and to receive bequests, donations and transfers  of movable or immovable 
properties from testators or donors or transferors, as the  case may be;  
(m) to co -operate with educational or other institutions in any part of the world  having objects 
wholly or partly similar to those of the School by exchange of teachers,  students and scholars and 
generally in such manner as  may be conducive to their  common objects on such terms as may be 
specified from time to time by the Senate;  
(n) to undertake consultancy in the areas or disciplines relating to the School for  promotion of 
its common objectives; and  
(o) to do all such thin gs as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the  attainment of all 
or any of the objects of the School.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a School shall not dispose  of in any 
manner any immovable property without the prior ap proval of the Central  Government.  
8. Schools to be open to all races, creeds and classes. —(1) Every School shall be open to 
persons of either sex and of whatever race, creed,  caste or class, religion, disability, domicile, 
ethnicity, social or economic bac kground.  
(2) No bequest, donation or transfer of any property shall be accepted by any School,  which in the 
opinion of the Council involves conditions or obligations opposed to the spirit  and object of this 
section.  
9. Teaching at Schools. —All teaching at each of the Schools shall be conducted by or in the 
name of the  School in accordance with the Statutes and Ordinances made in this behalf.  
10. School to be a distinct legal entity not -for-profit. —Each School shall be a not -for-profit 
legal entity and no pa rt of the surplus, if any,  in revenue of such School, after meeting all expenditure 
in regard to its operations under  this Act, shall be invested for any purpose other than for the growth 
and development of  such School or for conducting research therein.  
11. Visitor. —(1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of every School.  
(2) The Visitor may appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress of  any School 
and to hold inquiries into the affairs thereof and to report thereon in such  manner a s the Visitor may 
direct.  6 
 (3) Upon receipt of any such report, the Visitor may take such action and issue such  directions as 
he considers necessary in respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report  and the School shall be 
bound to comply with such directions within reasonable time.  
CHAPTER III  
THE AUTHORITIES OF SCHOOLS  
12. Authorities of Schools. —The following shall be the authorities of a School, namely: — 
(a) a Board of Governors;  
(b) a Senate; and  
(c) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities  of the 
School.  
13. Board of Governors. —(1) The Board of each School shall be the principal executive body of 
that School.  
(2) The Board of every School shall consist of the following Members, namely: — 
(a) Chairperson to b e appointed by the Visitor from among a panel of three  names 
recommended by the Central Government who shall be an eminent Architect or  Planner;  
(b) Principal Secretary or Secretary, Technical Education or Higher Education of  the 
respective State Governmen t or Union territory in which the School is situated;  
(c) one representative from the Institute of Town Planners, India to be nominated  by the 
President of the Institute of Town Planners, India;  
(d) one representative from the Council of Architecture to be  nominated by the  President of 
the Council of Architecture;  
(e) a representative from the All India Council for Technical Education to be  nominated by 
the Chairman of All India Council of Technical Education;  
(f) a representative of the University Grants Commission;  
(g) one expert from the professions of architecture or landscape architecture or  urban design 
and one from Urban and Regional Planning nominated by the Council of  School of Planning and 
Architecture;  
(h) two representatives from Senate; one eac h from Department of Planning and  Department 
of Architecture, by rotation, for a period of two years, in order of seniority;  
(i) two persons not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India  to be 
nominated by the Central Government from amo ngst persons dealing with technical  education 
and finance or their nominee, ex officio ; 
(j) one person not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India  to be 
nominated by the Government of India, Ministry of Urban Development;  
(k) the Direc tor of the School, Member, ex officio ; 
(l) the Registrar of the School shall act as a Secretary to the Board.  
14. Term of office of vacancies among, and allowances payable to , Members of Board. —
Save as otherwise provided in this section — 
(a) the term of office of the Chairperson or any other Members of the Board shall  be five 
years from the date of his nomination;  
(b) the term of office of an ex officio Member shall continue so long as he holds  the office by 
virtue of which he is a Member;  
(c) the term of  office of a Member nominated under clause ( h) of section 13 shall  be two 
years from the date of nomination or till he holds the office whichever is earlier;  7 
 (d) a casual vacancy of a Member shall be filled up in accordance with the  provisions of 
section 1 3; 
(e) the term of office of a Member nominated to fill a casual vacancy shall  continue for the 
remainder of the term of the Member in whose place he has been  nominated; and  
(f) the Members of the Board shall be entitled to such allowances, if any, from  the School as 
may be specified in the Statutes, for attending meetings of the Board or  as may be convened by 
the School but no Member other than the Members referred to  in clauses ( h), (k) and ( l) of                 
sub-section ( 2) of section 13 shall be ent itled to any salary  by reason of this clause.  
15. Powers and functions of Board. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board of 
every School shall be  responsible for the general superintendence, direction and control of the affairs 
of the  School and shall have all the powers of School not otherwise provided for by this Act, the  
Statutes and the Ordinances, and shall have the power to review the acts of the Senate.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Board of every Schoo l shall have 
the following powers, namely: — 
(a) take decisions on questions of policy relating to the administration and  working of the 
School;  
(b) establish departments, faculties or schools of studies and initiate programmes  or courses 
of study at the Sc hool;  
(c) make Statutes governing the administration, management and operations of  such School;  
(d) appoint persons to academic and non -academic section of the School;  
(e) consider and modify or cancel Ordinances;  
(f) consider and pass resolutions on the a nnual report, the audited accounts and  the budget 
estimates of the School for the next financial year as it thinks fit and submit  them to the Council 
together with a statement of its development plans;  
(g) provide, by Statutes, the qualifications, criteria  and processes for appointment  to teaching 
and other posts in such School;  
(h) exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred  or imposed 
upon it by this Act or the Statutes.  
(3) The Board shall have the power to appoint such c ommittees, as it considers  necessary for the 
exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties under this Act.  
(4) The Board shall conduct an annual review of the performance of the Director with  specific 
reference to his leadership in the context of the achievement of the objects of the  School.  
(5) The Board shall in exercise of powers and discharge of functions strive, to the  extent possible, 
to provide autonomy in academic matters to the Senate and Departments or  Faculties or Schools, as 
the case  may be.  
(6) Where in the opinion of the Director or the Chairperson, the situation is so emergent  that an 
immediate decision needs to be taken in the interest of the School, the Chairperson,  on the 
recommendation of the Director may issue such orders as m ay be necessary, recording  the grounds in 
his opinion:  
Provided that such orders shall be submitted for ratification of the Board in the next  meeting.  
16. Senate. —(1) The Senate of every School shall consist of the following persons, namely: — 
(a) the Direc tor of the School, Chairman of the Senate, ex officio ; 
(b) five persons, from amongst the educationists of repute or eminent  professionals, who are 
not in the service of the School, nominated by the Chairperson  of the Board of Governo rs; 
(c) a nominee of t he Institute of Town Planners, India;  8 
 (d) a nominee of the Council of Architecture;  
(e) a nominee of All India Council for Technical Education;  
(f) Dean in charge of academic, research, student affairs, faculty welfare and  planning and 
development of the S chool;  
(g) all the Heads of the Departments;  
(h) all Professors other than the Heads of the Departments;  
(i) four Members of the teaching staff, representing Associate Professors and  the Assistant 
Professors of the School, by rotation, for a period of two years:  
Provided that an employee of the School shall not be eligible for the membership  referred to in 
clauses ( b), (c), (d) and ( e). 
(2) The term of the Members of the Senate other than ex officio Members shall be two  years.  
17. Functions of Senate. —(1) Subject to the provision of this Act, the Statutes and the 
Ordinances, the  Senate of a School shall be the principal academic body of the School and be 
responsible  for the maintenance of standards of instruction, education and examination in the School  
and shall have such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or  imposed upon 
it by the Statutes.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Senate shall have the  following 
powers, namely: — 
(a) to specify the criteria and process for admission to courses or programmes of  study 
offered by the School;  
(b) to recommend to the Board for creation of teaching and other academic  posts, 
determination of the number and emoluments of such posts and defining the  duties and conditi ons 
of service of teachers and other academic posts;  
(c) to recommend to the Board for the commencement of new programmes and  courses of 
study;  
(d) to specify the broad academic content of programmes and courses of study  and to 
undertake modifications therein;  
(e) to specify the academic calendar and approve grant of degrees, diplomas and  other 
academic distinctions or titles;  
(f) to exercise such other powers and discharge such other functions as may be  assigned to it, 
by Statutes or by the Board.  
18. Chairperson of Board. —(1) The Chairperson shall ordinarily preside at the meeting of the 
Board and at the  convocations of the School.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Chairperson to ensure that the decisions taken by the  Board are 
implemented.  
(3) The Chair person shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties  as may be 
assigned to him by this Act or the Statutes.  
19. Director. —(1) The Director of a School shall be appointed by the Central Government with  
the prior approval of the Visitor, on such terms and conditions of service as may be provided  by the 
Statutes.  
(2) The Director shall be the principal academic and executive officer of the School  and shall be 
responsible for the implementation of the decisions of the Board and Senate  and day-to-day 
administration of the School.  
(3) The Director shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as  may be 
assigned to him by this Act or the Statutes or delegated by the Board or the Senate  or the Ordinances.  9 
 (4) The Director shall  submit annual reports and audited accounts to the Board.  
20. Registrar. —(1) The Registrar of every School shall be appointed on such terms and 
conditions  as may be laid down by the Statutes and shall be the custodian of records, the common 
seal, the funds  of the School and such other property of the School as the Board shall commit to  his 
charge.  
(2) The Registrar shall act as the Secretary of the Board, Senate and such committees  as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(3) The Registrar shall be responsible  to the Director for the proper discharge of his  functions.  
(4) The Registrar shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as  may be 
assigned to him by this Act or the Statutes or by the Director.  
21. Other authorities and officers. —The p owers and duties of authorities and officers other than 
those mentioned  above shall be determined by the Statutes.  
22. Review of performance of School. —(1) Every School shall, within seven years from the 
establishment and incorporation  of School under this  Act and thereafter at the expiration of every fifth 
year, constitute, with  the prior approval of the Central Government, a Committee to evaluate and 
review the  performance of the School in achievement of its objects in the said period.  
(2) The Committee c onstituted under sub -section ( 1) shall consist of members of  acknowledged 
repute in academia or industry, drawn from such fields of knowledge as may  have relevance to 
teaching, learning and research in such School.  
(3) The Committee shall assess the perfor mance of School and make recommendations  to the 
Board in accordance with the provisions laid down in Statutes.  
23. Grants by Central Government. —For the purpose of enabling the Schools to discharge their 
functions efficiently  under this Act, the Central Go vernment may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by  law in this behalf, pay to every School in each financial year such sums of money in 
such manner as it may think fit.  
CHAPTER IV  
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
24. Fund of School. —(1) Every School shall maintain a Fund to which shall be credited to — 
(a) all moneys provided by the Central Government;  
(b) all fees and other charges received by the School;  
(c) all moneys received by the School by way of grants, gifts, donations,  benefactions, 
bequests or tra nsfers;  
(d) all moneys received by the School from utilisation of intellectual property  arising from 
research conducted or provision of advisory or consultancy services by  it; and  
(e) all moneys received by the School in any other manner or from any other  source.  
(2) All moneys credited to the Fund of every School shall be deposited in such banks  or invested 
in such manner as the School may, with the approval of the Finance Committee  and the governing 
body, decide.  
(3) The fund of any School shall be applie d towards meeting the expenses of the  School, 
including expenses incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its duties  under this Act.  
25. Accounts and audit. —(1) Every School shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and  prepa re annual statement of accounts including the balance sheet in such form and 
accounting  standard as may be specified by notification, by the Central Government in consultation  
with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  10 
 (2) Where the statement of in come and expenditure and the balance sheet of the  School do not 
comply with the accounting standards, the School shall disclose in its  statement of income and 
expenditure and balance sheet, the following, namely: — 
(a) the deviation from the accounting standards;  
(b) the reasons for such deviation; and  
(c) the financial effect, if any, arising out of such deviation.  
(3) The accounts of every School shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of 
India and any expenditure incurred by audit team  in connection with such audit  shall be payable by 
the School to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(4) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him  in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the School shall  have the same rights,  privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India has in connection with 
the audit of the Government accounts and, in  particular shall have the rights to demand the production 
of books, accounts, connected  vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the offices of 
the School.  
(5) The accounts of every School as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General  of India or 
any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report  thereon shall be 
forwarded annually to the Central Government and that Government shall  cause the same to be laid 
before each House of Parliament in accordance with such procedure  as may be laid down by the 
Central Government . 
26. Pension and provident fund. —(1) Every School may constitute for the benefit of its 
employees such provident or  pension fund or provide such insurance scheme as it may deem fit in 
such manner and  subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Where such provident fund or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central  Government 
may declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925  (19 of 1925) , shall apply  to such 
fund, as if it were a Government provident fund.  
27. Appointment s.—All appointments of the staff of every School, except that of the Director, 
shall be  made in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Statutes, by: — 
(a) the Board, if the appointment is made on the academic staff in the post of  Assista nt 
Professor or if the appointment is made on the non -academic staff in every  cadre the maximum of 
the pay scale for which exceeds prevalent grade pay scale for  Group „A‟ Officers;  
(b) the Director, in any other case.  
28. Statutes. —Subject to the provision s of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of the  
following matters, namely: — 
(a) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(b) the formation of departments of teaching and centres for research;  
(c) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the School and for admission  to the 
examinations of degrees and diplomas of the School;  
(d) the institution of fellowship, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes;  
(e) the term of office and the method of appointment of officers of the School;  
(f) the qua lifications of teachers of the School;  
(g) the classification, the method of appointment and the determination of the  terms and 
conditions of service of teachers and other staff of the School;  
(h) the constitution of pension, insurance and provident funds for the benefit of  the officers, 
teachers and other staff of the School;  11 
 (i) the constitution, powers and duties of the authorities of the School;  
(j) the establishment and maintenance of halls and hostels;  
(k) the conditions of residence of students of th e School and the levying of fees  for residence 
in the halls and hostels and of other charges;  
(l) the allowances to be paid to the Chairperson and Members of the Board;  
(m) the authentication of the orders and decisions of the Board; and  
(n) the meetings o f the Board, the Senate, or any Committee, the quorum at such  meetings 
and the procedure to be followed in the conduct of their business.  
29. Statutes how made. —(1) The first Statutes of each School shall be framed by the Central 
Government  with the approv al of the Visitor and a copy of the same shall be laid as soon as may be 
before  each House of Parliament.  
(2) The Board may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend  or repeal 
the Statutes in the manner provided in this section.  
(3) Every new Statutes or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of  Statutes shall 
require the prior approval of the Visitor who may grant assent or withhold  assent or remit it to the 
Board for consideration.  
(4) New Statutes or a Statute amending  or repealing an existing Statute shall have no  validity 
unless it has been assented to by the Visitor:  
Provided that the Central Government with the prior approval of the Visitor may  frame or amend 
the Statutes for the School, if the same is required for uniformity and a copy  of the same shall be laid 
as soon as may be before each House of Parliament.  
30. Ordinances .—Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances of every  
School may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of the students to the School;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees and diplomas of the  School;  
(c) the conditions under which students shall be admitted to the degree or  diploma courses 
and to the examination s of the School, and shall be eligible for degrees  and diplomas;  
(d) the conditions of award of the fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals  and prizes;  
(e) the conditions and mode of appointment and duties of examining bodies,  examiners and 
moderato rs; 
(f) the conduct of examinations;  
(g) the maintenance of discipline among the students of the School; and  
(h) any other matter which by this Act or the Statutes is to be or may be provided  for by the 
Ordinances.  
31. Ordinances how made. —(1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, Ordinances shall be 
made by the  Senate.  
(2) All Ordinances made by the Senate shall have effect from such date as it may  direct, but every 
Ordinance so made shall be submitted, as soon as may be, to the Board and  shall b e considered by the 
Board at its next meeting.  
(3) The Board shall have power by resolution to modify or cancel any such Ordinance  and such 
Ordinance shall from the date of such resolution stand modified accordingly or  cancelled, as the case 
may be.  
32. Tribunal of Arbitration. —(1) Any dispute arising out of a contract between a School and 
any of its employees  shall, at the request of the employee concerned or at the instance of the School, 12 
 be referred  to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one Member a ppointed by the School, one 
Member  nominated by the employee, and an umpire appointed by the Visitor.  
(2) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final and shall not be questioned in any  court.  
(3) No suit or proceeding shall lie in any court in respect of a ny matter, which is  required by sub -
section ( 1) to be referred to the Tribunal of Arbitration.  
(4) The Tribunal of Arbitration shall have power to regulate its own procedure:  
Provided that the Tribunal shall have regard to the principles of natural justice  while  making such 
procedure.  
(5) Nothing in any other law for the time being in force relating to arbitration shall  apply to 
arbitrations under this section.  
CHAPTER V  
THE COUNCIL  
33. Establishment of Council for Schools. —(1) With effect from such date as  the Central 
Government may, by notification,  specify in this behalf, there shall be established for all Schools 
specified in column (3) of the  Schedule, a central body to be called the Council.  
(2) The Council shall consist of the following members, namel y:— 
(a) the Minister in charge of the Ministry or Department of the Central Government  having 
administrative control of the technical education, ex officio , as Chairperson;  
(b) two Members of the Parliament of India (one Member to be nominated by  the Speak er of 
Lok Sabha and one member to be nominated by the Chairman of  Rajya Sabha), ex officio;  
(c) the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry or  Department of the 
Central Government having administrative control of the technical  education, ex officio , as Vice -
Chairperson;  
(d) the Chairperson of every Board, ex officio ; 
(e) the Director of every School, ex officio ; 
(f) the Chairman, University Grants Commission, ex officio ; 
(g) the President, Council of Architecture, New Delhi, ex officio ; 
(h) the President, Institute of Town Planners, India, ex officio ; 
(i) the Chairman, Indian Institute of Architects, ex officio ; 
(j) the President, Institution of Surveyors of India, ex officio ; 
(k) two Secretaries to the Government of India to rep resent the Ministries or  Departments of 
the Central Government dealing with Urban Development and Defence,  ex officio;  
(l) the Chairman, All India Council for Technical Education, ex officio ; 
(m) three persons to be nominated by the Visitor, at least one o f whom shall be a  woman, 
having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of Architecture or  Landscape 
Architecture or Urban Design and one from Urban and Regional Planning,  ex officio ; 
(n) two Secretaries to the State Government, from amongst the Ministries or  Departments of 
that Government dealing with technical education where the Schools  are located , ex officio ; 
(o) Financial Advisor, dealing with the Ministry of Human Resource Development,  
Department of the Central Government, ex officio ; and 
(p) one officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India  in the 
Ministry or Department of the Central Government having administrative control  of the Technical 
Education, ex officio , as Member Secretary.  13 
 (3) The Council shall ha ve a Secretariat with officials to be appointed by the Statutes.  
(4) The Council, may, constitute a Standing Committee of the School of Planning and  
Architecture Council to assist the Council in discharge of its duties and responsibilities.  
34. Term of off ice of vacancies among, and allowances payable to , Members of Council. —(1) 
Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of office of a Member of  the Council, other than 
an ex officio Member, shall be three years from the date of notification.  
(2) The terms of office of an ex officio Member shall continue so long as he holds  office by virtue 
of which he is such a Member.  
(3) The term of office of a member nominated under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 33 
shall expire as soon as he ceases to  be Member of the House, which elected him.  
(4) The term of office of a Member of the Council nominated or elected to fill a casual  vacancy 
shall continue for the remainder of the term of the Member in whose place he has  been appointed.  
(5) Notwithstanding  anything contained in this section an outgoing Member of the  Council shall, 
unless the Central Government otherwise directs, continue in office until  another person is appointed 
as a Member in his place.  
(6) The members of the Council shall be entitled to  such travelling and other  allowances, as may 
be prescribed, for attending meetings of the Council or the Committees  thereof.  
35. Functions of Council. —(1) It shall be the general duty of the Council to co -ordinate the 
activities of all the  Schools.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Council shall perform  the following 
functions, namely: — 
(a) to advise on policy matters relating to the duration of the courses, the  degrees and other 
academic distinctions to be conferred by the Sc hools, admission  standards and other academic 
matters;  
(b) to recommend to the Central Government, proposals for establishment of  new Schools of 
Planning and Architecture;  
(c) to deliberate on such matters of common interest to Schools as may be  referred t o it by 
any School;  
(d) to lay down policy regarding cadres, methods of recruitment and conditions  of service of 
employees, institution of scholarships and freeships, levying of fees  and other matters of common 
interest;  
(e) to examine the development plans of each School and to approve such of  them as are 
considered necessary and also to indicate broadly the financial implications  of such approved 
plans;  
(f) to advise the Visitor, if so required, in respect of any function to be performed  by him 
under this Act; and  
(g) to perform such other functions as may be referred to it by the Central  Government:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall derogate the powers and functions vested  in the Board 
or Senate or other authorities of a School.  
36. Chairperson of Council. —(1) The Chairperson of the Council shall ordinarily preside at the 
meetings of the  Council:  
Provided that in his absence, the Vice -Chairperson of the Council shall preside at the  meetings of 
the Council.  
(2) It shall be the duty of  the Chairperson of the Council to ensure that the decisions  taken by the 
Council are implemented.  14 
 (3) The Chairperson shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties  as are 
assigned to him by this Act.  
(4) The Council shall meet once in eve ry year and follow such procedure in its meetings  as may 
be prescribed.  
37. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Chapter. —(1) The Central Government 
may, after previous publication, by notification, make  rules to carry out the purposes of this  Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such  rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner and the conditions for providing provident fund and pension  fund or insurance 
scheme under sub -section ( 1) of section 26;  
(b) the travelling and other allowances for the Members for attending  the meetings of the 
Council or the Committees thereof under sub -section ( 6) of section 34;  
(c) the procedure to be followed in the meetings of t he Council under  sub-section ( 4) of 
section 36.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as  may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total  period of thirty days 
which  may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive  sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session aforesaid, both Houses agree in making  any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule  shall there after have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be;  so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the  validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
38. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc. —No act of the Council, or 
any School or Board or Senate or any other body set up  under this Act or the Statutes, shall be invalid 
merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy or defect in the constituti on thereof; or  
(b) any defect in the election, nomination or appointment of a person acting as  a Member 
thereof; or  
(c) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the case.  
39. Returns and information to be provided to Central Government. —Each School shall 
furnish to the Central Government such returns or other  information with respect to its policies or 
activities as the Central Government may, for the  purpose of reporting to P arliament or for the making 
of policy, from time to time require.  
40. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act the Central  Government, may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make su ch 
provisions not  inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary or 
expedient  for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years  from the date 
on which this Act  receives the assent of the President.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be, after it is made, be  laid before 
each House of Parliament.  
41. School to be public authority under Right to Information Act, 2005 .—The provisions of 
the Right to Information Act, 2005  (22 of 2005)  shall apply to each School,  as if it were a public 
authority defined in clause ( h) of section 2 of the Right to Information  Act, 2005.  
  15 
 42. Transitional provisions. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this  Act— 
(a) the Board of Governors of every School functioning as such immediately  before the 
commencement of this Act shall continue to so function until a new Board  is constituted for that 
School under this Act, but on the constitution of a new Board  under  this Act, the Members of the 
Board holding office before the constitution shall  cease to hold office;  
(b) every Academic Council constituted in relation to every School before the  commencement 
of this Act shall be deemed to be the Senate constituted under  this Act until a Senate is constituted 
under this Act for that School but on the constitution  of the new Senate under this Act, the 
Members of the Academic Council holding  office before such constitution shall cease to hold 
office;  
(c) the Board of Govern ors, Finance Committee, Academic Council, Executive  Council, 
Building and Works Committee and such other Committees of every School  functioning as such 
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall continue  to so function until a new Board 
is constituted for the School under this Act, but on  the constitution of a new Board under this Act, 
the Members of the Board of Governors,  Finance Committee, Academic Council, Building and 
Works Committee and such  other Committees holding office before such constitution shall cease 
to hold office;  
(d) any student who joined classes of the existing School on or after the academic  year 2008 -
2009 or completed the course on or after the academic year 2011 -2012 shall  for the purpose of 
clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 7, be deemed to have  pursued a course of study in the 
existing Schools located at Bhopal and Vijayawada  only if such student has not already been 
awarded degree or diploma for the same  course of study.   16 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 3( k) and secti on 4]  
 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
SI. 
No. Name of the  
State  Name of the  
existing School  Location  Name of School 
incorporated under 
this Act  
1. Delhi  School of Planning and 
Architecture, being a 
society registered under the 
Societies Registration Act, 
1860 (21 of 1860)  New Delhi  School of Planning 
and Architecture, 
New Delhi.  
2. Madhya Pradesh  School of Planning and 
Architecture, being a 
society registered under the 
Societies Registration Act, 
1860  (21 of 1860)  Bhopal  School of P lanning 
and Architecture, 
Bhopal.  
3. Andhra Pradesh  School of Planning and 
Architecture, being a 
society registered under the 
Societies Registration Act, 
1860 (21 of 1860)  Vijay awada  School of Planning 
and Architecture, 
Vijay awada.  
 
  
--------------------------The Street Vendors (Protection of Livelihood and Regulation of Street Vending) Act, 2014--------------------------
 
1 
 THE STREET VENDORS (PROTECTION OF LIVELIHOOD AND  
REGULATION OF STREET VENDING) ACT, 2014  
_______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and provisions . 
2. Definitions . 
 
CHAPTER II  
REGULATION OF STREET VENDING  
3. Survey of street vendors and protection from eviction or relocation . 
4. Issue of certificate of vending . 
5. Conditio ns for issue of certificate of vending . 
6. Categories of certificate of vending and issue of identity cards . 
7. Criteria for issuing certificate of vending . 
8. Vending fees . 
9. Validity and renewal of certificate of vending . 
10. Cancellation or suspension of certificate of vending . 
11. Appeal from decision of Town Vending Committee . 
 
CHAPTER III  
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF STREET VENDORS  
12. Right s of street vendor . 
13. Right of street vendor for a new site or area on relocation . 
14. Duty of street vendor s. 
15. Maintenance of cleanliness and public hygiene . 
16. Maintenance of civic amenities in vending zone in good condition . 
17. Payment of maintenance charges . 
 
CHAPTER IV  
RELOCATION AND EVICTION OF STREET VENDORS  
18. Relocation or eviction of street vendors . 
19. Seizure and reclaiming of goods . 
 
CHAPTER V  
DISPUTE REDRESSAL MECHANISM  
20. Redressal of grievances or resolution of disputes of street vendors . 
 
   
2 
 CHAPTER VI  
PLAN FOR STREET VENDING  
SECTIONS  
21. Plan for street vending . 
 
CHAPTER VII  
TOWN VENDING COMMITTEE  
22. Town Vending Committee . 
23. Meetings of Town Vending Committee . 
24. Temporary association of persons with Town Vending Committee for particular purposes . 
25. Office space and other employees for Town Vending Committee . 
26. Publication of street vendor’s charter and data -base and carrying out of social audit . 
 
CHAPTER VIII  
PREVENTION OF HARASSMENT OF STREET VENDORS  
27. Prevention of harassment by police and other authorities . 
 
CHAPTER IX  
PENAL PROVISIONS  
28. Penalty for contraventions . 
 
CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
29. Provisions of this Act, not to be construed as conferring ownership rights, etc . 
30. Returns . 
31. Promotional  measures . 
32. Research, training and awareness . 
33. Act to have overriding effect . 
34. Powers to delegate . 
35. Power to amend Schedules . 
36. Power to make rules . 
37. Power to make bye -laws. 
38. Scheme for street vendors . 
39. Power to remove difficulties . 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
   
3 
 THE STREET VENDORS (PROTECTION OF LIVELIHOOD AND  
REGULATION OF STREET VENDING) ACT, 2014  
ACT NO. 7 OF 2014  
         [4th March , 2014 .] 
An Act to protect the rights of urban street vendors and to regulate street vending  activities and 
for matters c onnected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -fifth Year of the Republic of India as  follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, c ommencement  and provisions .—(1) This Act m ay be called the Street 
Vendors  (Protection of Livelihood and Regulation  of Street Vending) Act, 2014.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different States and any re ference in 
any provision to the c ommencement of this Act shall be construed in relation to any State as a reference 
to the coming into force of that provision in  that State.  
(4) The provisions of this Act shall not apply to any land, premises and trains owned  and controlled 
by the Railways under the Railway Act, 1989  (24 of 1989) . 
2. Definitions. —(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appropriate Government” means in respect of matters relating to, — 
(i) a Union territory without Legislature, the Central Government;  
(ii) the Union territories with Legislature, the Government of the National  Capital Territory 
of Delhi or, as the case may  be, the Government of Union  territory of Puducherry;  
(iii) a State, the State Government;  
(b) “holding capacity” means the maximum number of street vendors who ca n in any vending 
zone and has been determined as such by the local  authority on th e commendat ions of the Town 
Vending Committee;  
(c) “local authority” means a Municipal Corporation or a Municipal Council or a  Nagar 
Panchayat, by whatever name called, or the Cantonment Board, or as the case  may be, a civil area 
committee appointed under section 47 of the Cantonment Act, 2006 (41 of 2006 )or such other body 
entitled to function as a local authority in any city or town to  provide civic services and regulate street 
vending and includes the “planning authority”  which regulates the land use in that city or  town;  
(d) “mobile vendors” means street vendors who carry out vending activities in  designated area by 
moving from one place to another place vending their goods and  services;  
(e) “natural market” means a market where sellers and buyers have traditionally  congregated for 
the sale and purchase of products or services and has been determine  das such by the local authority 
on the recommendations of the Town Vending Committee;  
(f) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the  term “notify” shall 
be construed accordingly;  
(g)“planning authority” means an Urban Development Authority or any other  authority in any 
city or town designated by the appropriate Government as responsible  for regulating the land use by 
                                                           
1. 1st May, 2014, vide notification No. S.O. 1185  (E), dated 1st May, 2014, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Sec. 3( ii).  
4 
 defining the precise extent of areas for any particular  activity in the master plan or development plan 
or zonal plan or layout plan or any  other spatial plan which is legally enforceable under the applicable 
Town and Country  Planning Act or the Urban Development Act or the Municipal Act, as the case 
may be;  
(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act by the  appropriate Government;  
(i) “Schedule” means the Schedule annexed to this Act;  
(j) “scheme” means a scheme framed by the appropriate Government under  section 38;  
(k) “stationary vendors” means street vendors who carry out vending activities  on regular basis at 
a specific location;  
(l) “street vendor” means a person engaged in vending of articles, goods, wares,  food items or 
merchandise of everyday use o r offering services to the general public,  in a street, lane, side walk, 
footpath, pavement, public park or any other public place or  private area, from a temporary built up 
structure or by moving from place to place and  includes hawker, peddler, squatter a nd all other 
synonymous terms which may be local or region specific; and the words “street vending” with their 
grammatical variations and cognate expressions, shall be construed accordingly;  
(m) “Town Vending Committee” means the body constituted by the ap propriate  Government 
under section 22;  
(n) “vending zone” means an area or a place or a location designated as such by  the local 
authority, on the recommendations of the Town Vending Committee, for the  specific use by street 
vendors for street vending and includes footpath, side walk,  pavement, embankment, portions of a 
street, waiting area for public or any such place  considered suitable for vending activities and 
providing services to the general public.  
(2) Any reference in this Act to any enactment or a ny provision thereof, shall, in  relation to an area in 
which such enactment or such provision is not in force be construed as  a reference to the corresponding 
law, if any, in force in that area.  
CHAPTER II  
REGULATION OF STREET VENDING  
3. Survey of street v endor  sand protection from eviction or relocation .—(1) The Town Vending 
Committee shall, within such period and in such manner as  may be specified in the scheme, conduct a 
survey of all existing street vendors, within the  area under its jurisdiction , and subsequent survey shall be 
carried out at least once in every  five years.  
(2) The Town Vending Committee shall ensure that all existing street vendors, identified  in the 
survey, are accommodated  in the vending zones subject to a norm conforming to two  and half per cent. of 
the population of the ward or zone or town or city, as the case may be,  in accordance with the plan for 
street vending and the holding capacity of the vending  zones.  
(3) No street vendor shall be evicted or, as the case may be, relocated till the survey  specified under 
sub-section ( 1) has been completed and the certificate of vending is issued  to all street vendors.  
4. Issue of certificate of vending .—(1) Every street vendor, identified under the survey carried out 
under sub -section  (1) of section 3, who has completed the age of fourteen years or such age as may be  
prescribed by the appropriate Government, shall be issued a certificate of vending by the  Town Vending 
Committee, subject to such terms and conditions and within the period speci fied in the scheme including 
the restrictions specified in the plan for street vending:  
Provided that a person, whether or not included under the survey under sub -section  (1) of section 3, 
who has been issued a certificate of vending before the commencemen t of this Act, whether known as 
licenc e or any other form of permission (whether as a stationary  vendor or a mobile vendor or under any  
5 
 other category) shall be deemed to be a street vendor for  that category for the period for which he has 
been issued such  certificate of vending.  
(2) Where, in the intervening period between two surveys, any person seeks to vend,  the Town 
Vending Committee may grant a certificate of vending to such person, subject to  the scheme, the plan for 
street vending and the holding capacity of the vending zones.  
(3) Where the number of street vendors identified under sub -section ( 1) or the number  of persons 
seeking to vend under sub -section ( 2) are more than the holding capacity of the  vending zone and exceeds 
the number of persons t o be accommodated in that vending zone,  the Town Vending Committee shall 
carry out a draw of lots for issuing the certificate of  vending for that vending zone and the remaining 
persons shall be accommodated in any  adjoining vending zone to avoid relocation . 
5.Conditions for  issue of  certificate of  vending .—(1) Every street vendor shall give an undertaking 
to the Town Vending Committee prior to the issue of a certificate of vending under section 4, that — 
(a) he shall carry on the business of street vending himself or through any of his family member;  
(b) he has no other means of livelihood:  
(c) he shall not transfer in any manner whatsoever, including rent, the certificate of vending or the 
 place  specified therein to any other person.  
(2) Where a street vendor to whom a certificate of vending is issued dies or suffers from any 
permanent disability or is ill, one of his family member in following order of priority,  may vend in his 
place, till the validity of the certificate of vending — 
(a) spouse of the street vendor;  
(b) dependent child of the street vendor:  
Provided that where a dispute  arises as to who is entitled to vend in the place of the  vendor, the matter 
shall be decided by the committee under section 20.  
6. Categories of certificate of vending and issue of identity cards .—(1) The certificate of vending 
shall be issued under any of the following  categories,  namely: — 
(a) a stationary vendor;  
(b) a mobile vendor; or  
(c) any other category as may be specified in the scheme.  
(2) The certificate of vending issued for the categories specified in sub -section ( 1) shall be in such 
form, and issued in such manner, as may be specified in the scheme and specify the vending zone where 
the street vendor shall carry on his vending activiti es, the days and timings for carrying on such vending 
activities and the conditions and restriction subject to which he shall carry on such vending activities.  
(3) Every street vendor who has been issued certificate of vending under sub -section  (1) shall be 
issued identity cards in such form and manner as may be specified in the scheme.  
7. Criteria for issuing certificate of vending.—The criteria to be followed by the Town Vending 
Committee for issuing certificate of  vending to a street vendor shall be as specified in the scheme, which 
may, apart from other  things, provide for preference to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, Other 
Backward  Classes, women, persons with disabilities, minorities or such other categories as may be  
specified in the sche me. 
8. Vending fees .—Every street vendor who has been issued certificate of vending shall pay such  
vending fees as may be specified in the scheme.  
9. Validity and renewal of certificate of vending .—(1) Every certificate of vending shall be valid 
for such p eriod as may be specified in  the scheme.   
6 
 (2) Every certificate of vending shall be renewable for such period, in such manner,  and on payment 
of such fees, as may be specified in the scheme.  
10. Cancellation  or suspension  of certificate  of vending .—Where a street vendor who has been 
issued a certificate of vending under this Act  commits breach of any of the conditions thereof or any other 
terms and conditions specified or the purpose of regulating street vending under this Act or any rules or 
schemes made  thereunder, or where the Town Vending Committee is satisfied that such certificate of 
vending  has been secur ed by the street vendor through misrepresentation or fraud, the Town Vending  
Committee may,  without prejudice to any other fine which may have been in curred by the  street vendor 
under this Act, cancel the certificate of vending or suspend the same in such  as may be specified in the 
scheme and for such period as it deems fit:  
Provided that no such cancellation or suspension shall be made by the Town Vend ing Committee 
unless an opportunity of hearing has been given to the street vendor.  
11. Appeal from decision of Town Vending Committee .—(1) Any person who is aggrieved by any 
decision of the Town Vending Committee  with respect to issue of certificate of vending under section 6 
or cancellation or suspension  of certificate of vending under section 10 may prefer an appeal to the local 
authority in such  form, within such period, and in such manner, as may be prescribed.  
(2) No appeal shall be disposed of by t he local authority unless the appellant has been  given an 
opportunity of hearing.  
CHAPTER III  
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF STREET VENDORS  
12. Right s of street vendor s.—(1) Every street vendor shall have the right to carry on the business of 
street  vending  activities in accordance with the terms and conditions mentioned in the certificate of 
vending.  
(2)Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any area or space,  as the case may 
be, has been earmarked as no -vending zone, no street vendor s hall carry out  any vending activities in that 
zone.  
13. Right of street vendor for a new site or area on relocation .—Every st reet vendor, who 
possesses a certificate of vending, shall, in case of his  relocation under section 18, be entitled for new site 
or area, as the case  may be, for carrying  out his vending activities as may be determined by the local 
authority, in consultation with  the Town Vending Committee.  
14.  Duty of street vendor s.—Where a street vendor occupies space on a time sharing basis, he shall 
remove his  goods and wares every day at the end of the time -sharing period allowed to him.  
15. Maintenance of cleanliness and public hygiene .—Every street vendor shall maintain cleanliness 
and public hygiene in the vending  zones and the adjoining are as. 
16.  Maintenance of civic amenities in vending zone in good  condition .—Every street vendor shall 
maintain civic amenities and public property in the vending  zone in good condition and not damage or 
destroy or cause any damage or destruction to the  same.  
17. Payment of maintenance charges .—Every street vendor shall pay such periodic maintenance 
charges for the civic  amenities and facilities provided in the vending zones as may be determined by the 
local  authority.  
CHAPTER IV  
RELOCATION AND EVICTION O F STREET VENDORS  
18. Relocation or eviction of street  vendors.—(1) The local authority may, on the recommendations 
of the Town Vending  Committee, declare a zone or part of it to be a no -vending zone for any public 
purpose and  relocate the street vendors vending in that area, in such manner as may be specified in the  
scheme.   
7 
 (2) The local authority shall evict such street vendor whose certificate of vending has  been cancelled 
under section 10 or who does not have a certificate of vending and vends  without such certificate, in such 
manner as may be specified in the scheme.  
(3) No street vendor shall be relocated or evicted by the local authority from the place  specified in the 
certificate of vending unless he has been given thirty days’ notice for the  same i n such manner as may be 
specified in the scheme.  
(4) A street vendor shall be relocated or evicted by the local authority physically in  such manner as 
may be specified in the scheme only after he had failed to vacate the place  specified in the certificate of 
vending, after the expiry of  the period specified in the notice.  
(5) Every street vendor who fails to relocate or vacate the place specified in the  certificate of vending, 
after the expiry of the period specified in the notice, shall be liable to  pay fo r every day of such default, a 
penalty which may extend up to two hundred and fifty  rupees, as may be determined by the local 
authority, but shall not be more than the value of  goods seized.  
19. Seizure and reclaiming of goods .—(1) If the street vendor fails to vacate the place specified in 
the certificate of  vending, after the lapse of the period specified in the notice given under sub -section ( 3) 
of section 18, the local authority, in addition to evicting the street vendor under section 18, may,  if it 
deems necessary, seize the goods of such street vendor in such manner as may be  specified in the scheme:  
Provided that where any such seizure is carried out, a list of goods seized shall be prepared, as 
specified in the scheme, and a copy thereof, duly sig ned by the person authorised  to seize the goods, shall 
be issued to the street vendor.  
(2) The street vendor whose goods have been seized under sub -section ( 1) may, reclaim his goods in 
such manner, and after paying such fees, as may be specified in the sc heme:  
Provided that in case of non -perishable goods, the local authority shall release the goods within two 
working days of the claim being made by the street vendor  and in case of perishable goods the local 
authority shall release the goods on the same da y of the claim being made by the street vendor.  
CHAPTER V  
DISPUTE REDRESSAL MECHANISM  
20. Redressal of grievances or resolution of disputes of street vendors .—(1) The appropriate 
Government  may constitute one or more committees consisting  of a Chairperson who has been a civil 
judge or a judicial magistrate and two other professional  shaving such experience as may be prescribed 
for the purpose of deciding the applications  received under sub -section ( 2): 
Provided that no employee of the appropriate Government  or the local authority shall  be appointed as 
members of the committee.  
(2) Every street vendor who has a grievance or dispute may make an application in writing to the 
committee constituted under sub -section ( 1) in such form and manner as maybe prescribed . 
(3) On receipt of grievance or dispute under sub -section ( 2), the committee referred to in sub -section 
(1) shall, after verification and enquiry in such manner, as may be prescribed, take steps for redressal of 
such grievance or resolution of such disput e, within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(4) Any person who is aggrieved by the decision of the committee may prefer an appeal to the local 
authority in such form, within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(5) The local authority shall dispose of the appeal received under sub -section ( 4) within such time and 
in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the local authority shall, before disposing of the appeal, give an  opportunity of being 
heard to the aggrieved person.  
   
8 
 CHAPTER VI  
PLAN FOR STREET VENDING  
21. Plan for street vending .—(1) Every local authority shall, in consultation with the planning 
authority and on  the recommendations of the Town Vending Committee, once in every five years, prepare 
a plan to pro mote the vocation of street vendors covering the matters contained in the First  Schedule.  
(2) The plan for street vending prepared by the local authority shall be submitted to  the appropriate 
Government for approval and that Government shall, before notifying the  plan, determine the norms 
applicable to the street vendors.  
CHAPTER VII  
TOWN VENDING COMMITTEE  
22. Town Vending Committee. —(1) The appropriate Government may, by rules made in this behalf,  
provide for the  term and the manner of constituting a  Town Vending Committee in each local authority:  
Provided that the appropriate Government may, if considers necessary, provide for  constitution of 
more than one Town Vending Committee, or a Town Vending Committee for  each zone or ward, in each 
local author ity. 
(2) Each Town Vending Committee shall consist of: — 
(a) Municipal Commissioner or Chief Executive Officer, as the case may be, who  shall be the 
Chairperson; and 
(b) such number of other members as may be prescribed, to be nominated  by th e appropriate 
Government, representing the local authority, medical officer of the local  authority,  the planning 
authority, traffic police, police, association of street vendors,   market associations, traders 
associations,  non-governmental organisations, community  based  organisations, resident welfare 
associations, banks and such  other interests as  it deems proper;  
(c) the number of members nominated t o represent the non -governmenta l organisations and the 
community based organisations shall not be less than ten per  cent.;  
(d) the number of members representing the street vendors shall not be less than  forty per cent. 
who shall be elected by the street vendors themselves in such manner  as may be prescribed:  
Provided that one -third of members representing the street vendor s shall be from  amongst women 
vendors:  
Provided further that due representation shall be given to the Scheduled Castes, the  Scheduled Tribes, 
Other Backward Classes, minorities and persons with disabilities from  amongst the members representing 
street vend ors. 
(3) The Chairperson and the members nominated under sub -section ( 2) shall receive  such allowances 
as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.  
23. Meetings of Town Vending Committee .—(1) The Town Vending Committee shall meet at such 
times and places within the  jurisdiction of the local authority and shall observe such rules of procedure in 
regard to the  transaction of business at its meetings, and discharge such functions, as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every decision of the Town Vending Committee s hall be notified along with the  reasons for 
taking such decision.  
24. Temporary association of persons with Town Vending Committee for particular  
purposes .—(1) The Town Vending Committee may associate with itself in such manner and for  such 
purposes, as ma y be prescribed, any person whose assistance or advice it may desire,  in carrying out any 
of the provisions of this Act.  
(2) A person associated under sub -section ( 1) shall be paid such allowances as maybe prescribed.   
9 
 25. Office space and other employees f or Town Vending Committee .—The local authority shall 
provide the Town Vending Committee with appropriate  office space and such employees as may be 
prescribed.  
26. Publication  of street  vendor’s  charter and data -base and  carrying out of social audit .—(1) 
Every Town Vending Committee shall publish the street vendor's charter  specifying therein the time 
within which the certificate of vending shall be issued to a street  vendor and the time within which such 
certificate of vending shall be renewed and other  activities to be performed within the time limit specified 
therein.  
(2) Every Town Vending Committee shall maintain up to date records of registered  street vendors and 
street vendors to whom certificate of vending has been issued containing  name of such str eet vendor, stall 
allotted to him, nature of business carried out by him,  category of street vending and such other 
particulars which may be relevant to the street  vendors, in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) Every Town Vending Committee shall carry out social audit of its activities under  the Act or the 
rules or the schemes made there  under in such form and manner as may be  specified in the scheme.  
CHAPTER VIII  
PREVENTION OF HARASSMENT OF STREET VENDORS  
27. Prevention of harassment by police and othe r authorities .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force,  no street vendor who carries on the street vending 
activities in accordance with the terms  and conditions of his certificate of vending shall be prevented from 
exercising such rights by  any person or police or any other authority exercising powers under any other 
law for the  time being in force.  
CHAPTER IX  
PENAL PROVISIONS  
28. Penalty for contraventions .—If any street vendor — 
(a) indulges in vending activities without a certificate of vending;  
(b) contravenes the terms of certificate of vending; or  
(c) contravenes any other terms and conditions specified for the purpose of  regulating street 
vending under this Act or any rules or schemes made thereunder,  
he shall  be liable to a penalty for each such offence which may extend up to rupees two  thousand as may 
be determined by the local authority.  
CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
29. Provisions of this Act, not to be construed as conferring ownership rights, etc .—(1) Nothing 
contained in this Act shall be construed as conferring upon a street  vendor any temporary, permanent or 
perpetual right of carrying out vending activities in the  vending zones allotted to him or in respect of any 
place on which he carries on such vending  activity.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to any stationery vendor, if a  temporary leasehold 
or ownership right has been conferred on him by a lease deed or  otherwise, in respect of a place at 
specific location where he carries on such vending activity  in accordance with the provisions of any law 
for the time being in force for carrying out such  vending activity.  
30. Returns .—Every Town Vending Committee shall furnish, from time to time, to the appropriate  
Government and the local authority such returns as may be prescribed.  
31. Promotional measures .—The appropriate Government may, in consultation with the Town 
Vending  Committee, local authority, planning authority and  street vendors associations or  unions,   
10 
 promotional measures of m aking available credit, insurance and other welfare  schemes of social security 
for the street vendors.  
32. Research, training and awareness .—The appropriate Government may, to the extent of 
availability of financial and other  resources, — 
(a) org anise capacity building programme s to enable the street vendors to exercise  the rights 
contemplated under this Act;  
(b) undertake research, education and training programmes to advance knowledge  and 
understanding of the role of the informal sector in the economy , in general and the  street vendors, in 
particular and to raise awareness among the public through Town  Vending Committee.  
33. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything in consistent  there  in contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having  effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.  
34. Powers to d elegate .—The appropriate Government may, by general or special order in writing, 
delegate  such of its powers and functions under this Act (excluding the power to frame scheme under  
section 38 and power to make rules under section 36), as it may deem necessary, to the local  authority or 
the Town Vending Committee or any other officer, subject to such conditions, i f any, as may be specified 
in that order.  
35. Power to amend Schedules .—(1) On the recommendations made by the appropriate Government 
or otherwise, if  the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by  
notification, amend the Schedules and thereupon the First Schedule or the Second Schedule,  as the case 
may be, shall be deemed t o have been amended accordingly.  
(2) A copy of every notification issued under sub -section ( 1), shall be laid before each  House of 
Parliament as soon as may be after it is issued.  
36. Power to make rules .—(1) The appropriate Government shall, within one year from the date of 
commencement  of this Act, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and w ithout prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such  rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the age for street vending under sub -section ( 1) of section 4;  
(b) the form, period and manner of filing appeal with the  local authority under  sub-section ( 1) of 
section 11;  
(c) the persons and the experience such person shall have under sub -section ( 1) of section 20;  
(d) the form and the manner of making application under sub -section ( 2) of section 20;  
(e) the manner of verification and enquiry on receipt of grievance or dispute, the  time within 
which and the manner in which steps for redressal of grievances and  resolution of disputes may be 
taken under sub -section ( 3) of section 20;  
(f) the form, the time within which an d the manner  in which an appeal may be filed under                  
sub-section ( 4) of section 20;  
(g) the time within which and the manner in which an appeal shall be disposed of  under                     
sub-section ( 5) of section 20;  
(h) the term of, an d the manner of constituting, the Town Vending Committee  under                
sub-section ( 1) of section 22;  
(i) the number of other members of the Town Vending Committee under  clause ( b) of             
sub-section ( 2) of section 22;  
(j) the manner of elections among street vendors under clause ( d) of sub -section  (2) of section 22;   
11 
 (k) the allowances to Chairperson and members under sub -section ( 3) of section 22;  
(l) the time and place for meeting, procedure for transaction of business at meetings and f unctions 
to be discharged by the Town Vending Committee under  section 23;  
(m) the manner and the purpose for which a person may be associated under  sub-section ( 1) of 
section 24;  
(n) the allowances to be paid to an associated person under sub -section ( 2) of section 24;  
(o) the other employees of Town Vending Committee under section 25;  
(p) the manner of maintaining up to date record of all street vendors under  sub-section ( 2) of 
section 26;  
(q) the returns to be furnished under section 30;  
(r) the manner of  publishing summary of scheme under sub -section ( 2) of section 38.  
(3) Every rule and scheme made by the Central Government under this Act shall be  laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session  ,for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more  successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the  session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modifi cation  in the rule or scheme or both Houses agree that the rule or scheme 
should not be made, the  rule or scheme shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the  case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annu lment shall be without  
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or scheme.  
(4) Every rule or scheme made by the State Government under this Act shall, as soon  as may be after 
it is made, be laid before each House of the State L egislature where there are  two Houses, and where 
there is one House of the State  Legislature, before that House.  
37. Power to make by e-laws .—Subject to the provisions of this Act or any rule or scheme made 
thereunder, the  local authority may make bye -laws to provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely: — 
(a) the regulation and manner of vending in restriction -free-vending zones,  restricted -vending  
zones  and designated vending zones;  
(b) determination of monthly maintenance charges for the civic a menities and  facilities in the  
vending  zones under section 17;  
(c) determination of penalty under sub -section ( 5) of section 18 and section 28;  
(d) the regulation of the collection of taxes and fees in the vending zones;  
(e) the regulation of traffic in th e vending zones;  
(f) the regulation of the quality of products and services provided to the public  in vending zones 
and maintenance of public health, hygiene and safety standards;  
(g) the regulation of civic services in the vending zones; and  
(h) the regulation of such other matters in the vending zones as may be necessary.  
38. Scheme for street vendors .—(1) For the purposes of this Act, the appropriate Government shall 
frame a scheme,  within six months from the date of commencement of this Act, after due consultations 
with the local authority and the Town Vending Committee, by notification, which may specify all  or any 
of the matters provided in the Second Schedule.  
(2) A summary of the scheme notified by the appropriate Government under sub -section  (1) shall be 
published by the local authority in at least two local newspapers  in such  manner as may be prescribed.  
  
12 
 39. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central  Government may, by  order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not in consistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary expedient  for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after expiry o f three years from  the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid  before each 
House of Parliament.  
   
13 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See section 21)  
PLAN FOR STREET VENDING  
(1) The plan for street vending shall, — 
(a) ensure that all existing street vendors identified in the survey, subject to a  norm conforming t o 
 two and half per cent. of the population of the ward, zone, town or  city, as the case may be, are 
accommodated in the plan for str eet vending;  
(b) ensure the right of commuters to move freely and use the roads without any  impediment;  
(c) ensure that the provision of space or area for street vending is reasonable  and consistent with  
existing natural markets;  
(d) take into account the civic facilities for appropriate use of identified spaces  or areas as 
vending zones;  
(e) promote convenient, efficient and cost effective distribution of goods and  provision of 
services;  
(f) such other matters as may be specified in the scheme to give effe ct to the plan  for street 
vending.  
(2) The plan for street vending shall contain all of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) determination of spatial planning norms for street vending;  
(b) earmarking of space or area for vending zones;  
(c) determination of vending zones as restriction -free-vending zones, restricted  vending  zones and 
no-vending zones;  
(d) making of spatial plans conducive and adequate for the prevalent number of  street vendors in 
that city or town and also for the future growth, by adopting s uch norms as may be necessary;  
(e) consequential changes needed in the existing master plan, development  plan, zonal plan, 
layout plan and any other plan for accommodating street vendors in  the designated vending zones.  
(3) Declaration of no -vending zone s hall be carried out by the plan for street vending,  subject to the 
following principles, namely: — 
(a) any existing market, or a natural market as identified under the survey shall  not be declared as 
a no-vending zone;  
(b) declaration of no -vending zone shall be done in a manner which displace  sthe minimum 
percentage of street vendors;  
(c) overcrowding of any place shall not be a basis for declaring any area as a  no-vending zone 
provided that restrictions may be placed on issuing certificate of  vending in  such areas to persons not 
identified as street vendors in the survey;  
(d) sanitary concerns shall not be the basis for declaring any area as a  no-vending zone unless 
such concerns can be solely attributed to street vendors and  cannot be resolved through a ppropriate 
civic action by the local authority;  
(e) till such time as the survey has not been carried out and the plan for street  vending has not 
been formulated, no zone shall be declared as a no -vending zone.  
   
14 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 38)  
Matters to be provided in the Scheme for Street Vendors framed by the appropriate  Government: — 
(a) the manner of conducting survey;  
(b) the period within which certificate of vending shall be  issued to the stre et vendors identified 
under the survey;  
(c) the terms and conditions subject to which certificate of vending may be  issued to a street 
vendor including to those persons who wish to carry on street  vending during the intervening period 
of two surveys;  
(d) the form and the manner in which the certific ate of vending may be issued to  a street vendor;  
(e) the form and manner of issuing identity cards to street vendors;  
(f) the criteria for issuing certificate of vending to street vendors;  
(g) the vending fees to be paid on the basis of category of street vending, which  may be different 
for different cities;  
(h) the manner of collecting, through banks, counters of local authority and  counters of Town 
Vending Committee, vending fees, maintenance charges and penalties  for registration, use of parking 
space fo r mobile stalls and availing of civic services;  
(i) the period of validity of certificate of vending;  
(j) the period for which and the manner in which a certificate of vending may be  renewed and the 
fees for such renewal;  
(k) the manner in which the certif icate of vending may be suspended or cancelled;  
(l) the categories of street vendors other than stationery vendors and mobile  vendors;  
(m) the other categories of persons for preference for issue of certificate of  vending;  
(n) the public purpose for which a street vendor may be relocated and the  manner of relocating 
street vendor;  
(o) the manner of evicting a street vendor;  
(p) the manner of giving notice for eviction of a street vendor;  
(q) the manner of evicting a street vendor physically on failure to evict;  
(r) the manner of seizure of goods by the local authority, including preparation  and issue of list of 
goods seized;  
(s) the manner of reclaiming seized goods by the street vendor and the fees for  the same;  
(t) the form and the manner for carrying out social audit of the activities of Town  Vending 
Committee;  
(u) the conditions under which private places may be designated as restriction  free-vending zones, 
restricted -vending zones and no -vending zones;  
(v) the terms and conditions for street vending including norms to be observed  for up keeping 
public health and hygiene;  
(w) the designation of State Nodal Officer for co -ordination of all matters relating  to street 
vending at the state level;  
(x) the manner of maintenance of proper records and other do cuments by the  Town Vending 
Committee, local authority, planning authority and State Nodal Officer  in respect of street vendors;   
15 
 (y) the manner of carrying out vending activities on time -sharing basis;  
(z) the principles for determination of vending zones as restriction -free-vending  zones,              
restricted -vending zones and no -vending zones;  
(za) the principles for determining holding capacity of vending zones and the  manner of 
undertaking comprehensive census and survey;  
(zb) principles of relocation subject to the following:  
(i) relocation should be avoided as far as possible, unless there is clear  and urgent need for 
the land in question;  
(ii) affected vendors or their representatives shall be involved in planning  and implementation 
of the  rehabilitation project;  
(iii) affected vendors shall be relocated so as to improve their livelihood  sand standards of 
living or at least to restore them, in real terms to pre -evicted  levels;  
(iv) livelihood opportunities created by new infrastructure deve lopment  projects shall 
accommodate the displaced vendors so that they can make use of  the livelihood opportunities 
created by the new infra structure;  
(v) loss of assets shall be avoided and in case of any loss, it shall be  compensated;  
(vi) any transfer of  title or other interest in land shall not affect the rights  of street vendors on 
such land, and any relocation consequent upon such a  transfer shall be done in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act;  
(vii) state machinery  shall take comprehensive meas ures to check and  control the practice of 
forced evictions;  
(viii) natural markets where street vendors have conducted business for  over fifty years shall 
be declared as heritage markets, and the street vendors in  such markets shall not be relocated;  
(zc) any other matter which may be included in the scheme for carrying out the  purposes of this 
Act. 
--------------------------The Whistle Blowers Protection Act, 2014--------------------------
1 
 THE WHISTLE  BLOWERS PROTECTION ACT,  2014  
_________________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
 
SECTION S 
1. Short title , extent and commencement.  
2. Provisions of this Act not to apply to Special Protection Group.  
3. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER I I 
PUBLICINTEREST DISCLOSURE  
4. Requirement of public interest disclosure.  
 
CHAPTER II I 
INQUIRY INRELATIONTOPUBLIC INTEREST D ISCLOSURE  
5. Power and functions of Competent Authority on receipt of public interest disclosure.  
6. Matters not to be inquired by Competent Au thority.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
POWERS OF COMPETENT AUTHORITY  
7. Power s of Competent Authority.  
8. Certain matters exempt from disclosure.  
9. Superintendence of Competent Authority over appropriate machinery.  
10. Competent Authority to take assistance of police authorities , etc., in certain cases.  
 
CHAPTER V  
PROTECTION TO THE PERSONS MAK ING DISCLOSURE  
11. Safeguards against victimisation.  
12. Protection of witnesses and other persons.  
13. Protection of identity of complainant.  
14. Power to pass interim orders.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
OFFENCES AND PENAL TIES 
15. Penalty for furnishin g incomplete or mis leading comments or explanation  or report.  
16. Penalty for revealing identity or complainant.  2 
 SECTIONS  
17. Punishment for false or frivolous disclosure.  
18. Punishment to Head of Department in certain cases.  
19. Offences by companies.  
20. Appeal to High Court.  
21. Bar of jurisdiction.  
22. Court to take co gnizance. 
 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANE OUS 
23. Report on disclosures.  
24. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
25. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
26. Power of State Government to  make rules.  
27. Power of make regulations.  
28. Notificati on and rules to be laid before P arliament.  
29. Notification issued and rules made by State Government to  be laid before State Legislatur e. 
30. Power to remove difficulties.  
31. Repeal and savings.  3 
 THE WHISTLE BLOWERS PROTECTION ACT, 1[2014 ] 
ACT NO. 17 OF 2014  
[9th May, 2014 .] 
An Act to establish a mechanism to receive complaints relating to disclosure on any allegation of 
corruption or  wilful misuse of power or wil ful misuse of discretion against any pu blic servant 
and to inquire or cause an inquiry into such disc losure and to provide adequate safeguards 
against victimis ation of the person making such complaint and for matters connected 
therewith and incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the 2[Sixty -fifth Year ] of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Whistle Blowers 
Protection Act, 1[2014 ]. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of  Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and 
any reference in any provision to t he commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the 
comin g into force of that provision.  
2. Provisions of this Act not to apply to Special Protection  Group .—The provisions of this Act 
shall not apply to th e armed forces of the Union, be ing the Special Protection Group constituted under the 
Special Protection Group Act, 1988 (34 of 1988) . 
3.  Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Central Vigilance Commission”  means the Commission constituted unde r sub-section  (1) of 
section 3 of the Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003  (45 of 2003) ; 
(b) “Competent Authority”  means —  
(i) in relation to a Member of the Union Council of Ministers, the  Prime Minister;  
(ii) in relation to a Member of Parliament, other than a Mini ster, the Chairman  of the Council 
of States if such Member is a Mem ber of the Council of States or the Speaker of the House of the 
People if  such Member is a Member of the House of the People, as the case may be;  
(iii) in relation to a Member of the Counci l of Ministers in a State or Union territory, the 
Chief Minister of the State or Union territory, as the case may be;  
(iv) in relation to a Member of Legislative Council or Legislative Assembly  of a State or 
Union territory, other than a Minister, the Chair man of the Legislative Council if such Member is 
a Member of th e Council or the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly if such Member is a 
Memb er of the Assembly,  as the case may be;  
(v) in relation to — 
(A) any Judge (except a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High  Court) including any 
person empowered by law to discharge, whether by  himself or as a member of any body of 
persons, any adjudicatory functions;  or 
(B) any person authorised  by a court of justice to perform any duty,  in connection with 
the adm inistration of j ustice, including a liquidator, receiver or commissioner appointed by 
such court; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 17 of 2015, s.3 and the Second Schedule for “2011” (w.e.f. 13 -5-2015).  
2. Subs. by s.  3, ibid., and t he Second Schedule, for “Sixty -second Year” (w.e.f. 13 -5-2015).  4 
 (C) any arbitrator or other person to whom any cause or matter has  been referred for 
decision or report by a cou rt of justice or by a competent public authority ,  
the High Court;  
(vi) in relation to — 
(A) any person in the service or pay of the Central Government or  remunerated by the 
Central Governme nt by way of fees or commission for the performance of any public du ty except 
Ministers, Members of Parliament and members or persons referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) 
or clause ( c) or clause ( d) of article 33 of the Co nstitution, or in the service or pay of a society or 
local authority or an y corporation established by or under any Central Act, or an authority or  a 
body owned or controlled or aided by the Central Government or a Government company as 
defined in  section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , own ed or controlled by the 
Central Government; or  
(B) any person who holds an office by virtue of which he is empowered to prepare, 
publish, maintain or  revise an electoral roll or to conduct an election or part of an elect ion in 
relation to elections to Parliament or a State Legislatu re; or  
(C) any person who holds an office by v irtue of which he is authorised  or required to 
perform any public duty ( except Ministers and Members of Parliament); o r 
(D) any person who is the president, secretary or other office -bearer  of a registered                
co-operative society engaged in agriculture, industry,  trade or banking, receiving or having 
received any  financial aid from the Central Government or from any corporation es tablished by or 
under a Central Act, or any authority or body or a Government company as defined in  section 617 
of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956)  owned or controlled or aided by the Government; or  
(E) any person who is a chairman, me mber or employee of any Central Service 
Commission or Board, by whate ver name called, or a member of any selection committee 
appointed by such Commission or Board for the  conduct of any examination or making any 
selection on behalf  of such Commission or Board; or 
(F) any person who is a Vice -Chance llor or member of any gove rning body, professor, 
associate professor, assist ant professor, reader, lecturer or any other teacher or employee, by 
whatever designation called, of any  University established by a Central Act or established or 
controlled or funded by the Central Governm ent or  any person whose services have been availed 
of by such University or any  such other public authority in connection with holding  or conducting 
examinations; o r 
(G) any person who is an off ice-bearer or an employee of an  educational, scientific, 
social, cultural or  other institution, in whatever manner established, receiving or having re ceived 
any financial assistance from the Cent ral Gover nment  or any l ocal or other public authority,  
the Central Vigilance Commission or any other authority, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf under this Act.  
(vii) in relation to — 
 (A) any person in the service or pay of the State Government or  remunerated by the State 
Government by  way of fees or commission, for the performance of any public du ty except 
Ministers, Members of Legislative Council or Legislative Assembly of the State, or in the service 
or pay of a society or local authority or an y corporation established by or under a Pro vincial or 
State Act, or an authorit y or a body owned or controlled or aided by the State Government or a 
Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , owned 
or controlled by the State Government; or  
(B) any person who holds an office by virtue of which he is empowered  to prepare, 
publish, maintain or  revise an electoral roll or to conduct an election or part of an election  in 
relation to municipality or Panchayat s or other local body in the State; or  
(C) any person who holds an office by virtue of which he is authorised or required to 
perform any public duty in relation to the affairs of the State Government (except Minis ters and 
Members of Legislative Council or Legisla tive Assembly of the State); or  5 
 (D) any person who is the president, s ecretary or other office -bearer of a registered co -
operative society engaged in agriculture, industry, trade or banking, receiving or having received 
any financial aid from the State Government or from any corporation established by or u nder a 
Provincial or State Act, or any authority or body or a Government company as defined in section 
617 of the Companies Act, 19 56 (1 of 1956) owned or controlled or aided by the State 
Government; or  
(E) any person who is a chairman, member or employee of any State Service  Commission 
or Board, by whatever name called, or a member of any select ion committee appointed by such 
Commission or Board for the conduct of any examination or making any selection on behalf of 
such Commission or Bo ard; or  
(F) any person who is a Vice -Chance llor or member of any governing body, professor, 
associate professor, assist ant professor, reader, lecturer or any other teacher or employee, by 
what ever designation called, of any University established by a Prov incial  or State Act or 
established or controlled or funded by the State Government and any person whose  services have 
been availed of by such University or any such other public authority in connection with holdin g 
or conducting examinations; or  
(G) any person who is an off ice-bearer or an employee of an educational, scientific, social, 
cultural or  other institution, in whatever manner established, receiving or having re ceived any 
financial assistance from the State Government or any l ocal or other public  authority,  
the State Vigilance Commission, if any, or any officer of the State Government or an y other authority, 
as the State Government may, by notifica tion in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf under this 
Act; 
(viii) in relation to members or persons referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) or 
clause ( d) of article 33 of the Constitution, any authority or authorities as the Central Government 
or th e State Government, as the case may be, having jurisdiction in respect thereof, ma y, by 
notification in the Official  Gazette, specify  in this behalf under this Act;  
(c) “complainant”  means any person who makes a compl aint relating to disclosure under this Act;  
(d) “disclosure”  means a complaint relating to, — 
(i) an attempt to commit or commission of an offence under the Prevention of Corruption 
Act, 1988 (49 of 1988) ; 
(ii) wilful misuse of power or wilful misuse of discretion by virtue of which  demonstrable 
loss is caused to the Governmen t or demonstrable wrongful gain accrues to the public servant or 
to any third party;  
(iii) attempt to commit or commission of a criminal offence by a public  servant , 
made in writing or by electronic mail or electronic m ail message, against the public serva nt and 
includes public interest disclosure referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 4;  
(e) “electronic mail” or “ electronic m ail message”  means a message or information created or 
transmitted or received on  any computer, computer system, computer resource  or communication 
device includ ing attachments in text, image, audio, video and any other electronic record, which may 
be transmitted with the  message;  
(f) “Government com pany”  means a company refer red to in section 617 of the Companies Act, 
1956 (1 of 1956 ); 
(g) “notification”  means a notification published  in the Gazette of India or, as the case may be, 
the Official Gazette of a State;  
(h) “public authority”  means any authority, body or  institution falling within the jurisdiction of 
the Competent Authority;  
(i) “public servant”  shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( c) of section 2 of the 
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988  (49 of 1988)  but s hall not include a Judge of the  Supreme Court 
or a Judge of a High Court;  6 
 (j) “prescribed”  means prescribed by rules mad e by the Central Government and the State 
Government, as t he case may be, under this Act;  
(k) “regulations”  means the regulations made b y the Competent Authority under this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
PUBLIC INTEREST DISCLOSURE  
4. Requirement of public interest disclosure .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
provisions of the Official Secrets  Act, 1923  (19 of 1923) , any public servant or any other person  including 
any non -governmental organisation, may make a public interest disclosure before the Competent 
Authority.  
(2) Any disclosure made under this Act shall be treate d as public interest disclosure for the purposes 
of this Act and shall be made before the Competent Authority and the complaint making the disclosure 
shall, on behalf of the Comp etent Authority, be received by such authority as may be specified by 
regulations made by the Competent Authority.  
(3) Every disclosure shall be made in good faith and the person making disclosure  shall make a 
personal declarati on stating that he reasonably believes that the information  disclosed by him and 
allegation contained therein is substantially true.  
(4) Every disclosure shall be made in writing or by electronic mail or electronic mail  message in 
accordance with the proce dure as may be prescribed and contain full particular  sand be accompanied by 
supporting documents, or other materials, if any . 
(5) The Competent Authority may, if it deems fit, call for further information or particulars  from the 
person making the disclosure.  
(6) No action shall be taken on public interest disclo sure by the Competent Authority if the disclosure 
does not indicate the identity of the compl ainant or public servant making public interest disclosure or the 
identity of the complainant or public servant is found incorrect or false.  
CHAPTER III  
INQUIRY IN RELATION TO PUBLIC INTEREST DISCLOSURE  
5. Powers and functions of Competent Authority on receip t of public interest disclosure. —(1) 
Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Competent Authority shall, on receipt of a public inter est 
disclosure under section 4, — 
(a) ascertain from the complainant or the public servant whether he was the  person or the public 
servant who made the disclosure or not;  
(b) conceal the identity  of the complainant unl ess the complainant himself has revealed his 
identity to any other office or authori ty while making public interest disclosure or in his complaint or 
otherwise.  
(2) The Competent Authority shall, upon receipt of t he complaint and con cealing the identity of the 
complainant, or the public servant in the first i nstance, make discreet inquiry, in such manner and within 
such time as may be prescribed, to  ascertain whether there is any basis for proceeding further to 
investigate the disclos ure. 
(3) If the Competent Authority, either as a result of the di screet inquiry, or on the basis of the 
disclosure itself without any inquiry, is of the opinion tha t the disclosure requires to be investigated, it 
shall seek comments or explanation or repor t from the Head of the Department of the organisation or 
authority, board or corporation conce rned or office concerned within such time as may be specified by it.  
(4) While seeking comments or explanations or report referred to in sub -section ( 3), the Comp etent 
Authority shall not reveal the identity of the co mplainant or the public servant and direct the Head of the 
Department of the organisation co ncerned or office concerned not to reveal the identity of the  
complainant or public servant:  
Provided that if  the Competent Authority is of the opinion that it has, for the purpose  of seeking 
comments or explanation or report from them under sub -section ( 3) on the public disclosure, become 
necessary to reveal the identity of the complainant or public serv ant to the Head of the Department of the 7 
 organisation or authority,  board or corporation concerned  or office concerned, the Competent Authority 
may, with the prior written consent of the  complainant or public servant, reveal the identity of the 
complainant or public servant to such Head of the Department of the organisation or authority,  board or 
corporation concerned or office concerned for the said purpose:  
Provided further that in case the complainant or public servant does not agree to his  name being 
revealed to the Head of the Department, in that case, the complainant or public servant, as the case may 
be, shall provide all documentary evide nce in support of his complaint to the Competent Authority.  
(5) The Head of the organisation or office concerned s hall not directly or indirectly reveal the i dentity 
of the complainant or public servant who made the disclosure.  
(6) The Competent Authority, if after conducting an i nquiry, is of the opinion that — 
(a) the facts and allegations contained in the  disclosure are frivolous or vexatious;  or 
(b) there are no sufficient grounds f or proceeding with the inquiry,  
it shall close the matter . 
(7) After receipt of the comments or explanations or re port referred to in sub -section (3), if the 
Competent Authority is of the opinion that such comments or explanations or report reveals either wilful 
misuse of power or wilful misuse  of discretion or substantiates allegations of corruption, it shall 
recommend to the public au thority to take  any one or more of the following measures, namely: —  
(i) initiating proceedings against the concerned public servant;  
(ii) taking appropriate administrative steps for re dressing the loss caused to the Government as a 
result of the corrupt practice or misu se of office or misuse of discretion,  as the case may be;  
(iii) recommend to the appropriate authority or ag ency for initiation of criminal proceedings 
under the relevant laws for the time being in force, if so warranted by th e facts and circumstances of 
the case;  
(iv) recommend for  taking of corrective measures;  
(v) take any other measures not falling under clauses ( i) to ( iv) which may be necessary for the 
purpose of this Act.  
(8) The public authority to whom a recommendation is made under sub -section ( 7) shall take a 
decision on such recommendation within three months of receipt of such  recommendation, or within such 
extended period not exceeding three months, as the  Competent Authority may allow on a request made by 
the public authority:  
Provided that i n case the public authority does not a gree with the recommendation of  the Competent 
Authority, it shall record the  reasons for such disagreement.  
(9) The Competent Authority shall, after making an inq uiry, inform the complainant or public servant 
about the  action taken on the complaint and the final outcome thereof:  
Provided that in a case where, after making an inquiry, the Competent Authority decides to close the 
case, it shall, before passing the order for  closure of the case, provide a n opportunity of being heard to the 
complainant, if the complainant so desires.  
6. Matters not to be inquired by Competent Authority. —(1) If any matter specified or an issue 
raised in a di sclosure has been determined by a Court or Tribunal authorised to determine the issue , after 
consideration of the matters  specified or issue raised in the disclosure, the Competent Authority shall not 
take notice of  the disclosure to the extent that the disclosure seeks to reopen such issue.  
(2)The Competent Authority shall not entertain or inquire into any disclosure — 
(a) in respect of which a formal and public inquiry has been  ordered under the Public Servants 
(Inquiries) Act, 1850  (37 of 1850) ; or 
(b) in respect of a matter which has been  referred for inquiry under the Commissions of Inquiry 
Act, 1952  (60 of 1952 ). 8 
 (3) The Competent Authority shall not investiga te, any disclosure involving an allegation, if the 
complaint is made after the expiry of seven years from the date on which the  action complained against is 
alleged to have taken place.  
(4) Nothing in this Act shall be construed as empowe ring the Competent Authority to question, in any 
inquiry under this Act, any bona fide action or bona fide discretion (including  administrative or statutory 
discretion) exercised in discharge  of duty by the employee.  
CHAPTER IV  
POWERS OF COMPETENT AUTHORITY  
7. Powers of Competent Authority. —(1) Without prejudice to the powers conferred upon the  
Competent Authority under any other law for the time being in force, the Competent Authority, may 
require, for the  purpose of any inquiry any public servant or any other person who in its opinion shall be  
able to furnish information or produce documents relevant to the inquiry or assist in the  inquiry, to furnish 
any such information or produce any suc h document as may be necessary  for the said purpose.  
(2) For the purpose of any such inquiry (includin g the preliminary inquiry), the Competent Authority 
shall have all the powers of a Civil Court while trying a suit under the  Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 
1908) , in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  
(f) such other matters as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Competent Authority shall be deemed to be a  Civil Court f or the purpose of section 195 and 
Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , and every  proceeding before the 
Competent Authority shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding  within the meaning of sections 193 and 
228 and for the purpo ses of section 196 of the Indian  Penal Code (45 of 1860) . 
(4) Subject to the provisions of section 8, no obligati on to maintain secrecy or other restriction upon 
the disclosure of information obtained by or furnished to the Government  or any public servant, whether 
imposed by the Official Secrets Act, 1923  (19 of 1923)  or any other law for  the time being in force, shall 
be claimed by any public serva nt in the proceedings before th e Competent Authority or any person or 
agency authorised by it in writi ng and the Government  or any public servant shall not be entitled in 
relation to any such inquiry, to any such privilege in respect of the production of document or the giving 
of evidence as is allowed by any enactment or by any rules made thereunder:  
Prov ided that the Competent Authority, while exercising such power s of the Civil Court, shall take 
steps as necessary to ensure that the identity of the person making complaint has n ot been revealed or 
compromised.  
8. Certain matters exempt from disclosure. —(1) No person shall be required or be authorised by 
virtue of provisions contained in this Act to furnish any such information or answer any such question or 
produce any document or information or render any other assistance in the inquiry und er this Act if such 
question or document or information is likely to prejudicially affect the interest of the sovereignty and 
integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign State, public order, decency or 
morality or in relation to contemp t of court, defamatio n or incitement to an offence, — 
(a) as might involve the disclosure of proceedings of the Cabinet of the Union Government o r any 
Committee of the Cabinet;  
(b) as might involve the disclosure of proceedings of the Cabinet of the State G overnment or any 
Committee of that Cabinet,  
and for the purpose of this sub -section, a certificate issued by the Secretary to the Government of India or 
the Secretary to the State Government, as the case may be, or, any authority so authorised by the Cent ral 9 
 or State Government certifying that any information, answer or portion of a document is of the nature 
specified in clause ( a) or clause ( b), shall be binding and conclusive.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), no pe rson shall be compelled for the purposes of 
inquiry under this Act to give any evidence o r produce any document which he could not be compelled to 
give or produce  in proceedings before a court.  
9. Superintendence of Competent Authority over appropriate mac hinery. —(1) Every public 
authority shall, for the purposes  of dealing or inquiry into the disclosures sent to it under sub -section ( 3) 
of section 5, crea te an appropriate machinery for the said purpose.  
(2)The Competent Authority shall exercise supe rintend ence over the working of machinery created 
under sub -section ( 1) for the purposes of dealing or inquiry into t he disclosures and give such directions 
for its proper functionin g, from time to time, as it may consider necessary.  
10. Competent Authority to take assis tance of police authorities , etc., in certain cases. —For the 
purpose of making discreet inquiry or  obtaining information from the organisation concerned, the 
Competent Authority shall be a uthorised to take assistance of the Delhi Special Police E stablishment or 
the police authori ties, or any other authority as may be considered necessary, to render all assistance to 
complete the inqu iry within the prescribed time pursuant to the disclosure received by the Competent 
Authority.  
CHAPTER V  
PROTECTION TO THE PERSONS MAKING DISCLOSURE  
11. Safeguards against victimisation .—(1)The Central Government shall ensure that no  person or a 
public servant who has made a disclosure under this Act is victimised by initiation of any proceedings or 
otherwise merely on the ground that such person or a public servant ha d made a disclosure or rendered 
assistance in inquiry under this Act.  
(2)If any person is being victimis ed or likely to be v ictimised on the ground that he had filed a 
complaint or made disclosure or render ed assist ance in inquiry under this Act, he may file an application 
before the Competent Authority seeking  redress in the matter, and such authority shall take such action, as 
deemed fit and may give suitable directions to the concerned public servant or t he public authority, as the 
case may be, to protect such person from being victimised or avoid his victimisation:  
Provided that the Competent Authority shall, before giving any such direction to the public authority 
or public servant, give an opportunity o f hearing to the complainant and the public authority or public 
servant, as the case may be:  
Provided further that in any such hearing, the burden of proof that the alleged action on the part of the 
public authority is not victimis ation, shall lie on the p ublic authority.  
(3) Every direction given under sub -section ( 2) by the Competent Authority shall be binding upon the 
public servant or the public authority against whom the allegation of victimisation has been proved.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the power to give 
directions under sub -section ( 2), in relation to a public servant, shall include the power to direct the 
restoration of the public servant making the disclosure, to the status quo an te. 
(5) Any person who wilfully does not comply with the direction of the Competent Authority under 
sub-section ( 2), shall be liable to a penalty which may extend up to thirty thousand rupees.  
12. Protection of witnesses and other  persons. —If the Competent  Authority either on the 
application of the complainant, or witnesses, or on the basis of information gathered, is of the opinion that 
either the complainant or public servant or the witnesses or any person rendering assistance for inquiry 
under this Act  need protection, the Competent Authority shall issue appropriate directions to the 
concerned  Government authorities (including police) which shall take necessary steps, through its  
agencies, to protect such complainant or public servant or persons concerne d. 
13. Protection of identity of complainant. —The Competent Authority shall, notwithstandin g any 
law for the time being in force, conceal, as required under this Act, the identity of th e complainant and the 
documents or information furnished by him, for th e purposes of enquiry un der this Act, unless so decided 10 
 otherwise by the Competent Authority itself or it became nec essary to reveal or produce the same by 
virtue of the order of the court.  
14. Power to pass interim orders .—The Competent Authority, at any time after the making of 
disclosure by the  complainant or public servant, if it is of the opinion that any corrupt practice required to 
be stopped during the continuation of any inquiry for the sai d purpose may pass such interim orders as it 
may deem fit, to prevent the immediate stoppage of such practice.  
CHAPTER VI  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
15. Penalty for furnishing incomplete or incorrect or misleading comments or explanation or 
report.—Where the Competent Authority, at the time of exami ning the report or explanations or report 
referred to in sub -section ( 3) of section 5 on the comp laint submitted by organis ation or official 
concerned, is of the opinion that the organisation  or official concerned, without any reasonable cause, has 
not fur nished the report within the specified time or mala fidely  refused to submit the report or knowingly 
given incomplete, incorrect or misleading or false  report or destroyed record or information which was 
the subject of the disclosure or obstructed in any m anner in furnishing the report, it shall impose — 
(a) where the organisation or official concerned , without any reasonable cause, has not furnished 
the report within the specified time or mala fidely refused to submit the report, a penalty which may 
extend to two hundred  fifty rupees for each day till report is furnished, so, however, the total amount 
of such penalty shall not exceed fifty  thousand rupees ; 
(b) where the organisation or official concerned, has knowingly given incomplete, incorrect or 
misleadi ng or false report or destroyed record or information which was the subject of the disclosure 
or obstructed in any manner the furnishing of t he report, a penalty which may extend to fifty thousand 
rupees:  
Provided that no penalty shall be imposed agains t any person unless he has been given an 
opportunity of being heard.  
16. Penalty for revealing identity of complainant. —Any person, who negligently or mala fidely 
reveals the identity of a co mplainant shall, without prejudice to the other provisions of this A ct, be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend up to three years and also to fi ne which may 
extend up to fifty thousand rupees.  
17. Punishment for false or frivolous disclosure .—Any person who makes any disclosure mala 
fidely and knowingly  that it was  incorrect or false or misleading shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may  extend up to two years and also to fine which may extend up to thirty thousand 
rupees.  
18. Punishment to Head of Department in certain cases. —(1) Where  an offence under this Act has 
been  committed by any Department of Government, the Head of the Department shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly unless he 
proves th at the offence was  committed without his knowledge or that he exercis ed all due diligence to 
prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under  this Act has been 
committed by a Department of Government a nd it is proved that the offence has been committed with the 
consent or connivance of, or is a ttributable, such officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence 
and shall be lia ble to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.   
19. Offences by  companies. —(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every  person who at the time the offence was committed was in ch arge of, and was responsible 
to the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, sh all be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be  proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable  to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he  proves that th e offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he has exercised all due diligence to  prevent the commission of such offence.  11 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed  by a company and it is proved that  the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any negle ct on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —for the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “Company ” means anybody  corporate and includes a firm or other associati on of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director” , in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
20. Appeal to High Court .—Any person aggrieved by any order of the Competent Authority relating 
to imposition of penalty under section 14 or section 15 or sec tion 16 may prefer an appeal to the High 
Court within a period of sixty days from the date of the order appealed against:  
Provided that the High Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said  period of sixty days, 
if it is satisfied that the a ppellant was prevented by suffic ient cause from preferring the appeal in time.  
Explanation. —For the  purposes of this section, the “High Court”  means the High  Court within whose 
jurisdic tion the cause of action arose.  
21. Bar of jurisdiction. —No Civil Court  shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter whi ch the 
Competent Authority is empowered by or under this Act to determine and  no injunction shall be granted 
by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken  or to be taken in pursuance of any power 
conferred by or under this Act.  
22. Court to take cognizance. —(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Act or the  rules or regulations made thereunder, save on a complaint made by the Competent 
Authority or any offi cer or person authorised by it.  
(2) No court inferior to that of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or  a Chief Judicial Magistrate shall try 
any offence punishable under this Act.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Report on disclosures. —(1) The Competent Authority shall prepare a co nsolidated annual report 
of the performance of its activities in such form as may be prescribed and fo rward it to the Central 
Government or State Government, as the case may be.  
(2) On receipt of the annual report under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government or State 
Government, as the case may be, shall cause a copy thereof to be laid before each  House  of Parliament, or 
the State L egislature, as the case may be:  
Provided that where any other law for the time being in force prov ides preparing of such annual 
report by the Competent Authority, then the said annual report shall contain a separate part on the 
performance of activities under this Act by the Competent Authority.  
24. Prot ection of action taken in good faith. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Competent  Authority or against any officer, employees, agency or person acting on its 
behalf, in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
25. Power o f Central Government to make rules. —(1) The Central Governme nt may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make  rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generali ty of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the procedure for disclosure by writing or app ropriate electronic means under sub-section ( 4) 
of section 4;  
  12 
 (b) the manner in which and the time within which the discreet  inquiry shall  be made by the 
Competent Authority under sub -section ( 2) of section 5;  
(c) the additional matter in respect of which the C ompetent Authority may exercise the powers of 
a Civil Court under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 2) of section 7;  
(d) the form of annual report under sub -section ( 1) of section 23;  
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
26. Power of State Government to make rules. —The State Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make rules for  the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
27. Power to make regulation s.—The Competent Authority may, with the p revious approval of the 
Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make regulations not inconsistent with the provision s of the Act and the rules made thereunder to provide 
for all matters for which provision is expedient for the purposes of  giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act. 
28. Notification and rules to be lai d before Parliament .—Every notification issued and every rule 
made by the Central Government and every regulation made by the Competent Authority under thi s Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued or made, before each House of Parliame nt, while it is in 
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised i n one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session im mediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both  Houses agree in  making any modification in the notification or the 
rule or the regulation, or both Houses agree that the notification or the  rule or the regulation should not be 
made, the notification or t he rule or the regulation shall thereafter have ef fect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that noti fication or rule or regulation.  
29. Notificat ion issued and rules made by State Government to be laid before State 
Legislature. —Every notification issued by a State Government  and every rule made by a State 
Government and every regulation made by the Competent Au thority under this Act shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is issued, before the State Legislature.  
30. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the 
Act, the Central  Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the pro visions of this Act, remove the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years  from the date of 
the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is ma de, be  laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
31. Repeal and savings. —(1) The Government of India, Ministry of P ersonnel, Public Grievances 
and Pensions (Department of Personnel and Training) Res olution No. 371/12/2002 -AVD -III dated the 
21st April, 2004 as amended vide Resolution of eve n number, dated the 29th April, 2004 is hereby 
repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Resolution be 
deemed to have been done or taken under this Act.  
