--------------------------The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016--------------------------
1 
 THE AADHAAR (TARGETED DELIVERY OF FINANCIAL AND OTHER SUBSIDIES, 
BENEFITS AND SERVICES) ACT, 2016  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ENROLMENT  
3. Aadhaar  number.   
4. Properties of Aadhaar number.   
5. Special measures for issuance of Aadhaar number to certain category of persons.  
6. Update of certain information . 
CHAPTER III  
AUTHENTICATION  
7. Proof of Aadhaar number necessary for receipt of certain subsidi es, benefits and services, etc.  
8. Authentication of Aadhaar number.  
9. Aadhaar number not evidence of citizenship or domicile, etc.  
10. Central Identities Data Repository . 
CHAPTER IV  
UNIQUE  IDENTIFICATION  AUTHORITY  OF INDIA 
11. Establishment of Authority.  
12. Composition of Authority.  
13. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members of Authority.  
14. Term of office and other conditions of service of Chairperson and Members.  
15. Removal of Chairperson and Members.  
16. Restrictions on Chairperson or Members on employment after cessation of office . 
17. Functions of Chairperson.   
18. Chief executive officer.  
19. Meetings of Authority.  
  2 
 SECTIONS  
20. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Authority . 
21. Officers and other employ ees of Authority.  
22. Transfer of assets, liabilities of Authority . 
23. Powers and functions of Authority . 
CHAPTER V  
GRANTS , ACCOUNTS  AND AUDIT  AND ANNUAL  REPORT  
24. Grants by Central Government.  
25. Other fees and revenues . 
26.  Accounts and audit . 
27. Returns and annual report, etc.  
CHAPTER VI  
PROTECTION  OF INFORMATION  
28. Security and confidentiality of information.   
29. Restriction on sharing information.  
30. Biometric information deemed to be sensitive personal information.  
31. Alteration of dem ographic information or biometric information.  
32. Access to own information and records of requests for authentication.  
33. Disclosure of information in certain cases.  
CHAPTER VII  
OFFENCES  AND PENALTIES  
34. Penalty for impersonation at time of enrolment.  
35. Penalty for impersonation of Aadhaar number holder by changing demographic information or 
biometric information . 
36. Penalty for impersonation.  
37.  Penalty for disclosing identity information.  
38.  Penalty for unauthorised access to the Central Identities Data Repository.  
39. Penalty for tampering with data in Central Identities Data Repository . 
40. Penalty for unauthorised use by requesting entity.  
41. Penalty for non -compliance with intimation requ irements.  
42. General penalty.  
43. Offences by companies.  
44. Act to apply for offence or contravention committed outside India.   
45. Power to investigate offences.  
46. Penalties not to interfere with other punishments.  
47. Cognizance of offences.   3 
 CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS  
48. Power of Central Government to supersede Authority.  
49.  Members, officers, etc., to be public servants.   
50. Power of Central Government to issue directions.  
51. Delegation.  
52. Protection of action taken in good fa ith. 
53. Power of Central Government to make rules.   
54. Power of Authority to make regulations.   
55. Laying of rules and regulations before Parliament.  
56. Application of other laws not barred.  
57. Act not to prevent use of Aadhaar number for other purpo ses under law.  
58. Power to remove difficulties.   
59. Savings.   
 
  4 
 THE AADHAAR (TARGETED DELIVERY OF FINANCIAL AND OTHER SUBSIDIES, 
BENEFITS AND SERVICES) ACT, 2016  
ACT NO. 18 OF 2016  
[25th March , 2016 .] 
An Act to provide for, as a good governance, efficient, transparent, and targeted delivery of 
subsidies, benefits and services, the expenditure for which is incurred from the Consolidated 
Fund of India, to individuals residing in India through assigning of unique identity numbers 
to such individuals and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Aadhaar (Targeted 
Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016.  
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir and save as otherwise 
provided in this Act, it shall also apply to any offence or contrav ention thereunder committed outside 
India by any person.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may, be appointed for different provisions of this Act and 
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to 
the commencement of that provision.  
2. Definitions .— In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Aadhaar number ” means an identification number issued to an individual under                       
sub-section ( 3) of section 3;  
(b) “Aadhaar number holder ” means an individual who has been issued an Aadhaar number under 
this Act;  
(c) “authentication ” means the process by which the Aadhaar number alongwith demographic 
information or biometric information of an individual is submitted to the Central Identities Data 
Repository for its verification and such Repository verifies the correctness, or the lack  thereof, on the 
basis of information available with it;  
(d) “authentication record ” means the record of the time of authentication and identity of the 
requesting entity and the response provided by the Authority thereto;  
(e) “Authority ” means the Unique Identification Authority of India established under                      
sub-section ( 1) of section 11;   
(f) “benefit” means any advantage, gift, reward, relief, or payment, in cash or kind, provided to an 
individual or a group of individ uals and includes such other benefits as may be notified by the Central 
Government;  
(g) “biometric information ” means photograph, finger print, Iris scan, or such other biological 
attributes of an individual as may be specified by regulations;  
(h) “Central  Identities Data Repository ” means a centralised database in one or more locations 
containing all Aadhaar numbers issued to Aadhaar number holders along with the corresponding 
demographic information and biometric information of such individuals and other information related 
thereto;  
                                                           
1. 12th September, 2016 — Section 1 to 10, 24 to 47, vide notification No. S.O. 2927 (E), dated 12th September, 2016 see 
Gazette of India Extraordinary, Part  II, s. 3 (ii). 
12th July, 2016  — Section 11 to 20, 22 and 23, 48 to 59, vide notification No. S.O. 2357 (E), dated 12 the July 2016, see 
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, s . 3 (ii). 
 5 
 (i) “Chairperson ” means the Chairperson of the Authority appointed under section 12;  
(j) “core biometric information ” means finger print, Iris scan, or such other biological attribute of 
an individual as may be specified by reg ulations;  
(k) “demographic information ” includes information relating to the name, date of birth, address 
and other relevant information of an individual, as may be specified by regulations for the purpose of 
issuing an Aadhaar number, but shall not includ e race, religion, caste, tribe, ethnicity, language, 
records of entitlement, income or medical history;  
(l) “enrolling agency ” means an agency appointed by the Authority or a Registrar, as the case 
may be, for collecting demographic and biometric information of individuals under this Act;  
(m) “enrolment ” means the process, as may be specified by regulations, to collect demographi c 
and biometric information from individuals by the enrolling agencies for the purpose of issuing 
Aadhaar numbers to such individuals under this Act;  
(n) “identity information ” in respect of an individual, includes his Aadhaar number, his biometric 
informa tion and his demographic information;  
(o) “Member” includes the Chairperson and Member of the Authority appointed under section 12;  
(p) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression 
“notified” with its cognate mea nings and grammatical variations shall be construed accordingly;  
(q) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government under this Act;  
(r) “records of entitlement ” means records of benefits, subsidies or services provided to, or 
availed  by, any individual under any programme;  
(s) “Registrar” means any entity authorised or recognised by the Authority for the purpose of 
enrolling individuals under this Act;  
(t) “regulations ” means the regulations made by the Authority under this Act;  
(u) “requesting entity ” means an agency or person that submits the Aadhaar number, and 
demographic information or biometric information, of an individual to the Central Identities Data 
Repository for authentication;  
(v) “resident” means an individual who has re sided in India for a period or periods amounting in 
all to one hundred and eighty -two days or more in the twelve months immediately preceding the date 
of application for enrolment;  
(w) “service” means any provision, facility, utility or any other assistanc e provided in any form to 
an individual or a group of individuals and includes such other services as may be notified by the 
Central Government;  
(x) “subsidy” means any form of aid, support, grant, subvention, or appropriation, in cash or kind, 
to an individual or a group of individuals and includes such other subsidies as may be notified by the 
Central Government.  
CHAPTER II  
ENROLMENT  
3. Aadhaar number . —(1) Every resident shall be entitled to obtain an Aadhaar number by 
submitting his demographic information and biometric information by undergoing the process of 
enrolment:  
Provided that the Central Government may, from time to time, notify such other category  of 
individuals who may be entitled to obtain an Aadhaar number.  
(2) The enrolling agency shall, at the time of enrolment, inform the individual undergoing enrolment 
of the following details in such manner as may be specified by regulations, namely:  — 
(a) the manner in which the information shall be used;  
(b) the nature of recipients with whom the information is intended to be shared during 
authentication; and  6 
 (c) the existence of a right to access information, the procedure for making requests for such 
access, and details of the person or department in -charge to whom such requests can be made.  
(3) On receipt of the demographic information and biometric information under sub -section ( 1), the 
Authority shall, after verifying the information, in such manner as  may be specified by regulations, issue 
an Aad haar number to such individual.  
4. Properties of Aadhaar number . —(1) An Aadhaar number, issued to an individual shall not be       
re-assigned to any other individual.  
(2) An Aadhaar number shall be a random number and bear no relation to the attributes or identity of 
the Aadhaar number holder.  
(3) An Aadhaar number, in physical or electronic form subject to authentication and other conditions, 
as may be specified by regulations, may be accepted as proof of id entity of the Aadhaar number holder 
for any purpose.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression “electronic form ” shall have the 
same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( r) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2  of the Information Tec hnology           
Act, 2000 (21 of 2000).  
5. Special measures for issuance of Aadhaar number to certain category of persons .— The 
Authority shall take special measures to issue Aadhaar number to women, children, senior citizens, 
persons with disability, unskilled and unorganised workers, nomadic tribes or to such other persons who 
do not have any permanent dwelling house and such other categories of individuals as m ay be specified 
by regulations.  
6. Upda te of certain information .— The Authority may require Aadhaar number holders to update 
their demographic information and biometric information, from time to time, in such manner as may be 
specified by regulations, so as to ensure continued accuracy of thei r information in the Central Identities 
Data Repository.  
CHAPTER III  
AUTHENTICATION  
 7. Proof of Aadhaar number necessary for receipt of certain subsidies, benefits and services, 
etc.—The Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government may,  for the purpose of 
establishing identity of an individual as a condition for receipt of a subsidy, benefit or service for which 
the expenditure is incurred from, or the receipt therefrom forms part of, the Consolidated Fund of India, 
require that such ind ividual undergo authentication, or furnish proof of possession of Aadhaar number or 
in the case of an individual to whom no Aadhaar number has been assigned, such individual makes an 
application for enrolment:  
Provided that if an Aadhaar number is not assi gned to an individual, the individual shall be offered 
alternate and viable means of identification for delivery of the subsidy, benefit or service.  
8. Authentication of Aadhaar number .— (1) The Authority shall perform authentication of the 
Aadhaar number of an Aadhaar number holder submitted by any requesting entity, in relation to his 
biometric information or demographic information, subject to such conditions and on payment of such 
fees and in such manner as may be specified by regulations.  
(2) A request ing entity shall — 
(a) unless otherwise provided in this Act, obtain the consent of an individual before collecting his 
identity information for the purposes of authentication in such manner as may be specified by 
regulations; and  
(b) ensure that the identi ty information of an individual is only used for submission to the Central 
Identities Data Repository for authentication.  7 
 (3) A requesting entity shall inform, in such manner as may be specified by regulations, the individual 
submitting his identity inform ation for authentication, the following details with respect to authentication, 
namely:  — 
(a) the nature of information that may be shared upon authentication;  
(b) the uses to which the information received during authentication may be put by the requestin g 
entity; and  
(c) alternatives to submission of identity information to the requesting entity.  
(4) The Authority shall respond to an authentication query with a positive, negative or any other 
appropriate response sharing such identity information excluding any core biometric information.  
9. Aadhaar number not evidence of citizenship or domicile, etc .— The Aadhaar number or the 
authentication thereof shall not, by itself, confer any right of, or be proof of, citizenship or domicile in 
respect of an Aadhaar number holder.  
10. Central Identities Data Repository .— The Authority may engage one or more entities to 
establish and maintain the Central Identities Data Repository and to perform any other functions as may 
be specified by regulations.  
CHAPTER IV  
UNIQUE  IDENTIFICATION  AUTHORITY  OF INIDA  
11. Establishment of Authority .— (1) The Central Government  shall, by notification, establish an 
Authority to be known as the Unique Identification Authority of India to be responsible for the processes 
of enrolment and authentication and perform such other functions assigned to it under this Act.  
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, 
both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, b y the said name, sue or be sued.  
(3) The head office of the Authority shall be in New Delhi.  
(4) The Authority may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, establish its offices at 
other places in India.  
12. Composition of Authority .—The Authori ty shall consist of a Chairperson, appointed on           
part-time or full -time basis, two part -time Members, and the chief executive officer who shall be 
Member -Secretary of the Authority, to be appointed by the Central Government.  
13. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members of Authority .—The 
Chairperson and Members of the Authority shall be persons of ability and integrity having experience and 
knowledge of at least ten years in matters relating to technology, governance, law, developmen t, 
economics, finance, management, pu blic affairs or administration.  
14. Term of office and other conditions of service of Chairperson and Members .—(1) The 
Chairperson and the Members appointed under this Act shall hold office for a term of three years from the 
date on which they assume office and shall be eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that no person shall hold office as the Chairperson or Member after he has attained the age 
of sixty -five years.  
(2) The Chairperson and every Member shall, before  entering office, make and subscribe to, an oath 
of office and of secrecy, in such form and in such manner and before such Authority as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Chairperson or Member may — 
(a) relinqu ish his office, by giving in writing to the Central Government, a notice of not less than 
thirty days; or  
(b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of section 15.  8 
 (4) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and co nditions of service of, the 
Chairperson and allowances or remuneration payable to part -time Members shall be such as  may be 
prescribed.  
15. Removal of Chairperson and Members .—(1) The Central Government may remove from 
office, the Chairperson, or a Member,  who— 
(a) is, or at any time has been adjudged as insolvent;  
(b) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as the Chairperson or, as the case may 
be, a Member;  
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government , involves 
moral turpitude;  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
the Chairperson or, as the case may be, a Member; or  
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his positi on as to render his 
continuance in office detrimental to the public interest.  
(2) The Chairperson or a Member shall not be removed under clause ( b), clause ( d) or clause ( e) of 
sub-section ( 1) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard . 
16. Restrictions on Chairperson or Members on employment after cessation of office .— The 
Chairperson or a Member on ceasing to hold office for any reason, shall not, without previous approval of 
the Central Government,  — 
(a) accept any employment in, or be connected with the management of any organisation, 
company or any other entity which has been associated with any work done or contracted out by the 
Authority, whether directly or indirectly, during his tenure as Chairperson or Member, as the cas e 
may be, for a period of three years from the date on which he ceases to hold office:  
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply to any employment under the Central 
Government or a State Government or local authority or in any statutory au thority or any corporation 
established by or under any Central, State or provincial Act or a Government Company, as defined in 
clause ( 45) of section 2  of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013);  
(b) act, for or on behalf of any person or organisation in connection with any specific proceeding 
or transaction or negotiation or a case to which the Authority is a party and with respect to which the 
Chairperson or such Member had, before cessation of offi ce, acted for or provided advice to, the 
Authority;  
(c) give advice to any person using information which was obtained in his capacity as the 
Chairperson or a Member and being unavailable to or not being able to be made available to the 
public; or  
(d) enter, for a period of three years from his last day in office, into a contract of service with, 
accept an appointment to a board of directors of, or accept an offer of employment with, an entity 
with which he had direct and significant official deal ings d uring his term of office.  
17. Functions of Chairperson .— The Chairperson shall preside over the meetings of the Authority, 
and without prejudice to any provision of this Act, exercise and discharge such other powers and 
functions of the Authority as may be  prescribed.  
18. Chief executive officer .— (1) There shall be a chief executive officer of the Authority, not below 
the rank of Additional Secretary to the Government of India, to be appointed by the Central Government.  
(2) The chief executive officer shall be the legal representative of the Authority and shall be 
responsible for — 
(a) the day -to-day administration of the Authority;  
(b) implementing the work programmes and decisions adopted by the Authority;  9 
 (c) drawing up of proposal for the Authority's  decisions and work programmes;  
(d) the preparation of the statement of revenue and expenditure and the execution of the budget of 
the Authority; and  
(e) performing such other functions, or exercising such other powers, as may be specified by 
regulations.  
(3) Every year, the chief executive officer shall submit to the Authority for approval — 
(a) a general report covering all the activities of the Authority in the previous year;  
(b) programmes of work;  
(c) the annual accounts for the previous year; and  
(d) the budget for the coming year.  
(4) The chief executive officer shall have administrative control over the officers and ot her employees 
of the Authority.  
19. Meetings of Authority .—(1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe 
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, including quorum at such 
meetings, as may be specified by regulations.  
(2) The Chairperson, or, if for any reason, he is unable to attend a meeting of the Authority, the seni or 
most Member shall preside over the meetings of the Authority.  
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided by a majority 
of votes by the Members present and voting and in the event of an  equality of votes, the Cha irperson or in 
his absence the presiding Member shall have a casting vote.  
(4) All decisions of the Authority shall be signed by the Chairperson or any other Member or the 
Member -Secretary authorised by the Authority in this behalf.  
(5) If any Member, who is a director of a company and who as such director, has any direct or 
indirect pecuniary interest in any manner coming up for consideration at a meeting of the Authority, he 
shall, as soon as possible after relevant circumstances have come to his knowledg e, disclose the nature of 
his interest at such meeting and such disclosure shall be recorded in the proceedings of the Authority, and 
the Member shall not take part in any deliberation or decision of the Authori ty with respect to that matter.  
20. Vacancies , etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Authority .—No act or proceeding of the 
Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Authority;  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as Chairperson or Member of the Authority; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not af fecting the merits of the case.  
21. Officers and other employees of Authority .— (1) The Authority may, with the approval of the 
Central Government, determine the number, nature and categories of other officers and employees 
required by the Authority in the discharge of its functions.  
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the chief 
executive offic er and other officers and other employees of the Authority shall be such as may be 
specified by regulations with the approval of the Central Government.  
22. Transfer of assets, liabilities of Authority .— On and from the establishment of the Authority — 
(a) all the assets and liabilities of the Unique Identification Authority of India, established vide 
notification of the Government of India in the Planning Commission number                                            
A-43011/02/2009 -Admin.  I, dated the 28th January, 2009, shall stand transferred to, and vested in, 
the Authority.  10 
 Explanation .—The assets of such Unique Identification Authority of India shall be deemed to include 
all rights and powers, and all properties, whether movable or immovable, including,  in particular, cash 
balances, deposits and all other interests and rights in, or arising out of, such properties as may be in the 
possession of such Unique Identification Authority of India and all books of account and other documents 
relating to the same ; and liabilities shall be deemed to include all debts, liabilities and obligations of 
whatever kind;  
(b) without prejudice to the provisions of clause ( a), all data and information collected during 
enrolment, all details of authentication performed, debts , obligations and liabilities incurred, all 
contracts entered into and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for such Unique 
Identification Authority of India immediately before that day, for or in connection with the purpose of 
the said Un ique Identification Authority of India, shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into 
or engaged to be done by, with or for, the Authority;  
(c) all sums of money due to the said Unique Identification Authority of India immediately before 
that day sha ll be deemed to be due to the Authority; and  
(d) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or 
against such Unique Identification Authority of India immediately before that day may be continued 
or may be institu ted by or against the Authority.  
23. Powers and functions of Authority .—(1) The Authority shall develop the policy, procedure and 
systems for issuing Aadhaar numbers to individuals and perform authentication thereof under this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to  sub-section ( 1), the powers and functions of the Authority, inter alia , 
include— 
(a) specifying, by regulations, demographic information and biometric information required for 
enrolment and the processes for collection and verification thereof;  
(b) collec ting demographic information and biometric information from any individual seeking an 
Aadhaar number in such manner as may be specified by regulations;  
(c) appointing of one or more entities to operate the Central Identities Data Repository;  
(d) generating  and assigning Aadhaar numbers to individuals;  
(e) performing authentication of Aadhaar numbers;  
(f) maintaining and updating the information of individuals in the Central Identities Data 
Repository in such manner as may be specified by regulations;  
(g) om itting and deactivating of an Aadhaar number and information relating thereto in such 
manner as may be specified by regulations;  
(h) specifying the manner of use of Aadhaar numbers for the purposes of providing or availing of 
various subsidies, benefits, s ervices and other purposes for which Aadhaar numbers may be used;  
(i) specifying, by regulations, the terms and conditions for appointment of Registrars, enrolling 
agencies and service providers and revocation of appointments thereof;  
(j) establishing, ope rating and maintaining of the Central Identities Data Repository;  
(k) sharing, in such manner as may be specified by regulations, the information of Aadhaar 
number holders, subject to the provisions of this Act;  
(l) calling for information and records, con ducting inspections, inquiries and audit of the 
operations for the purposes of this Act of the Central Identities Data Repository, Registrars, enrolling 
agencies and other agencies appointed under this Act;  
(m) specifying, by regulations, various processes  relating to data management, security protocols 
and other technology safeguards under this Act;  
(n) specifying, by regulations, the conditions and procedures for issuance of new Aadhaar number 
to existing Aadhaar number holder;  11 
 (o) levying and collecting the fees or authorising the Registrars, enrolling agencies or other 
service providers to collect such fees for the services provided by them under this Act in such manner 
as may be specified by regulations;  
(p) appointing such committees as may be necessar y to assist the Authority in discharge of its 
functions for the purposes of this Act;  
(q) promoting research and development for advancement in biometrics and related areas, 
including usage of Aadhaar numbers through appropriate mechanisms;  
(r) evolving of, and specifying, by regulations, policies and practices for Registrars, enrolling 
agencies and other service providers;  
(s) setting up facilitation centres and grievance redressal mechanism for redressal of grievances of 
individuals, Registrars, enrolli ng agencies and other service providers;  
(t) such other powers and functions as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Authority may, — 
(a) enter into Memorandum of Understanding or agreement, as the case may be, with the Central 
Government or State Governments or Unio n territories or other agencies for the purpose of 
performing any of the functions in relation to collecting, storing, securing or processing of 
information or delivery of Aadhaar numbers to individuals or performing authentication;  
(b) by notification, ap point such number of Registrars, engage and authorise such agencies to 
collect, store, secure, process information or do authentication or perform such other functions in 
relation thereto,  
as may be necessary for the purposes of this Act.  
(4) The Authority  may engage such consultants, advisors and other persons as may be required for 
efficient discharge of its functions under this Act on such allowances or remuneration and terms and 
conditions a s may be specified by contract.  
CHAPTER V  
GRANTS , ACCOUNTS  AND AUDIT  AND ANNUAL  REPORT  
24. Grants by Central Government .— The Central Government may, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Authority, grants of such sums of money as the Central 
Government may think fit for being utilise d for the purposes of this Act.  
25. Other fees and revenues .—The fees or revenue collected by the Authority shall be credited to 
the Consolidated Fund of India.  
26.  Accounts and audit .—(1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited annually by the C omptroller and Auditor -General 
of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with 
such audit shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor -General.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -Genera l of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit the accounts of the Authority under this Act shall have the same rights and privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General generally has in 
connection with the audit of Government accounts, and in particular, shall have the right to demand 
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers, and to inspect any of 
the offices of the Authority.  
(4) The accounts of  the Authority, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or 
any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government by the Authority and the Central Government shall cause the audit 
report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.  12 
 27. Returns and annual report, etc .— (1) The Authority shall furnish to the Central Government at 
such time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed or as the Central Government may direct, 
such returns and statements and particulars in regard to any matter under the jurisdiction of the Authority, 
as the Central Government may from time to time require.  
(2) The Authority sha ll prepare, once in every year, and in such form and manner and at such time as 
may be prescribed, an annual report giving — 
(a) a description of all the activities of the Authority for the previous years;  
(b) the annual accounts for the previous year; and  
(c) the programmes of work for coming year.  
(3) A copy of the report received under sub -section ( 2) shall be laid by the Central Government, as 
soon as may be after it is received, b efore each House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER VI  
PROTECTION  OF INFORMATION  
28. Security and confidentiality of information . — (1) The Authority shall ensure the security of 
identity information and authentication records of individuals.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Authority shall ensure confidentiality of identity  
information and authentication records of individuals.  
(3) The Authority shall take all necessary measures to ensure that the information in the possession or 
control of the Authority, including information stored in the Central Identities Data Repository , is secured 
and protected against access, use or disclosure not permitted under this Act or regulations made 
thereunder, and against accidental or intentional destruction, loss or damage.  
(4) Without prejudice to sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), the Authority sh all— 
(a) adopt and implement appropriate technical and organisational security measures;  
(b) ensure that the agencies, consultants, advisors or other persons appointed or engaged for 
performing any function of the Authority under this Act, have in place ap propriate technical and 
organisational security measures for the information; and  
(c) ensure that the agreements or arrangements entered into with such agencies, consultants, 
advisors or other persons, impose obligations equivalent to those imposed on the Authority under this 
Act, and require such agencies, consultants, advisors and other persons to act only on instructions 
from the Authority.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, and save as 
otherwise provided  in this Act, the Authority or any of its officers or other employees or any agency that 
maintains the Central Identities Data Repository shall not, whether during his service or thereafter, reveal 
any information stored in the Central Identities Data Repo sitory or authentication record to anyone:  
Provided that an Aadhaar number holder may request the Authority to provide access to his identity 
information excluding his core biometric information in such manner as m ay be specified by regulations.  
29. Restri ction on sharing information .—(1) No core biometric information, collected or created 
under this Act, shall be — 
(a) shared with anyone for any reason whatsoever; or  
(b) used for any purpose other than generation of Aadhaar numbers and authentication under this 
Act. 
(2) The identity information, other than core biometric information, collected or created under this 
Act may be shared only in accordance with the provisions of this Act and in such manner as may be 
specified by regulations.  13 
  
(3) No identity information available with a requesting entity shall be — 
(a) used for any purpose, other than that specified to the individual at the time of submitting any 
identity information for authentication; or  
(b) disclosed further, except with the prior consent of  the individual to whom such information 
relates.  
(4) No Aadhaar number or core biometric information collected or created under this Act in respect of 
an Aadhaar number holder shall be published, displayed or posted publicly, except for the purposes as 
may be specified by regulations.  
30. Biometric information deemed to be sensitive personal information .— The biometric 
information collected and stored in electronic form, in accordance with this Act and regulations made 
thereunder, shall be deemed to be “electronic record ” and “sensitive personal data or information ”, and 
the provisions contained in the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000) and the rules made 
thereunder shall apply to such information, in addition to, and to the extent not in derog ation of the 
provisions of this Act.  
Explanation . — For the purposes of  this section, the expressions — 
(a) “electronic form ” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( r) of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 2  of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000);  
(b) “electronic record ” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( t) of                         
sub-section ( 1) of section 2  of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000);  
(c) “sensitive personal data or information ” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in 
clause ( iii) of the Explanation  to section 43A  of the Information Tec hnology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000).  
31. Alteration of demographic information or biometric information .—(1) In case any 
demographic information of an Aadhaar number holder is found incorrect or changes subsequently, the 
Aadhaar number holder shall request the Authority to alter such demographic information in his record in 
the Central Identities Data Repository in such manner as may be specified by regulations.  
(2) In case any biometric information of Aadhaar number holder is lost or changes subsequently for 
any reason, the Aadhaar number holder shall request the Authority to make necessary alteration in his 
record in the Central Identities Data Repository in such manner as may be specified by regulations.  
(3) On receipt of any request under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the Authority may, if it is 
satisfied, make such alteration as may be required in the record relating to such Aadhaar number holder 
and intimate such alter ation to the concerned Aadhaar number holder.  
(4) No identity information in the Central Identities Data Repository shall be altered except in the 
manner provided in this Act or r egulations made in this behalf.  
32. Access to own information and records of requests for authentication .—(1) The Authority 
shall maintain authentication records in such manner and for such period as may be specified by 
regulations.  
(2) Every Aadhaar number holder shall be entitled to obtain his authentication record in such manner  
as may be specified by regulations.  
(3) The Authority shall not, either by itself or through any entity under its control, collect, keep or 
maintain any information about  the purpose of authentication.  
33. Disclosure of information in certain cases .—(1) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 2) or                  
sub-section ( 5) of section 28 or sub -section ( 2) of section 29 shall apply in respect of any disclosure of 
information, including identity information or authentication records, made pursuant to an or der of a court 
not inferior to that of a District Judge:  
Provided that no order by the court under this sub -section shall be made without giving an 
opportunity of hearing to the Authority.  14 
 (2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 5) of sect ion 28 and clause ( b) of sub -section 
(1), sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) of section 29 shall apply in respect of any disclosure of information, 
including identity information or authentication records, made in the interest of national security in 
pursu ance of a direction of an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India 
specially authorised in this behalf by an order of the Central Government:  
Provided that every direction issued under this sub -section, shall be reviewed by an Oversight 
Committee consisting of the Cabinet Secretary and the Secretaries to the Government of India in the 
Department of Legal Affairs and the Department of Electronics and Information Technology, before it 
takes effect:  
Provided further that any direction issued under this sub -section shall be valid for a period of three 
months from the date of its issue, which may be extended for a further period of three months after the 
review by the Oversight Committee.  
CHAPTER VII  
OFFENCES  AND PENALTIES  
34. Penalty for impersonation at time of enrolment .—Whoever impersonates or attempts to 
impersonate another person, whether dead or alive, real or imaginary, by providing any false demographic 
information or biometric information, shall be punishable with impr isonment for a term which may 
extend to three years or with a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both.  
35. Penalty for impersonation of Aadhaar number holder by changing demographic 
information or biometric information . —Whoever, with the  intention of causing harm or mischief to an 
Aadhaar number holder, or with the intention of appropriating the identity of an Aadhaar number holder 
changes or attempts to change any demographic information or biometric information of an Aadhaar 
number hold er by impersonating or attempting to impersonate another person, dead or alive, real or 
imaginary, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall 
also be liable to a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.  
36. Penalty for impersonation .—Whoever, not being authorised to collect identity information 
under the provisions of this Act, by words, conduct or demeanour pretends that he is authorised to do so, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which ma y extend to three years or with a fine which 
may extend to ten thousand rupees or, in the case of a company, with a fine which may extend t o one lakh 
rupees or with both.  
37.  Penalty for disclosing identity information .— Whoever, intentionally discloses, transmits, 
copies or otherwise disseminates any identity information collected in the course of enrolment or 
authentication to any person not authorised under this Act or regulations made thereunder or in 
contravention of any agreement or arrangement enter ed into pursuant to the provisions of this Act, shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with a fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees or, in the case of a company, with a fine which may extend t o one lakh 
rupees or with both.  
38.  Penalty for unauthorised access to the Central Identities Data Repository .— Whoever, not 
being authorised by the Authority, intentionally, — 
(a) accesses or secures access to the Central Identities Data Repository;  
(b) downloads, copies or extracts any data from the Central Identities Data Repository or stored 
in any removable storage medium;  
(c) introduces or causes to be introduced any virus or other computer contaminant in the Central 
Identities Data Repository;  
(d) damages or c auses to be damaged the data in the Central Identities Data Repository;  
(e) disrupts or causes disruption of the access to the Central Identities Data Repository;  
(f) denies or causes a denial of access to any person who is authorised to access the Central  
Identities Data Repository;  15 
 (g) reveals any information in contravention of sub -section ( 5) of section 28, or shares, uses or 
displays information in contravention of section 29 or assists any person in any of the aforementioned 
acts; 
(h) destroys, delete s or alters any information stored in any removable storage media or in the 
Central Identities Data Repository or diminishes its value or utility or affects it injuriously by any 
means; or  
(i) steals, conceals, destroys or alters or causes any person to st eal, conceal, destroy or alter any 
computer source code used by the Authority with an intention to cause damage,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable 
to a fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees.  
Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, the expressions “computer contaminant ”, “computer 
virus” and “damage” shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Explanation  to           
section 43  of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000), and the expression “computer source 
code” shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Explanation  to section 65  of the said Act.  
39. Penalty for tampering with data in Central Identities Data Repository .—Whoever, not being 
authorised by the Authority, uses or tampers with the data in the Central Identities Data Repository or in 
any removable storage medium with the intent of modifying information relating to Aadhaar number 
holder or discovering any information thereof, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three years and shall also be liable to a fine which may  extend to ten thousand rupees.  
40. Penalty for unauthorised use by requesting entity .—Whoever, being a requesting entity, uses 
the identity information of an individual in contravention of sub -section ( 3) of section 8, shall be 
punishable with im prisonment which may extend to three years or with a fine which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees or, in the case of a company, with a fine which may extend t o one lakh rupees or with 
both.  
41. Penalty for non -compliance with intimation requirements .—Whoever, being an enrolling 
agency or a requesting entity, fails to comply with the requirements of sub -section ( 2) of section 3 or                       
sub-section ( 3) of section 8, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year or wi th 
a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or, in the case of a company, with a fine which may 
extend t o one lakh rupees or with both.  
42. General penalty .—Whoever commits an offence under this Act or any rules or regulations made 
thereunder for whi ch no specific penalty is provided elsewhere than this section, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with a fine which may extend to twenty -five 
thousand rupees or, in the case of a company, with a fine which may  extend to  one lakh rupees, or with 
both.  
43. Offences by companies. — (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such pers on liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer  of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation . — For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a fir m, means a partner in the firm.  16 
 44. Act to apply for offence or contravention committed outside India . — (1) Subject to the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2), the provisions of this Act shall apply also to any offence or contravention 
committed outside India by any person, irrespective of his nationality.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the provisions of this Act shall app ly to any offence or 
contravention committed outside India by any person, if the act or conduct constituting the offence or 
contravention involves any data in the Central Identiti es Data Repository.  
45. Power to investigate offences .—Notwithstanding anythi ng contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), a police officer not below the rank of Inspector of Police shall investig ate 
any offence under this Act.  
46. Penalties not to interfere with other punishments .—No penalty imposed under this Act shall 
prevent the imposition of any other penalty or punishment under any other l aw for the time being in force.  
47. Cognizance of offences .—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Act, save on a complaint made by the Authority or any officer or person authorised by it.  
(2) No court inferior to that of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or a Chief Judicial Magistrate shall try 
any off ence punishable under this Act.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
48. Power of Central Government  to supersede Authority .—(1) If, at any time, the Central 
Government is of the opinion,  — 
(a) that, on account of circumstances beyond the control of the Authority, it is unable to discharge 
the functions or perform the duties imposed on it by or under the  provisions of this Act; or  
(b) that the Authority has persistently defaulted in complying with any direction given by the 
Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions or performance of the duties 
imposed on it by or under the pro visions of this Act and as a result of such default the financial 
position of the Authority or the administration of the Authority has suffered; or  
(c) that a public emergency exists,  
the Central Government may, by notification, supersede the Authority for  such period, not exceeding six 
months, as may be specified in the notification and appoint a person or persons as the President may 
direct to exercise powers and discharge functions under this Act:  
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the C entral Government shall give a reasonable 
opportunity to the Authority to make representations against the proposed supersession and shall consider 
the representations, if any, of the Authority.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section (1), superseding the Authority, — 
(a) the Chairperson and other Members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their 
offices as such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be 
exercised or discha rged by or on behalf of the Authority shall, until the Authority is reconstituted 
under sub -section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by the person or persons referred to in                 
sub-section ( 1); and  
(c) all properties owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until the Authority is reconstituted 
under sub -section ( 3), vest in the Central Government.  
(3) On or before the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under 
sub-section ( 1), the Central Government shall reconstitute the Authority by a fresh appointment of its 
Chairperson and other Members and in such case any person who had vacated his office under clause ( a) 
of sub -section ( 2) shall not be deemed to be disqualified for reappointment.  17 
 (4) The Centra l Government shall cause a copy of the notification issued under sub -section ( 1) and a 
full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid 
before each House  of Parliament at the earliest.  
49.  Members,  officers, etc., to be public servants .— The Chairperson, Members, officers and other 
employees of the Authority shall be deemed, while acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the 
provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21  of the Indian Penal               
Code (45 of 1860).  
50. Power of Central Government to issue directions .— (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing 
provisions of this Act, the Authority shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions 
under this Act be bound by such directions on questions of policy, as the Central Government may give, 
in writing to it, from time to time:  
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as pr acticable, be given an opportunity to express its views 
before any direction is given under this sub -section:  
Provided further that nothing in this section shall empower the Central Government to issue 
directions pertaining to technical or administrative m atters undertaken by the Authority.  
(2) The decision of the Central Government, whether a question is one of  policy or not, shall be final.  
51. Delegation .— The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to any 
Member, officer of the Authority or any other person, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be 
specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act (except the power under sectio n 54) 
as it may deem necessary.  
52. Protection of action taken in good faith .— No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or the Authority or the Chairperson or any Member or any officer, or 
other employees of the Authority for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under 
this Act or the rule  or regulation made thereunder.  
53. Power of Central Government to make rules .— (1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:  — 
(a) the form and manner in which and the authority before whom the oath of office and of secrecy 
is to be subscribed by the Chairperson and Members  under sub -section ( 2) of section 14;  
(b) the salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the 
Chairperson and the allowances or remuneration payable to Members of the Authority under                
sub-section ( 4) of section 14;  
(c) the other powers and functions of the Chairperson of the Authority under section 17;  
(d) the other powers and functions of the Authority under clause ( t) of sub -section ( 2) of            
section 23;  
(e) the form of annual statement of accou nts to be prepared by Authority under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 26;  
(f) the form and the manner in which and the time within which returns and statements and 
particulars are to be furnished under sub -section ( 1) of section 27;  
(g) the form and the manner and the time at which the Authority shall furnish annual report under         
sub-section ( 2) of section 27;  
(h) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which 
provision is to b e or may be made by rules.  18 
 54. Power o f Authority to make regulations . —(1) The Authority may, by notification, make 
regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder, for carrying out the provisions of this 
Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:  — 
(a) the biometric information under clause ( g) and the demographic information under clause ( k), 
and the process of collecting demographic information and biometric information from the 
individuals by enrolling agencies under clause ( m) of section 2;  
(b) the manner of verifying the demographic information and biometric information for issue of 
Aadhaar number under sub -section ( 3) of section 3;  
(c) the condit ions for accepting an Aadhaar number as proof of identity of the Aadhaar number 
holder under sub -section ( 3) of section 4;  
(d) the other categories of individuals under section 5 for whom the Authority shall take special 
measures for allotment of Aadhaar n umber;  
(e) the manner of updating biometric information and demographic information under                   
section 6;  
(f) the procedure for authentication of the Aadhaar number under section 8;  
(g) the other functions to be performed by the Central Identit ies Data Repository under               
section 10;  
(h) the time and places of meetings of the Authority and the procedure for transaction of business 
to be followed by it, including the quorum, under sub -section ( 1) of section 19;  
(i) the salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the chief 
executive officer, officers and other employees of the Authority under sub -section ( 2) of section 21;  
(j) the demographic information and biometric information under clause ( a) and the manner of 
their collection under clause ( b) of sub -section (2) of section 23;  
(k) the manner of maintaining and updating the information of individuals in the Central 
Identities Data Repository under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 2) of section 23;  
(l) the manner of omitting and deactivating an Aadhaar number and information relating thereto 
under clause ( g) of sub -section ( 2) of section 23;  
(m) the manner of use of Aadhaar numbers for the purposes of providing or availing of various 
subsidies, benefits , services and other purposes for which Aadhaar numbers may be used under clause 
(h) of sub -section ( 2) of section 23;  
(n) the terms and conditions for appointment of Registrars, enrolling agencies and other service 
providers and the revocation of appointm ents thereof under clause ( i) of sub -section ( 2) of section 23;  
(o) the manner of sharing information of Aadhaar number holder under clause ( k) of                       
sub-section ( 2) of section 23;  
(p) various processes relating to data management, secur ity protocol and other technology 
safeguards under clause ( m) of sub -section ( 2) of section 23;  
(q) the procedure for issuance of new Aadhaar number to existing Aadhaar number holder under 
clause ( n) of sub -section ( 2) of section 23;  
(r) manner of authorising Registrars, enrolling agencies or other service providers to collect such 
fees for services provided by them under clause ( o) of sub -section ( 2) of section 23;  
(s) policies and practices to be followed by the Registrar, enrolling agencies and o ther service 
providers under clause ( r) of sub -section ( 2) of section 23;  19 
 (t) the manner of accessing the identity information by the Aadhaar number holder under the 
proviso to sub -section ( 5) of section 28;  
(u) the manner of sharing the identity informati on, other than core biometric information, 
collected or created under this Act under sub -section ( 2) of section 29;  
(v) the manner of alteration of demographic information under sub -section ( 1) and biometric 
information under sub -section ( 2) of section 31;  
(w) the manner of and the time for maintaining the request for authentication and the response 
thereon under sub -section ( 1), and the manner of obtaining, by the Aadhaar number holder, the 
authentication records under sub -section ( 2) of section 32;  
(x) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified, or in respect of which provision 
is to be  or may be made by regulations.  
55. Laying of rules and regulations before Parliament .— Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be la id, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immedia tely following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation, or 
both the Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have e ffect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done  under 
that rule or regulation.  
56. Application of other laws not barred .— The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not in derogation of, any other l aw for the time being in force.  
57. Act not to prevent use of Aadhaar number for other purposes under law .— Nothing 
contained in this Act shall preve nt the use of Aadhaar number for establishing the identity of an 
individual for any purpose, whether by the State or any body corporate or person, pursuant to any law, for 
the time being in force, or any contract to this effect:  
Provided that the use of Aa dhaar number under this section shall be subject to the procedure and 
obligations under section 8 and Chapter VI.  
58. Power to remove difficulties . — (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of t hree years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, b efore each 
House of Parliament.  
59. Savings .—Anything done or any action taken by the Central Government under the Res olution of 
the Government of India, Planning Commission bearing notification number  A-43011/02/2009 -Admin.  I, 
dated the 28th January, 2009, or by the Department of Electronics and Information Technology under the 
Cabinet Secretariat Notification bearing no tification number S.O.  2492( E), dated the 12th September, 
2015, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have been validl y done or taken under this Act.  
 
--------------------------The Anti-Hijacking Act, 2016--------------------------
1 THE ANTI -HIJACKING ACT, 2016  
ACT NO. 30 OF 2016  
[13th May , 2016.]  
An Act to give effect to the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft 
and for matters connected therewith.  
WHEREAS  a Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft was signed at The 
Hague on the 16th day of December, 1970;  
AND WHEREAS  India acceded to the said Convention and enacted the Anti -Hijacking                                  
Act, 1982 (65 of 1982) to give effect to the provisions of the Convention;  
AND WHEREAS  India has signed the Protocol Supplementary to the Convention at Beijing on the 
10th day of September, 2010 which deals with unlawful acts against Civil Aviation by new types of 
threats which require comprehensive amendments to the said Act;  
AND WHEREAS  it is considered expedient that the unlawful acts of seizure or exercise of control 
of aircraft which jeopardize safety of persons and property is a matter of great concern to be addressed  
effectively by making suitable provisions for giving effect to the Convention and the Protocol and for 
matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: –– 
1. Short title, extent, applic ation and commencement .––(1) This Act may be called the       
Anti-Hijacking Act, 2016.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India and, save as otherwise provided in this Act, it applies also to 
any offence thereunder committed outside India by any person.  
(3) It shall come into force on such 1date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .–– In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires ,–– 
(a) “Agency” means the National Investigation Agency constituted under  section  3 of the 
National Investigation Agency Act, 2008 (34 of 2008);  
(b) “aircraft” means any aircraft, whether or not registered in India, other than a military 
aircraft or an aircraft used in customs or police service;  
(c) “aircraft registered in India ” means an aircraft which is for the time being registered in 
India;  
(d) “Convention country” means a country in which the Hague Convention is for the time 
being in force;  
(e) “Hague Convention ” means the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of 
Aircraft signed at The Hague on the 16th day of December, 1970 and includes the Pr otocol 
Supplementary to the Convention signed at Beijing on the 10th day of September, 2010;  
(f) “hostage” means a passenger or a crew member of an aircraft or any security personnel on 
board the aircraft or a ground support staff involved in the maintenance of the aircraft, who is 
unlawfully seized or detained without his consent, or with his consent obtained  by fraud or duress, 
by an individual or by a group of persons, during the transit of an aircraft or when it is stationed at 
an airport, with an intention to secure any demand or fulfilment of any condition made by such 
individual or such group of persons;  
                                                           
1. 5th July, 2017 vide notificat ion No. G.S.R. (827)(E) dated 5th July 2017, see Gazette of India, Extraordi nary, Part II,  
Section 3 (i).   2 (g) “military aircraft ” means an aircraft of the naval, military, air force or any other armed 
forces of any country and includes every aircraft commanded for the time being by a person in 
any such force detailed for the purpose;  
(h) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(i) “security personnel ” means security personnel deployed by the Central Government or 
appointed by any agency authorised by that Government to ensure security of civil aviation 
against acts of unlawful in terference.  
Explanation .–– for the purposes of this clause “acts of unlawful interference ” means acts or 
attempted acts to jeopardize the safety of civil aviation and air transport, including –– 
(i) unlawful seizure of aircraft in flight;  
(ii) unlawful seizure of aircraft on the ground;  
(iii) hostage -taking on board aircraft or on aerodromes;  
(iv) forcible intrusion on board aircraft, at an aerodrome or on the premises on an aeronautical 
facility;  
(v) introduction on board an aircraft or at an aerodrome,  of a weapon, explosive or other 
hazardous device, article or substances intended for criminal purposes;  
(vi) communication of false information with a view to jeopardize the safety of an aircraft in 
flight or on the ground, of passengers, crew, ground per sonnel or the general public, at an 
aerodrome or on the premises of a civil aviation facility.  
CHAPTER II  
HIJACKING AND  CONNECTED  OFFENCES  
3. Hijacking .–– (1) Whoever unlawfully and intentionally seizes or exercises control of an 
aircraft in service by force or threat thereof, or by coercion, or by any other form of intimidation, or 
by any technological means, commits the offence of hijacking.  
(2) A person shall also be deemed to have committed the offence of hijacking specified in       
sub-section ( 1), if, such person –– 
(a) makes a threat to commit such offence or unlawfully and intentionally causes any person 
to receive such threat under circumstances which indicate that the threat is credible; or  
(b) attempts to commit or abets the commission of such offence; or  
(c) organises or directs others to commit such offence or the offence specified in clause ( a) or 
clause ( b) above;  
(d) participates as an accomplice in such offence or the offence specified in clause ( a) or 
clause ( b) above;  
(e) unlawfully and intentionally assists another person to evade investigation, prosecution or 
punishment, knowing that such person has committed any such offence or the offence specified in 
clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) or clause ( d) above, or that such person is wanted for criminal 
prosecution by law enforcement authorities for such an offence or has been sentenced for such an 
offence.  
(3) A person also commits the offence of hijacking, when committed intentionally, whether or not 
any of the offences specified in sub-section ( 1) or in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) is actually 
committed or attempted, either or both of the following: –– 
(a) agreeing with one or more other persons to commit an offence specified in sub -section ( 1) 
or in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2), involving an act undertaken by one of the participants in 
furtherance of the agreement; or  3 (b) contributing in any manner to the commission of an offence specified in sub -section ( 1) or 
in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) by a group of persons acting with a com mon purpose and such 
contribution shall either –– 
(i) be made with the aim of furthering the general criminal activity or purpose of the 
group, where such activity or purpose involves the commission of such an offence; or  
(ii) be made in the knowledge of th e intention of the group to commit such offence.  
(4) For the purposes of this Act, an aircraft shall be considered to be “in service ” from the 
beginning of the pre -flight preparation of the aircraft by ground personnel or by the crew for a specific 
flight until twenty -four hours after any landing and in the case of a forced landing, the flight shall be 
deemed to continue until the competent authorities take over the responsibility for the aircraft and for 
persons and property on board.  
4. Punishment for hijacking .–– Whoever commits the offence of hijacking shall be punished –– 
(a) with death where such offence results in the death of a hostage or of a security personnel 
or of any person not involved in the offence, as a direct consequence of the office of hijacking; or  
(b) with imprisonment for life which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that 
person's natural life and with fine,  and the movable and immovable property of such person shall 
also be liable to be confiscated.  
5. Punishment for acts o f violence connected with hijacking .––Whoever, being a person 
committing the offence of hijacking of an aircraft, commits, in connection with such offence, any act 
of violence against any passenger or member of the crew of such aircraft, shall be punished with the 
same punishment with which he would have been punishable under any law for the time being in 
force in India if such act had been committed in India.  
6. Conferment of powers of investigations, etc .––(1) For the purposes of this Act, the Central 
Government may, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,             
1973 (2 of 1974), by notification, confer on any officer of the Central Government or any officer of 
the Agency, powers of arrest, investigation and prosecution exercisable by a police officer under the 
said Code.  
(2) All officers of police and all officers of Government are hereby required and empowered to 
assist the officer of the Central Government referred to in sub -section ( 1) in the execution of the 
provisio ns of this Act.  
7. Jurisdiction .–– (1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), where an offence under section 
3 or section 5 is committed outside India, the person committing such offence may be dealt with in 
respect thereof as if such offence had be en committed at any place within India at which he may be 
found.  
(2) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under section 3 or section 5 which is 
committed outside India unless, –– 
(a) such offence is committed within the territory of India;  
(b) such offence is committed against or on board an aircraft registered in India;  
(c) such offence is committed on board and the aircraft in which the offence is committed 
lands in India with the alleged offender still on board;  
(d) such offence is  committed against or on board an aircraft which is for the time being 
leased without crew to a lessee who has his principal place of business or where he has no such 
place of business, his permanent residence is in India;  
(e) such offence is committed by or against a citizen of India;  
(f) such offence is committed by a stateless person whose habitual residence is in the territory 
of India;  4 (g) such offence is committed by the alleged offender who is present in India but not 
extradited under section 11.  
8. Designated Court .–– (1) For the purpose of providing for speedy trial, the State Government 
shall, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court, by notification, specify a Court of 
Sessions to be a Designated Court for such area or areas as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Special Court Constituted under    
section 11  or, as the case may be, under  section  22 of the National Investigation Agency                  
Act, 2008 (34 of 2008) shall be the Designated Court for the purposes of this Act in case where the 
power of arrest, investigation and prosecution is exercis ed by the Agency under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 6.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), a 
Designated Court shall, as far as practicable, hold the trial on a day -to-day basis.  
9. Offences triable by D esignated Court .––(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), –– 
(a) all offences under this Act shall be triable by the Designated Court referred to in  section 8 . 
(b) where a person who is accused or suspected of the commission of an offence under this 
Act is forwarded to the Magistrate under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 2A) of section 167  of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), such Magistrate may authorise detention of such 
person in such custody, as he thinks fit, for a period not exceeding thirty days in the whole, where 
such Magistrate is a Judicial Magistrate, and seven days in the whole, where such Magistrate is an 
Executive Magistrate:  
Provided that the Magistrate may, if he considers that the detention of such person is not 
required,  –– 
(i) when such person is forwarde d to him as aforesaid; or  
(ii) upon or at any time before the expiry of the period of detention authorised by him, he 
shall order such person to be forwarded to the Designated Court having jurisdiction;  
(c) the Designated Court may exercise, in relation to  the person forwarded to it under clause ( b), 
the same power which a Magistrate having jurisdiction to try a case may exercise under  section 167  of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974),  in relation to an accused person in such case who 
has been forwarded to him under that section;  
(d) the Designated Court may, u pon perusal of the report filled by the Agency or a complaint 
made by an officer of the Central Government, or the State Governm ent, as the case may be, 
authorised in this behalf, take cognizance of the offence without the accused being committed to it for 
trial. 
(2) When trying an offence under this Act, a Designated Court may also try an offence other than 
an offence under this Act, which the accused may, under the Code of Criminal Procedure,              
1973 (2 of 1974), be charged at the same trial.  
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
10. Application of Code to proceedings before Designated Court .––Save as otherwise 
provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall apply 
to the proceedings before a Designated Court and the perso n conducting a prosecution before a 
Designated Court shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor.  
11. Provisions as to extradition .––(1) The offences under section 3 and section 5 shall be 
deemed to have been included as extraditable offences and provided fo r in all the extradition treaties 
made by India with Convention countries and which extend to, and are binding on, India on the date 
of commencement of this Act.  5 (2) For the purposes of the application of the Extradition Act, 1962 (34 of 1962) to offences under 
this Act, any aircraft registered in a Convention country shall, at any time while that aircraft is in 
service, be deemed to be within the jurisdiction of that country, whether or not it is for the time being 
also within the jurisdiction of any other  country.  
(3) None of the offences mentioned in section 3 shall be regarded, for the purposes of extradition 
or mutual legal assistance, as a political offence or as an offence connected with a political offence or 
as an offence inspired by political motives and a request for extradition or for mutual legal assistance 
based on such an offence shall not be refused on the sole ground that it concerns a political offence or 
an offence connected with a political offence or an offence inspired by political motives.  
12. Provision as to bail .––(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), no person accused of an offence punishable under this Act shall, if in 
custody, be released on bail or on his own bond, unless, –– 
(a) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose the application for such 
release; and  
(b) where Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the Designated Court is satisfied that 
there are reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such offence and that he is not 
likely to commit any offence while on bail.  
(2) The limitations on granting of bail as specified in sub -section ( 1) are in addition to the 
limitation under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), or any o ther law for the time 
being in force, on granting bail.  
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the special powers of the High 
Court regarding bail under  section 439  of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
13. Contracting parties to Convention .––The Central Government may, by notification, certify 
as to who are the contracting parties to the Hague Convention and to what extent they have availed 
themselves of the provisions of the Convention, and any such notification shall be conclusive 
evidence of the matters certified therein.  
14. Power to treat certain aircraft to be registered in Convention countries .––(1) If the 
Central Government is satisfied that the requirements of sub -section ( 2) have been satisfied in relation 
to any aircraft, it may, by notification, direct that such aircraft shall, for the purposes of this Act, be 
treated as registered in such Convention country as may be specified in the notifica tion. 
(2) Where the Convention countries establish joint air transport operating organisations or 
international operating agencies, which operate aircraft which are subject to joint or international 
registration, shall, by appropriate means, designate for each aircraft, the country among them which 
shall exercise the jurisdiction and have the attributes of the country of registry for the purposes of the 
Convention and shall give notice thereof to the Secretary General of the International Civil Aviation 
Organisation who shall communicate the notice to all Convention countries.  
15. Previous sanction necessary for prosecution .––No prosecution for an offence under this Act 
shall be instituted except with the previous sanction of the Central Government.  
16. Pres umption as to offences under sections 3 and 5.––In a prosecution for an offence under 
section 3 or section 5, if it is proved that –– 
(a) the arms, ammunitions or explosives were recovered from the possession of the accused 
and there is reason to believe that such arms, ammunitions or explosives of similar nature were 
used in the commission of such offence; or  
(b) there is evidence of use of force, threat of force or any other form of intimidation caused 
to the crew or passengers in connection with the com mission of such offence, the Designated 
Court shall presume, unless the contrary is proved, that the accused has committed such offence.  6 17. Protection of action taken in good faith .––(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against any  person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of the provisions of this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government for any damage 
caused or likely to be caused for anything whi ch is in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of the provisions of this Act.  
18. Powers of investigating officers to seize or attach property .––(1) Where any officer, 
referred to in section 6, while conducting an inquiry or investigation has  a reason to believe that any 
property, movable or immovable, or both, is relatable to the commission of the offence in relation to 
which such inquiry or investigation is being conducted, is likely to be concealed, transferred or dealt 
with in any manner w hich will result in disposal of such property, he may make an order for seizing 
such property and where it is not practicable to seize such property, he may make an order of 
attachment directing that such property shall not be transferred or otherwise deal t with, except with 
the prior permission of the officer making such order, and a copy of such order shall be served on the 
person concerned.  
(2) Any order made under sub -section ( 1) shall have no effect unless the said order is confirmed 
by an order of the  Designated Court, within a period of forty -eight hours of its being made.  
(3) The Designated Court may either confirm or revoke the order of seizure or attachment referred 
to in sub -section ( 2). 
(4) Notwithstanding the confirmation of the order by the Designated Court under sub -section ( 3), 
any person aggrieved by the order of attachment made under sub -section ( 1), may make an 
application to the Designated Court for revocation of said order within a period of thirty days from the 
date of confirmation of  the order under sub -section ( 3). 
19. Confiscation and forfeiture of property .––Where any order is made by the Designated 
Court under section 4 for confiscation of movable or immovable property or both, of the accused, 
then, such property shall stand forfe ited to the Government free from all encumbrances:  
Provided that the Designated Court may, during the period of such trial, order that all or any of 
the properties, movable or immovable, or both, belonging to the accused be attached, and in case such 
trial ends in conviction, then, the property so attached shall stand forfeited to Government free from 
all encumbrances.  
20. General power to make rules .––(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make 
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or mor e successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule  shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
21.  Repeal and savings .–– (1) The Anti -Hijacking Act, 1982 (65 of 1982) is hereby repealed.  
(2) The repeal of the said Act shall not affec t–– 
(a) the previous operation of, or anything duly done or suffered under, or any action taken or 
purported to have been done or tak en including any notification, order or notice made or issued, 
or any appointment, confirmation or declaration made or any authorisation granted or any 
document or instrument executed or any direction given, under the Act so repealed, shall, in so far 
as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken 
under the corresponding provisions of this Act; or  7 (b) any right, privilege or obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the said 
Act; or  
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence under the said 
Act; or  
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid,   
and, any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced and 
any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if the said Act had not been repealed.  
 
--------------------------The Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016--------------------------
1 THE BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS ACT, 2016  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
BUREAU  OF INDIAN  STANDARDS  
3. Establishment of Bureau and Constitution of Governing Council . 
4. Executive Committee of Bureau.   
5. Advisory Committees of Bureau.  
6. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate act or proceedings.  
7. Director General.  
8. Officers and employees of Bureau.  
9. Powers and functions of Bureau.  
CHAPTER III  
INDIA N STANDARDS , CERTIFICATION  AND LICENCE  
10. Indian Standards.   
11. Prohibition to publish, reproduce or record without authorisation by Bureau.  
12. Conformity Assessment scheme.  
13. Grant of licence or certificate of conformity.  
14. Certification of Standard Mark of jewellers and sellers of certain specified goods or articles.  
15. Prohibition to import, sell, exhibit, etc.  
16. Central Government to direct compulsory use of Standard Mark.  
17. Prohibition to manufacture, sell, etc.,  certain goods without Standard Mark.  
18. Obligations of licence holder, seller, etc.  
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE , ACCOUNTS  AND AUDIT  
19. Financial Management of Bureau of Indian Standards.  
20. Fund of Bureau.  
21. Borrowing powers of Bureau.  
22. Budget.  2 23. Annual report.  
24. Accounts and audit.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Power of Central Government to issue directions.  
26. Restriction on use of name of Bureau and Indian Standard.  
27. Appointment and powers of certification officers.  
28. Power to search and seizure.  
29. Penalty for contravention.  
30. Offences by companies.  
31. Compensation for non -conforming goods.  
32. Cognizance of offence by courts.  
33. Compounding of offence.  
34. Appeal.  
35. Members, officers and employees of Bureau to be public servants.  
36. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
37. Authentication of orders and other instruments of Bureau.  
38. Power to make rules.   
39. Power to make regulations.  
40. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
41. Act not to affect operation of  certain Acts . 
42. Power to remove difficulties.  
43. Repeal and savings . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  3 THE BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS ACT, 2016  
ACT NO. 11 OF 2016  
[21st March , 2016.]  
An Act to provide for the establishment of a national standards body for the harmonious 
development of the activities of standardisation, conformity assessment and quality assurance 
of goods, articles, processes, systems and services and for matters connec ted therewith or 
incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 2016.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such  1date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint . 
2. Definitions .— In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(1) “article” means any substance, artificial or natural, or partly artificial or partly natural, 
whether raw or partly or wholly processed or manufactured or handmade within India or imported 
into India;  
(2) “assaying and hallmarking centre ” means a testing and markin g centre recognised by the 
Bureau to determine the purity of precious metal articles and to apply hallmark on the precious metal 
articles in a manner as may be determined by regulations;  
(3) “Bureau” means the Bureau of Indian Standards established under s ection 3;  
(4) “certification officer ” means a certification officer appointed under sub -section ( 1) of    
section 27;  
(5) “certified body ” means a holder of certificate of conformity or licence under sub -section ( 2) 
of section 13 in relation to any goods, article, process, system or service which conforms to a 
standard;  
(6) “certified jeweller ” means a jeweller who has been granted a certificate by the Bureau to get 
manufactured for sale or to sell any precious metal article after getting the same hallmarke d in a 
manner as may be determined by regulations;  
(7) “conformity assessment ” means demonstration that requirements as may be specified relating 
to an article, process, system, service, person or body are fulfilled;  
(8) “conformity assessment scheme ” mean s a scheme relating to such goods, article, process, 
system or service as may be notified by the Bureau under section 12;  
(9) “consumer ” means a person as defined in the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (68 of 1986);  
(10) “covering” includes any stopper, cask, bottle, vessel, box, crate, cover, capsule, case, frame, 
wrapper, bag, sack, pouch or other container;  
(11) “Director General ” means the Director General appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 7;  
                                                           
1. 12th October 2017, vide Notification No. S.O.3295(E) dated 12th October 2017 , see Gazette of India, Extraordi nary, Part II,  
Section 3 ( ii).    4 (12) “Executive Committee ” means the Executive Committee constituted under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 4;  
(13) “fund” means the fund constituted under section 20;  
(14) “goods” includes all kinds of movable properties under the Sale of Goods                          
Act, 1930  (3 of 1930), other than actionable claims, money, stocks and shares;  
(15) “Governing Council ” means a Governing Council constituted under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 3;  
(16) “Hallmark ” means in relation to precious metal article, the Standard Mark, which indicate s 
the proportionate content of precious metal in that article as per the relevant Indian Standard;  
(17) “Indian Standard ” means the standard including any tentative or provisional standard 
established and published by the Bureau, in relation to any goods, article, process, system or service, 
indicative of the quality and specification of such goods, article, process, system or service and 
includes— 
(i) any standard adopted by the Bureau under sub -section ( 2) of section 10; and  
(ii) any standard established and published, or recognised, by the Bureau of Indian Standards 
established under the Bureau of Indian Standard Act, 1986 (63 of 1986), which was in force 
immediately before the commencement of this Act ; 
(18) “Indian Standards Institution ” means the Indian Standards Institution registered under the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) ; 
(19) “jeweller” means a person engaged in the business to get manufactured precious metal article 
for sale or to sell precious metal articles;  
(20) “licence” means a licence granted under section 13 to use a specified Standard Mark in 
relation to any goods, article, process, system or service, which conforms to a standard;  
(21) “manufacturer ” means a person responsible for designing and manufacturing any goods or 
article;  
(22) “mark” includes a device, brand, heading, label, ticket, pictorial representation, name, 
signature, word, letter or numeral or any combination thereof;  
(23) “member” means a member of the Governing Council, Executive Committee or  any of the 
Advisory Committee;  
(24) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression 
“notify” or “notified” shall be construed accordingly;  
(25) “person” means a manufacturer, an importer, a distributor, retailer, s eller or lessor of goods 
or article or provider of service or any other person who uses or applies his name or trade mark or any 
other distinctive mark on to goods or article or while providing a service, for any consideration or 
gives goods or article or provides service as prize or gift for commercial purposes including their 
representative and any person who is engaged in such activities, where the manufacturer, importer, 
distributor, retailer, seller, lessor or provider of service cannot be identified;  
(26) “precious metal ” means gold, silver, platinum and palladium;  
(27) “precious metal article ” means any article made entirely or in part from precious metals or 
their alloys;  
(28) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(29) “process” means a set of inter -related or interacting activities, which transforms inputs into 
outputs;  5 (30) “recognised testing and marking centre ” means a testing and marking centre recognised by 
the Bureau under sub -section ( 5) of section 14;  
(31) “recognised  testing laboratory ” means a testing laboratory recognised by the Bureau under 
sub-section ( 4) of section 13;  
(32) “registering authority ” means any authority competent under any law for the time being in 
force to register any company, firm or other body o f persons, or any trade mark or design, or to grant 
a patent;  
(33) “regulations ” means regulations made by the Bureau under this Act;  
(34) “sale” means to sell, distribute, hire, lease or exchange of goods, article, process, system or 
service for any consi deration or for commercial purposes;  
(35) “seller” means a person who is engaged in the sale of any goods, article, process, system or 
service;  
(36) “service” means the result generated by activities at the interface between an organisation 
and a customer and by organisation ’s internal activities, to meet customer requirements;  
(37) “specification ” means a description of goods, article, process, system or service as far as 
practicable by reference to its nature, quality, strength, purity, composition, quant ity, dimensions, 
weight, grade, durability, origin, age, material, mode of manufacture or processing, consistency and 
reliability of service delivery or other characteristics to distinguish it from any other goods, article, 
process, system or service;  
(38) “specified” means specified by the regulations;  
(39) “standards ” means documented agreements containing technical specifications or other 
precise criteria to be used consistently as rules, guidelines, or definitions of characteristics, to ensure 
that goods, articles, processes, systems and services are fit for their pu rpose;  
(40) “Standard Mark ” means the mark specified by the Bureau, and includes Hallmark, to 
represent conformity of goods, article, process, system or service to a particular Indian Standard or 
conformity to a standard, the mark of which has been establi shed, adopted or recognised by the 
Bureau and is marked on the article or goods as a Standard Mark or on its covering or label attached 
to such goods or article so marked;  
(41) “system” means a set of inter -related or interacting elements;  
(42) “testing la boratory” means a body set up for the purpose of testing of goods or article against 
a set of requirements and report its findings;  
(43) “trade mark ” means a mark used or proposed to be used in relation to goods or article or 
process or system or service f or the purpose of indicating, or so as to indicate, a connection in the 
course of trade of goods, article, process, system or service, as the case may be, and some person 
having the right, either as proprietor or as registered user, to use the mark, whethe r with or without 
any indication of the identity of that person.  
CHAPTER II  
BUREAU  OF INDIAN  STANDARDS  
3. Establishment of Bureau and Constitution of Governing Council .—(1) With effect from such 
date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there 
shall be established a national body for the purposes of this Act, a Bureau, to be called the Bureau of 
Indian Standards.  
(2) The Bureau shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succe ssion and a 
common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, 
both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  6 (3) The members of the Governing Council shall con stitute the Bureau and general superintendence, 
direction and management of the affairs of the Bureau shall vest in the Governing Council, which shall 
consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Minister in -charge of the Ministry or Department of th e Central Government having 
administrative control of the Bureau who shall be ex officio  President of the Bureau;  
(b) the Minister of State or a Deputy Minister, if any, in the Ministry or Department of the 
Central Government having administrative control of the Bureau who shall be ex officio                 
Vice -President of the Bureau, and where there is no such Minist er of State or Deputy Minister, such 
person as may be nominated by the Central Government to be the Vice -President of the Bureau;  
(c) the Secretary to the Government of India of the Ministry or Department of the Central 
Government having administrative con trol of the Bureau, ex officio ; 
(d) the Director General of the Bureau, ex officio ; 
(e) such number of other persons to represent the Government, industry, scientific and research 
institutions, consumers and other interests, as may be prescribed, to be app ointed by the Central 
Government.  
(4) The term of office of the members referred to in clause ( e) of sub -section ( 3) and the manner of 
filling vacancies among, and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions by the 
members, shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that a member, other than an ex officio  member of the Bureau of Indian Standards 
constituted under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 (63 of 1986), shall, after the commencement 
of this Act, continue to hold such o ffice as member till the completion of his term  
(5) The Governing Council may associate with itself, in such manner and for such purposes as may be 
prescribed, any person whose assistance or advice it may desire in complying with any of the provisions 
of this Act and a person so associated shall have the right to take part in the discussions of the Governing 
Council relevant to the purposes for which he has been associated but shall not have the right to vote.  
(6) The Governing Council may, by general or sp ecial order in writing, delegate to any member, the 
Director General or any other person subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, 
such of its powers and functions under this Act except the powers under section 37 as it may deem  
necessary.  
4. Executive Committee of Bureau .—(1) The Governing Council may, with the prior approval of 
the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an Executive Committee which 
shall consist of the following members, namely:  — 
(a) Director General of the Bureau, who shall be its ex officio  Chairman; and  
(b) such number of members, as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Executive Committee constituted under sub -section ( 1) shall perform, exercise and discharge 
such functions, powers and duties of the Bureau, as may be delegated to it by the Governing Council . 
5. Advisory Committees of Bureau .—(1) Subject to any regulations made in this behalf, the 
Governing Council may, from time to time and as and when it is considered necessary, con stitute the 
following Advisory Committees for the efficient discharge of the functions of the Bureau, namely:  — 
(a) Finance Advisory Committee;  
(b) Conformity Assessment Advisory Committee;  
(c) Standards Advisory Committee;  
(d) Testing and Calibration Advisory Committee; and  
(e) such number of other committees as may be specified by regulations.  7 (2) Each Advisory Committee shall consist of a Chairman and such other members as may be 
specified by regulations . 
6. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate act or proceedings .—No act or proceedings of the Governing 
Council, under section 3 shall be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the Governing Council; or  
(b) any  defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Governing Council; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Governing Council not affecting the merits of the case  
 7. Director General .—(1) The Central Government shall appoint a Director General of the Bureau.  
(2) The terms and conditions of service of the Director General of the Bureau shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) Subject to the general superintendence and control of the Governing Council, the Director General 
of the B ureau shall be the Chief Executive Authority of the Bureau.  
(4) The Director General of the Bureau shall exercise and discharge such of the powers and duties of 
the Bureau as may be specified by regulations.  
(5) The Director General may, by general or spec ial order in writing, delegate to any officer of the 
Bureau subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of his powers and 
functions as are assigned to him under the regulations or are delegated to him by the Governing Council , 
as he may deem necessary . 
8. Officers and employees of Bureau .—(1) The Bureau may appoint such other officers and 
employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.  
(2) The terms and conditions of service of officers and employees of the Bureau appointed under         
sub-section ( 1) shall be such as may be specified by regulations.  
9. Powers and functions of Bureau .—(1) The powers and duties as may be assigned to the B ureau 
under this Act shall be exercised and performed by the Governing Council and, in particular, such powers 
may include the power to — 
(a) establish branches, offices or agencies in India or outside;  
(b) recognise, on reciprocal basis or otherwise, with the prior approval of the Central 
Government, the mark of any international body or institution, on such terms and conditions as may 
be mutually agreed upon by the Bureau in relation to any goods, article, process, system or service at 
par with the Standar d Mark for such goods, article, process, system or service;  
(c) seek recognition of the Bureau and of the Indian Standards outside India on such terms and 
conditions as may be mutually agreed upon by the Bureau with any corresponding institution or 
organis ation in any country or with any international organisation;  
(d) enter into and search places, premises or vehicles, and inspect and seize goods or articles and 
documents to enforce the provisions of this Act;  
(e) provide services to manufacturers and cons umers of goods or articles or processes for 
compliances of standards on such terms and conditions as may be mutually agreed upon;  
(f) provide training services in relation to quality management, standards, conformity assessment, 
laboratory testing and cali bration, and any other related areas;  
(g) publish Indian Standards and sell such publications and publications of international bodies;  
(h) authorise agencies in India or outside India for carrying out any or all activities of the Bureau 
and such other pur poses as may be necessary on such terms and conditions as it deems fit;  
(i) obtain membership in regional, international and foreign bodies having objects similar to that 
of the Bureau and participate in international standards setting process;  8 (j) underta ke testing of samples for purposes other than for conformity assessment; and  
(k) undertake activities relating to legal metrology.  
(2) The Bureau shall take all necessary steps for promotion, monitoring and management of the 
quality of goods, articles, pro cesses, systems and services, as may be necessary, to protect the interests of 
consumers and various other stake holders which may include the following namely:  — 
(a) carrying  out market surveillance or survey of any goods, article, process, system or service to 
monitor their quality and publish findings of such surveillance or surveys;  
(b) promotion of quality in connection with any goods, article, process, system or service b y 
creating awareness among the consumers and the industry and educate them about quality and 
standards in connection with any goods, article, process, system and service;  
(c) promotion  of safety in connection with any goods, article, process, system or service;  
(d) identification of any goods, articles, process, system or service for which there is a need to 
establish a new Indian Standard, or to revise an existing Indian Standard;  
(e) promoting the use of Indian Standards;  
(f) recognising or accrediting any institution in India or outside which is engaged in conformity 
certification and inspection of any goods, article, process, system or service or of testing laboratories;  
(g) coordina tion and promotion of activities of any association of manufacturers or consumers or 
any other body in relation to improvement in the quality or in the implementation of any quality 
assurance activities in relation to any goods, article, process, system or  service; and  
(h) such other functions as may be necessary for promotion, monitoring and management of the 
quality of goods, articles, processes, systems and services and to protect the interests of consumers 
and other stake holders.  
(3) The Bureau shall p erform its functions under this section through the Governing Council in 
accordance with the direction and subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government.  
CHAPTER III  
INDIAN  STANDARDS , CERTIFICATION  AND LICENCE  
10. Indian Standards . —(1) The standards established by the Bureau shall be the Indian Standards.  
(2) The Bureau may — 
(a) establish, publish, review and promote the Indian Standard, in relation to any goods, article, 
process, system or service in such manner as may be prescribed;  
(b) adopt as Indian Standard, any standard, established by any other Institution in India or 
elsewhere, in relation to any goods, article, process, system or service in such manner as may be 
prescribed;  
(c) recognise or accredit any institution in India or o utside which is engaged in standardisation;  
(d) undertake, support and promote such research as may be necessary for formulation of Indian 
Standards.  
(3) The Bureau, for the purpose of this section, shall constitute, as and when considered necessary, 
such number of technical committees of experts for the formulation of standards in respect of goods, 
articles, processes, systems or services, as may be necessary.  
(4) The Indian Standard shall be notified and remain valid till withdrawn by the Bureau.  
(5) Notw ithstanding anything contained in any other law, the copyright in an Indian Standard or any 
other publication of the Bureau shall vest in the Bureau.  9 11. Prohibition to publish, reproduce or record without authorisation by Bureau .—(1) No 
individual shall, without the authorisation of the Bureau, in any manner or form, publish, reproduce or 
record any Indian Standard or part thereof, or any other publication of the Bureau.  
(2) No person shall issue a document that creates, or may creat e the impression that it is or contains 
an Indian Standard, as contemplated in this Act:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall prevent any individual from making a copy of Indian 
Standard for his personal use . 
12.  Conformity Assessment scheme .—(1) The Bureau may notify a specific or different conformity 
assessment scheme for any goods, article, process, system or service or for a group of goods, articles, 
processes, systems or services, as the case may be, with respect to any Indian Standard or a ny other 
standard in a manner as may be specified by regulations.  
(2) The Bureau may establish a Standard Mark in relation to each of its conformity assessment 
schemes, which shall be of such design and contain such particulars as may be specified by regul ations to 
represent a particular standard.  
13. Grant of licence or certificate of conformity .—(1) A person may apply for grant of licence  or 
certificate of conformity, as the case may be, if the goods, article, process, system or service conforms to 
an Indian Standard.  
(2) Where any goods, article, process, system or service conforms to a standard, the Director General 
may, by an order, gra nt— 
(a) a certificate of conformity in a manner as may be specified by regulations; or  
(b) a licence to use or apply a Standard Mark in a manner as may be specified by regulations,  
subject to such conditions and on payment of such fees, including late fee  or fine, before or during the 
operation of the certificate of conformity or licence, and as determined by regulations.  
(3) While granting a certificate of conformity or licence to use a Standard Mark, the Bureau may, by 
order, specify the marking and labe lling requirements that shall necessarily be affixed as may be specified 
from time to time.  
(4) The Bureau may establish, maintain or recognise testing laboratories for the purposes of 
conformity assessment and quality assurance and for such other purposes  as may be required for carrying 
out its functions.  
14. Certification of Standard Mark of jewellers and sellers of certain specified goods or       
articles .—(1) The Central Government, after consulting the Bureau, may notify precious metal articles or 
other goods or articles as it may consider necessary, to be marked with a Hallmark or Standard Mark, as 
the case may be, in a manner as specified in sub -section ( 2). 
(2) The goods or articles notified in sub -section ( 1) may be sold through retail outlets certified by the 
Bureau after such goods or articles have been assessed for conformity to the relevant standard by testing 
and marking centre, recognised by the Bureau and marked with Hallmark or Standard Mark, as the c ase 
may be, as specified by regulations.  
(3) The Central Government may, after consulting the Bureau, by an order published in the Official 
Gazette, make it compulsory for the sellers of goods or article notified under sub -section ( 1) to be sold 
only throu gh certified sales outlets fulfilling such conditions as may be determined by regulations.  
(4) The Bureau may, by an order, grant, renew, suspend or cancel certification of Standard Mark or 
Hallmark of a jeweller or any other seller for sale of goods or ar ticles notified under sub -section ( 1) in 
such manner as may be determined by regulations.  
(5) The Bureau may establish, maintain and recognise testing and marking centres, including assaying 
and hallmarking centres, for conformity assessment and applicatio n of Standard Mark, including 
Hallmark, on goods or articles notified under sub -section ( 1), in a manner as may be specified by 
regulations.  10 (6) No testing and marking centre or assaying and hallmarking centre, other than the recognised by 
the Bureau, shal l with respect to goods or articles notified under sub -section ( 1), use, affix, emboss, 
engrave, print or apply in any manner the Standard Mark, including the Hallmark, or colourable imitation 
thereof, on any goods or article; and make any claim in relatio n to the use and application of a Standard 
Mark, including the Hallmark, through advertisements, sales promotion leaflets, price lists or the like.  
(7) Every recognised testing and marking centre, including assaying and hallmarking centre, shall use 
or app ly Standard Mark on good or articles notified under sub -section ( 1), including Hallmark on 
precious metal articles, after accurately determining the conformity of the same in a manner as may be 
specified.  
(8) No recognised testing and marking centre, inclu ding assaying and hallmarking centre, shall, 
notwithstanding that it has been recognised under sub -section ( 5), use or apply in relation to any goods or 
article notified under sub -section ( 1) a Standard Mark, including Hallmark, or any colourable imitation  
thereof, unless such goods or article conforms to the relevant standard.  
15. Prohibition to import, sell, exhibit, etc .—(1) No person shall import, distribute, sell, store or 
exhibit for sale, any goods or article under sub -section ( 1) of section 14, exce pt under certification from 
the Bureau.  
(2) No person, other than that certified by the Bureau, shall sell or display or offer to sell goods or 
articles that are notified under sub -section ( 3) of section 14 and marked with the Standard Mark, 
including Hallmark and claim in relation to the Standard Mark, including Hallmark, through 
advertisements, sales promotion leaflets, price lists or the like.  
(3) No certified jeweller or seller shall sell or display or offer to sell any notified goods or articles, 
notwithstanding that he has been granted certification, with the Standard Mark, including Hallmark, or 
any colourable imitation thereof, unless such goods or article is marked with a Standard Mark or 
Hallmark, in a manner as may be specified by regulations,  and unless such goods or article conforms to 
the relevant standard.  
16. Central Government to direct compulsory use of Standard Mark .—(1) If the Central 
Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do in the public interest or for the 
protection of human, animal or plant health, safety of the environment, or prevention of unfair trade 
practices, or national security, it may, after consulting the Bureau, by an order published in the Official 
Gazette, notify — 
(a) goods or article of a ny scheduled industry, process, system or service; or  
(b) essential requirements to which such goods, article, process, system or service,  
which shall conform to a standard and direct the use of the Standard Mark under a licence  or certificate of 
conformity as compulsory on such goods, article, process, system or service . 
Explanation. —For the purpose of this sub -section,— 
(i) the expression “scheduled industry ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951);  
(ii) it is hereby clarified that essential requirements are requirements, expressed in terms of the 
parameters to be achieved or requirements of s tandard in technical terms that effectively ensure that 
any goods, article, process, system or service meet the objective of health, safety and environment.  
(2) The Central Government may, by an order authorise Bureau or any other agency having necessary 
accreditation or recognition and valid approval to certify and enforce conformity to the relevant standard 
or prescribed essential requirements under sub -section ( 1). 
17. Prohibition to manufacture, sell, etc., certain goods without Standard Mark .—(1) No pe rson 
shall manufacture, import, distribute, sell, hire, lease, store or exhibit for sale any such goods, article, 
process, system or service under sub -section ( 1) of section 16 — 
(a) without a Standard Mark, except under a valid licence; or  11 (b) notwithstanding that he has been granted a license, apply a Standard Mark, unless such goods, 
article, process, system or service conforms to the relevant standard or prescribed essential 
requirements.  
(2) No person shall make a public claim, through adver tisements, sales promotion leaflets, price lists 
or the like, that his goods, article, process, system or service conforms to an Indian standard or make such 
a declaration on the goods or article, without having a valid certificate of conformity or licence  from the 
Bureau or any other authority approved by the Central Government under sub -section ( 2) of section 16 . 
(3) No person shall use or apply or purport to use or apply in any manner, in the manufacture, 
distribution, sale, hire, lease or exhibit or off er for sale of any goods, article, process, system or service, or 
in the title of any patent or in any trade mark or design, a Standard Mark or any colourable imitation 
thereof, except under a valid licence from the Bureau.  
18. Obligations of licence holde r, seller, etc. —(1) The licence holder shall, at all times, remain 
responsible for conformance of the goods, articles, processes, systems or services carrying the Standard 
Mark.  
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the distributor or the seller, as the ca se may be, to ensure that 
goods, articles, processes, systems or services carrying the Standard Mark are purchased from certified 
body or licence holder.  
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the seller before the goods or article is sold or offered to be sold or 
exhibited or offered for sale to ensure that — 
(a) goods, articles, processes, systems or services carrying the Standard Mark bear the requisite 
labels and marking details, as specified by the Bureau from time to time;  
(b) the marking and labelling  requirements on the product or covering is displayed in a manner 
that has been specified by the Bureau.  
(4) Every certified body or licence holder shall supply to the Bureau with such information and with 
such samples of any material or substance used in relation to any goods, article, process, system or 
service, as the case may be, as the Bureau may require for monitoring its quality and for the recovery of 
the fee as may be prescribed in the certificate of conformity or the licence.  
(5) (a) The Bureau ma y make such inspection and take such samples of any material or substance as 
may be necessary to see whether any goods, article, process, system or service, in relation to which a 
Standard Mark has been used, conforms to the requirements of the relevant st andard or whether the 
Standard Mark has been properly used in relation to any goods, article, process, system or service with or 
without a licence.  
(b) The Bureau may publicise the results of its findings and the directions given in pursuance 
thereof.  
(6) If the Bureau is satisfied under the provisions of sub -sections ( 4) and ( 5) that the goods, articles, 
processes, systems or services in relation to which a Standard Mark has been used do not conform to the 
requirements of the relevant standard, the Bureau may direct the certified body or licence holder or his 
representative to stop the supply and sale of non -conforming goods or articles and recall the non -
conforming goods or articles that have already been supplied or offered for sale and bear such mark fro m 
the market or any such place from where they are likely to be offered for sale or prohibit to provide the 
service.  
(7) Where a certified body or licence holder or his representative has sold goods, articles, processes, 
system or services, which bear a St andard Mark or any colourable imitation thereof, which do not 
conform to the relevant standard, the Bureau shall direct the certified body or licence holder or his 
representative to — 
(a) repair or replace or reprocess the standard marked goods, article, pr ocess, system or service in 
a manner as may be specified; or  
(b) pay compensation to the consumer as may be prescribed by the Bureau; or  12 (c) be liable for the injury caused by non -conforming goods or article, which bears a Standard 
Mark, as per the provisions of section 31.  
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE , ACCOUNTS  AND AUDIT  
19. Financial Management of Bureau of Indian Standards .—The Central Government may, after 
due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Bureau grants and loans of such 
sums of money as the Government may consider necessary . 
20. Fund of Bureau .—(1) There shall be constituted a fund to be called the Bureau of India n 
Standards fund and there shall be credited thereto — 
(a) any grants and loans made to the Bureau by the Central Government;  
(b) all fees and charges received by the Bureau under this Act;  
(c) all fines received by the Bureau;  
(d) all sums received by the Bureau from such other sources as may be decided upon by the 
Central Government.  
(2) The fund shall be applied for meeting — 
(a) the salary, allowances and other remuneration of the members, Director General, officers and 
other employe es of the Bureau;  
(b) expenses of the Bureau in the discharge of its functions under the Act; and  
(c) expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by this Act:  
Provided that the fines received in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) shall be used for consumer awareness, 
consumer protection and promotion of quality of goods, articles, processes, system or services in the 
country.  
21. Borrowing powers of Bureau .— (1) The Bureau may, with the consent of the Central 
Government or in accordance with the terms of any  general or special authority given to it by the Central 
Government, borrow money from any source as it may deem fit for discharging all or any of its functions 
under this Act.  
(2) The Central Government may guarantee in such manner as it thinks fit, the r epayment of the 
principal and the payment of interest thereon with respect to the loans borrowed by Bureau under          
sub-section ( 1). 
22. Budget .— The Bureau shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year as may 
be prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the 
Bureau and forward the same to the Central Government.  
23. Annual report .—(1) The Bureau shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial 
year as may be  prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous 
financial year, and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual report to be laid, as soon as may be after it  is 
received, before each House of Parliament.  
24. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Bureau shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts, in such form as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government in cons ultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  13 (2) The accounts of the Bureau shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India at 
such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such au dit 
shall be payable by the Bureau to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Bureau shall have the same rights and  privileges and the authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India generally has in connection 
with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts , connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any office of the 
Bureau.  
(4) The accounts of the Bureau as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the a udit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Power of Central Government to issue directions .—(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing 
provisions of this Act, the Bureau shall, in the exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions 
under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in 
writing to it fr om time to time:  
Provided that the Bureau shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views 
before any direction is given under this sub -section.  
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not  shall be final.  
(3) The Central Government may take such other action as may be necessary for the promotion, 
monitoring and management of quality of goods, articles, processes, systems and services and to protect 
the interests of consumers and various oth er stakeholders and notify any other goods, articles, processes, 
systems and services for the purpose of sub -section ( 1) of section 16.  
26. Restriction on use of name of Bureau and Indian Standard .—(1) No person shall, with a view 
to deceive or likely to deceive the public, use without the previous permission of the Bureau, — 
(a) any name which so nearly resembles the name of the Bureau as to deceive or likely to deceive 
the public or the name which contains the expression “Indian Standard ” or any abbreviat ion       
thereof; or  
(b) any title of any patent or mark or trade mark or design, in relation to any goods, article, 
process, system or service, containing the expressions “Indian Standard ” or “Indian Standard 
Specification ” or any abbreviation of such ex pressions.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, no registering 
authority shall — 
(a) register any company, firm or other body of persons which bears any name or mark; or  
(b) register a trade mark or design which bea rs any name or mark; or  
(c) grant a patent, in respect of an invention, which bears a title containing any name or mark,  
if the use of such name or mark is in contravention of sub -section ( 1). 
(3) If any question arises before a registering authority whet her the use of any name or mark is in 
contravention of sub -section ( 1), the registering authority may refer the question to the Central 
Government whose decision thereon shall be final.  14 27. Appointment and powers of certification officers .—(1) The Bureau may appoint as many 
certification officers as may be necessary for the purpose of inspection whether any goods, article, 
process, system or service in relation to which the Standard Mark has been used conforms to the relevant 
standard or wheth er the Standard Mark has been properly used in relation to any goods, article, process, 
system or service with or without licence, and for performing such other functions as may be assigned to 
them.  
(2) Subject to any rules made under this Act, a certifica tion officer shall have power to — 
(a) inspect any operation carried on in connection with any goods, article, process, system or 
service in relation to which the Standard Mark has been used; and  
(b) take samples of any goods or article or of any material o r substance used in any goods, article, 
process, system or service, in relation to which the Standard Mark has been used.  
(3) Every certification officer shall be furnished by the Bureau with a certificate of appointment as a 
certification officer, and the  certificate shall, on demand, be produced by the certification officer.  
(4) Every certified body or licence holder shall — 
(a) provide reasonable facilities to certification officer to enable him to discharge the duties 
imposed on him;  
(b) inform certifica tion officer or the Bureau of any change in the conditions which were declared 
or verified by the certification officer or the Bureau at the time of grant of certificate of conformity or 
licence.  
(5) Any information obtained by a certification officer or t he Bureau from any statement made or 
information supplied or any evidence given or from inspection made under the provisions of this Act shall 
be treated as confidential:  
Provided that nothing shall apply to the disclosure of any information for the purpos e of prosecution 
and protection of interest of consumers.  
28. Power to search and seizure .—(1) If the certification officer has reason to believe that any 
goods or articles, process, system or service in relation to which the contravention of section 11 or                      
sub-sections ( 6) or ( 8) of section 14 or section 15 or section 17 has t aken place are secreted in any place, 
premises or vehicle, he may enter into and search such place, premises or vehicle for such goods or 
articles, process, system or service, as the case may be.  
(2) Where, as a result of any search made under sub -section (1), any goods or article, process, system 
or service has been found in relation to which contravention of section 11 or sub -sections ( 6) or ( 8) of 
section 14 or section 15 or section 17 has taken place, the certification officer may seize such goods or 
article and other material and documents which, in his opinion will be useful for, or relevant to any 
proceeding under this Act : 
Provided that where it is not practicable to seize any such goods or article or material or document, 
the certification officer m ay serve on the owner an order that he shall not remove, part with, or otherwise 
deal with, the goods or article or material or document except with the previous permission of the 
certification officer . 
(3) The provision of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), relating to searches and 
seizures shall, so far as may be, apply to every search or seizure made under this section.  
29. Penalty for contravention .—(1) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 11 or 
sub-section ( 1) of section 26 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees.  
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub -sections ( 6) or ( 8) of section 14 or section 15 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or wit h fine which shall 
not be less than one lakh rupees, but may extend up to five times the value of goods or articles produced 
or sold or offered to be sold or affixed or applied with a Standard Mark including Hallmark, or with both:  15 Provided that where the value of goods or articles produced or sold or offered to be sold cannot be 
determined, it shall be presumed that one year's production was in such contravention and the annual 
turnover in the previous financial year shall be taken as the value of goods or  articles for such 
contravention . 
(3) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 17 shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend up to two years or with fine which shall not be less than two lakh rupees for 
the first contrave ntion and not be less than five lakh rupees for the second and subsequent contraventions, 
but may extend up to ten times the value of goods or articles produced or sold or offered to be sold or 
affixed or applied with a Standard Mark, including Hallmark, o r with both:  
Provided that where the value of goods or articles produced or sold or offered to be sold cannot be 
determined, it shall be presumed that one year's production was in such contravention and the annual 
turnover in the previous financial year sh all be taken as the value of goods or articles for such 
contravention.  
(4) The offence under sub -section ( 3) shall be cognizable.  
30. Offences by companies .—Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, 
every director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company who, at the time the offence was 
committed, was in charge of and was responsible to the company for the conduct of the busin ess of the 
company, or authorised representative of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly, irrespective of 
the fact that the offence has been com mitted with or without the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, 
or authorised representative of the company.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company” means a body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
31. Compensation for non -conforming goods .—Where a holder of licence or certificate of 
conformity or his representative has sold any goods, article, process, system or service, which bears a 
Standard Mark not conforming to the relevant standard, or with colourable imitation, the certified body or 
licence holder o r his representative shall be liable to compensate the consumer for the injury caused by 
such non -conforming goods, article, process, system or service in such manner as may be prescribed.  
32. Cognizance of offence by courts .—(1) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a 
Judicial Magistrate of the first class, specially empowered in this behalf, shall try any offence punishable 
under this Act.  
(2) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act save on a complaint 
made by— 
(a) or under the authority of the Bureau; or  
(b) any police officer, not below the rank of deputy superintendent of police or equivalent; or  
(c) any authority notified under sub -section ( 2) of section 16; or  
(d) any officer empowered under the auth ority of the Government; or  
(e) any consumer; or  
(f) any association.  
(3) Any police officer not below the rank of deputy superintendent of police or equivalent, may, if he 
is satisfied that any of the offences referred to in sub -section ( 3) of section 29 has been, is being, or is 
likely to be, committed, search and seize without warrant, the goods, die, block, machine, plate, other 
instruments or things involved in committing the offence, wherever found, and all the articles so seized 
shall, as soon as pra cticable, be produced before a Magistrate as prescribed under sub -section ( 1). 16 (4) The court may direct that any property in respect of which the contravention has taken place shall 
be forfeited to the Bureau.  
(5) The court may direct that any fine, in who le or any part thereof, payable under the provisions of 
this Act, shall be payable to the Bureau . 
33. Compounding of offence .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), any offence committed for the first time, punishable under this Act, not 
being an offence punishable with imprisonment only, or with imprisonment and also with fine, may, 
either before or after the institution of any prosecution, be compounded by an officer so authorised by the 
Director General, in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the sum so specified shall not in any case exceed the maximum amount of th e fine 
which may be imposed under section 29 for the offence so compounded; and any second or subsequent 
offence committed after the expiry of a period of three years from the date on which the offence was 
previously compounded shall be deemed to be an off ence committed for the first time.  
(2) Every officer referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall exercise the powers to compound an offence, 
subject to the direction, control and supervision of the Bureau.  
(3) Every application for the compounding of an offence s hall be made in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(4) Where any offence is compounded before the institution of any prosecution, no prosecution shall 
be instituted in relation to such offence against the offender in relation to whom the offence is so 
compo unded.  
(5) Where the composition of any offence is made after the institution of any prosecution, such 
composition shall be brought to the notice of the court in which the prosecution is pending in writing by 
the officer referred to in sub -section ( 1), and  on such notice of the composition of the offence being given 
and its acceptance by the court, the person against whom the offence is so compounded shall be 
discharged.  
34. Appeal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made under section 13 or sub -section ( 4) of      
section 14 or section 17 of this Act may prefer an appeal to Director General of the Bureau within such 
period as prescribed.  
(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period prescribed therefor:  
Provided that an  appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period prescribed therefor if the 
appellant satisfies the Director General that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within 
the prescribed period.  
(3) Every appeal made under this section sha ll be made in such form and shall be accompanied by a 
copy of the order appealed against and by such fees as may be prescribed.  
(4) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that before disposing of an appeal, th e appellant shall be given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard.  
(5) The Director General may suo motu  or on an application made in the manner prescribed review 
the order passed by any officer to whom the power has been delegated by him.  
(6) Any person aggrieved by an order made under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 5) may prefer an 
appeal to the Central Government having administrative control of the Bureau within such period as may 
be prescribed . 
35. Members, officers and employees of Bureau to be publ ic servants .—All members, officers 
and other employees of the Bureau shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any 17 of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of  section 21  of the Indian Penal   
Code (45 of 1860).  
36. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Government or any officer of the Government or any member, officer or other employee of 
the Bureau for anything which is in done or intended to be done in good faith under this Act or the rules 
or regulations made thereunder.  
37. Authentication of orders and other instruments of Bureau .—All orders and decisions of, and 
all o ther instruments issued by, the Bureau shall be authenticated by the signature of such officer or 
officers as may be authorised by the Bureau in this behalf.  
38. Power to make rules .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make  rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
39. Power to make regulations .—The Executive Committee may, with the previous approval of the 
Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and 
the rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
40. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in sessi on, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any suc h 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation.  
41. Act not to affect operation of certain Acts .—Nothing in this Act shall affect the operation of the 
Agricultural Produce (Grading and Marking) Act, 1937 (1 of 1937) , or the Drugs and Cosmetics           
Act, 1940 (23 of 1940), or any other law for the time being in force, which deals with any standardisation 
or quality control of any goods, article, process, system or servic e 
42. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be aft er it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
43. Repeal and savings .—(1) The Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 (63 of 1986) , is hereby 
repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or purported to have done or 
taken inc luding any rule, regulation, notification, scheme, specification, Indian Standard, Standard Mark, 
inspection order or notice made, issued or adopted, or any appointment, or declaration made or any 
licence, permission, authorisation or exemption granted or any document or instrument executed or 
direction given or any proceedings taken or any penalty or fine imposed under the Act hereby repealed 
shall, insofar as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or 
taken unde r the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
(3) The mention of particular matters in sub -section ( 2) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the 
general application of  section 6  of the General Cla uses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) , with regard to the effect of 
repeal.  18   
  
  
--------------------------The Commercial Courts Act, 2015--------------------------
1 THE COMMERCIAL COURTS ACT, 2015 
________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
________ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
SECTIONS
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II 
COMMERCIAL COURTS, COMMERCIAL APPELLATE COURTS, COMMERCIAL DIVISIONS AND COMMERCIAL
APPELLATE DIVISIONS 
3. Constitution of Commercial Courts.
3A. Designation of Commercial Appellate Courts.
4. Constitution of Commercial Division of High Court.
5. Constitution of Commercial Appellate Division.
6. Jurisdiction of Commercial Court.
7. Jurisdiction of Commercial Divisions of High Courts.
8. Bar against revision application or petition against an interlocutory order. 
9. [Omitted .].
10. Jurisdiction in respect of arbitration matters.
11. Bar of jurisdiction of Commercial Courts and Commercial Divisions.
CHAPTER III 
SPECIFIED  VALUE
12. Determination of Specified Value .
CHAPTER IIIA 
PRE-INSTITUTION MEDIATION AND SETTLEMENT
12A. Pre-Institution Mediation and Settlement. 
CHAPTER IV 
APPEALS
13. Appeals from decrees of Commercial Courts and Commercial Divisions.
14. Expeditious disposal of appeals .
CHAPTER V 
TRANSFER OF PENDING SUITS 
15. Transfer of pending cases.
CHAPTER VI 
AMENDMENTS TO THE PROVISIONS OF THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908
16. Amendments to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in its application to commercial disputes
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS
17. Collection and disclosure of data by Commercial Courts, Commercial Appellate Courts,  
Commercial Divisions and Commercial Appellate Divisions.
18. Power of High Court to issue directions.
19. Infrastructure facilities.2 SECTIONS
20. Training and continuous education.
21. Act to have overriding effect.
21A. Power of Central Government to make rules.
22. Power to remove difficulties.
23. Repeal and savings.
SCHEDULE.3 THE COMMERCIAL COURTS ACT, 2015 
ACT NO. 4 OF 2016 
[31st December , 2015.] 
An Act to provide for the constitution of Commercial Courts, 1[Commercial Appellate Courts,] 
Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division in the High Courts for 
adjudicating commercial disputes of specified value and matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —2[(1) This Act may be called the Commercial Courts 
Act, 2015.] 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 23rd day of October, 2015. 
2. Definitions. —(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–– 
3[(a) “Commercial Appellate Courts” means the Commercial Appellate Courts designated under 
section 3A;] 
4[(aa)] “Commercial Appellate Division” means the Commercial Appellate Division in a High 
Court constituted under sub-section ( 1) of section 5; 
(b) “Commercial Court” means the Commercial Court constituted under sub-section ( 1) of 
section 3; 
(c) “commercial dispute” means a dispute arising out of–– 
(i) ordinary transactions of merchants, bankers, financiers and traders such as those relating to 
mercantile documents, including enforcement and interpretation of such documents; 
(ii) export or import of merchandise or services; 
(iii) issues relating to admiralty and maritime law; 
(iv) transactions relating to aircraft, aircraft engines, aircraft equipment and helicopters, 
including sales, leasing and financing of the same; 
(v) carriage of goods; 
(vi) construction and infrastructure contracts, including tenders; 
(vii) agreements relating to immovable property used exclusively in trade or commerce; 
(viii) franchising agreements; 
(ix) distribution and licensing agreements; 
(x) management and consultancy agreements; 
(xi) joint venture agreements; 
(xii) shareholders agreements; 
1. Ins. by Act 28 of 2018, s. 2 (w.e.f. 3-5-2018).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for sub-section ( 1)  (w.e.f. 3-5-2018). 
3. Ins. by s. 4, ibid., (w.e.f. 3-5-2018). 
4. Clause ( a) renumbered as clause ( aa) by s. 4, ibid., (w.e.f. 3-5-2018). 4 (xiii) subscription and investment agreements pertaining to the services industry including 
outsourcing services and financial services; 
(xiv) mercantile agency and mercantile usage; 
(xv) partnership agreements; 
(xvi) technology development agreements; 
(xvii) intellectual property rights relating to registered and unregistered trademarks, 
copyright, patent, design, domain names, geographical indications and semiconductor integrated 
circuits; 
(xviii) agreements for sale of goods or provision of services; 
(xix) exploitation of oil and gas reserves or other natural resources including electromagnetic 
spectrum; 
(xx) insurance and re-insurance; 
(xxi) contracts of agency relating to any of the above; and 
(xxii) such other commercial disputes as may be notified by the Central Government. 
Explanation .––A commercial dispute shall not cease to be a commercial dispute merely 
because— 
(a) it also involves action for recovery of immovable property or for realisation of monies 
out of immovable property given as security or involves any other relief pertaining to 
immovable property; 
(b) one of the contracting parties is the State or any of its agencies or instrumentalities, or 
a private body carrying out public functions; 
(d) “Commercial Division” means the Commercial Division in a High Court constituted under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 4; 
(e) “District Judge” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (a) of article 236 of 
the Constitution of India; 
(f) “document” means any matter expressed or described upon any substance by means of letters, 
figures or marks, or electronic means, or by more than one of those means, intended to be used, or 
which may be used, for the purpose of recording that matter; 
(g) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression 
“notify” with its cognate meanings and grammatical variations shall be construed accordingly; 
(h) “Schedule” means the Schedule appended to the Act; and 
(i) “Specified Value”, in relation to a commercial dispute, shall mean the value of the           
subject-matter in respect of a suit as determined in accordance with section 12 1[which shall not be 
less than three lakh rupees] or such higher value, as may be notified by the Central Government. 
(2) The words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) and the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), shall have the same 
meanings respectively assigned to them in that Code and the Act. 
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2018, s. 4, for “which shall not be less than one crore rupees” (w.e.f. 3-5-2018).  5 CHAPTER II 
1[COMMERCIAL COURTS, COMMERCIAL APPELLATE COURTS, COMMERCIAL DIVISIONS AND COMMERCIAL 
APPELLATE DIVISIONS ]. 
3. Constitution of Commercial Courts. —(1) The State Government, may after consultation with the 
concerned High Court, by notification, constitute such number of Commercial Courts at District level, as 
it may deem necessary for the purpose of exercising the jurisdiction and powers conferred on those 
Courts under this Act: 
2[Provided that with respect to the High Courts having ordinary original civil jurisdiction, the State 
Government may, after consultation with the concerned High Court, by notification, constitute 
Commercial Courts at the District Judge level: 
 Provided further that with respect to a territory over which the High Courts have ordinary original 
civil jurisdiction, the State Government may, by notification, specify such pecuniary value which shall 
not be less than three lakh rupees and not more than the pecuniary jurisdiction exercisable by the District 
Courts, as it may consider necessary.] 
3[(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the State Government may, after consultation 
with the concerned High Court, by notification, specify such pecuniary value which shall not be less than 
three lakh rupees or such higher value, for whole or part of the State, as it may consider necessary.]; 
(2) The State Government shall, after consultation with the concerned High Court specify, by 
notification, the local limits of the area to which the jurisdiction of a Commercial Court shall extend and 
may, from time to time, increase, reduce or alter such limits. 
(3) The 4[State Government may], with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court appoint 
one or more persons having experience in dealing with commercial disputes to be the Judge or Judges, of 
a 5[Commercial Court either at the level of District Judge or a court below the level of a District Judge]. 
6[3A.Designation of Commercial Appellate Courts .—Except the territories over which the High 
Courts have ordinary original civil jurisdiction, the State Government may, after consultation with the 
concerned High Court, by notification, designate such number of Commercial Appellate Courts at District 
Judge level, as it may deem necessary, for the purposes of exercising the jurisdiction and powers 
conferred on those Courts under this Act.] 
4. Constitution of Commercial Division of High Court. —(1) In all High Courts, having 7[ordinary 
original civil jurisdiction], the Chief Justice of the High Court may, by order, constitute Commercial 
Division having one or more Benches consisting of a single Judge for the purpose of exercising the 
jurisdiction and powers conferred on it under this Act. 
(2) The Chief Justice of the High Court shall nominate such Judges of the High Court who have 
experience in dealing with commercial disputes to be Judges of the Commercial Division. 
5. Constitution of Commercial Appellate Division. —(1) After issuing notification under sub-
section ( 1) of section 3 or order under sub-section ( 1) of section 4, the Chief Justice of the concerned 
High Court shall, by order, constitute Commercial Appellate Division having one or more Division 
Benches for the purpose of exercising the jurisdiction and powers conferred on it by the Act. 
(2) The Chief Justice of the High Court shall nominate such Judges of the High Court who have 
experience in dealing with commercial disputes to be Judges of the Commercial Appellate Division. 
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2018, s. 5, for “ CONSTITUTION OF COMMERCIAL COURTS, COMMERCIAL DIVISIONS AND 
COMMERCIAL APPELLATE DIVISIONS ” (w.e.f. 3-5-2018).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for the proviso (w.e.f. 3-5-2018).   
3. Ins. by s. 6, ibid.,  (w.e.f. 3-5-2018).  
4. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for “State Government shall” (w.e.f. 3-5-2018). 
5. Subs. by s. 6,  ibid ., for “Commercial Court, from amongst the cadre of Higher Judicial Service in the State”              
(w.e.f. 3-5-2018). 
6. Ins. by s. 7,  ibid.,  (w.e.f. 3-5-2018). 
7. Subs. by s. 8, ibid.,  for “ordinary civil jurisdiction” (w.e.f. 3-5-2018). 6 6. Jurisdiction of Commercial Court. —The Commercial Court shall have jurisdiction to try all suits 
and applications relating to a commercial dispute of a Specified Value arising out of the entire territory of 
the State over which it has been vested territorial jurisdiction. 
Explanation .––For the purposes of this section, a commercial dispute shall be considered to arise out 
of the entire territory of the State over which a Commercial Court has been vested jurisdiction, if the suit 
or application relating to such commercial dispute has been instituted as per the provisions of sections 16 
to 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908). 
7. Jurisdiction of Commercial Divisions of High Courts. —All suits and applications relating to 
commercial disputes of a Specified Value filed in a High Court having ordinary original civil jurisdiction 
shall be heard and disposed of by the Commercial Division of that High Court: 
Provided that all suits and applications relating to commercial disputes, stipulated by an Act to lie in a 
court not inferior to a District Court, and filed or pending on the original side of the High Court, shall be 
heard and disposed of by the Commercial Division of the High Court: 
Provided further that all suits and applications transferred to the High Court by virtue of sub-section 
(4) of section 22 of the Designs Act, 2000 (16 of 2000) or section 104 of the Patents Act, 1970 (39 of 
1970) shall be heard and disposed of by the Commercial Division of the High Court in all the areas over 
which the High Court exercises ordinary original civil jurisdiction. 
8. Bar against revision application or petition against an interlocutory order. —Notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no civil revision application or petition 
shall be entertained against any interlocutory order of a Commercial Court, including an order on the 
issue of jurisdiction, and any such challenge, subject to the provisions of section 13, shall be raised only 
in an appeal against the decree of the Commercial Court. 
9. [Transfer of suit if counterclaim in a commercial dispute is of Specified Value ].—Omitted by the 
Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts 
(Amendment) Act, 2018  (28 of 2018 ), s. 9 (w.e.f. 3-5-2018) 
10. Jurisdiction in respect of arbitration matters. —Where the subject-matter of an arbitration is a 
commercial dispute of a Specified Value and–– 
(1) If such arbitration is an international commercial arbitration, all applications or appeals 
arising out of such arbitration under the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996           
(26 of 1996) that have been filed in a High Court, shall be heard and disposed of by the Commercial 
Division where such Commercial Division has been constituted in such High Court. 
(2) If such arbitration is other than an international commercial arbitration, all applications or 
appeals arising out of such arbitration under the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996 (26 of 1996) that have been filed on the original side of the High Court, shall be heard and 
disposed of by the Commercial Division where such Commercial Division has been constituted in 
such High Court. 
(3) If such arbitration is other than an international commercial arbitration, all applications or 
appeals arising out of such arbitration under the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996 (26 of 1996) that would ordinarily lie before any principal civil court of original jurisdiction in a 
district (not being a High Court) shall be filed in, and heard and disposed of by the Commercial Court 
exercising territorial jurisdiction over such arbitration where such Commercial Court has been 
constituted. 
11. Bar of jurisdiction of Commercial Courts and Commercial Divisions. —Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, a Commercial Court or a Commercial Division shall not entertain or 
decide any suit, application or proceedings relating to any commercial dispute in respect of which the 
jurisdiction of the civil court is either expressly or impliedly barred under any other law for the time being 
in force. 7 CHAPTER III 
SPECIFIED  VALUE
12. Determination of Specified Value. —(1) The Specified Value of the subject-matter of the 
commercial dispute in a suit, appeal or application shall be determined in the following manner:–– 
(a) where the relief sought in a suit or application is for recovery of money, the money sought to 
be recovered in the suit or application inclusive of interest, if any, computed up to the date of filing of 
the suit or application, as the case may be, shall be taken into account for determining such Specified 
Value; 
(b) where the relief sought in a suit, appeal or application relates to movable property or to a right 
therein, the market value of the movable property as on the date of filing of the suit, appeal or 
application, as the case may be, shall be taken into account for determining such Specified Value; 
(c) where the relief sought in a suit, appeal or application relates to immovable property or to a 
right therein, the market value of the immovable property, as on the date of filing of the suit, appeal 
or application, as the case may be, shall be taken into account for determining Specified Value; 1[and] 
(d) where the relief sought in a suit, appeal or application relates to any other intangible right, the 
market value of the said rights as estimated by the plaintiff shall be taken into account for 
determining Specified Value; 2* * * 
3* * * * * 
(2) The aggregate value of the claim and counterclaim, if any as set out in the statement of claim and 
the counterclaim, if any, in an arbitration of a commercial dispute shall be the basis for determining 
whether such arbitration is subject to the jurisdiction of a Commercial Division, Commercial Appellate 
Division or Commercial Court, as the case may be. 
(3) No appeal or civil revision application under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908           
(5 of 1908), as the case may be, shall lie from an order of a Commercial Division or Commercial Court 
finding that it has jurisdiction to hear a commercial dispute under this Act. 
4[CHAPTER IIIA  
PRE-INSTITUTION MEDIATION AND SETTLEMENT 
12A. Pre-Institution Mediation and Settlement —(1) A suit, which does not contemplate any urgent 
interim relief under this Act, shall not be instituted unless the plaintiff exhausts the remedy of pre-
institution mediation in accordance with such manner and procedure as may be prescribed by rules made 
by the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Government may, by notification, authorise the Authorities constituted under the 
Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 (39 of 1987), for the purposes of pre-institution mediation.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 (39 of 1987), the 
Authority authorised by the Central Government under sub-section ( 2) shall complete the process of 
mediation within a period of three months from the date of application made by the plaintiff under          
sub-section ( 1):  
Provided that the period of mediation may be extended for a further period of two months with the 
consent of the parties: 
Provided further that, the period during which the parties remained occupied with the pre-institution 
mediation, such period shall not be computed for the purpose of limitation under the Limitation Act, 1963 
(36 of 1963).  
1. Ins. by Act 28 of 2018, s. 10 (w.e.f. 3-5-2018).  
2. The word “and” omitted by s. 10, ibid., (w.e.f. 3-5-2018).  
3. Clause ( e) omitted by s. 10, ibid.,  (w.e.f. 3-5-2018). 
4. Ins. by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-5-2018). 8 (4) If the parties to the commercial dispute arrive at a settlement, the same shall be reduced into 
writing and shall be signed by the parties to the dispute and the mediator.  
(5) The settlement arrived at under this section shall have the same status and effect as if it is an 
arbitral award on agreed terms under sub-section ( 4) of section 30 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996 (26 of 1996).] 
CHAPTER IV 
APPEALS
13. Appeals from decrees of Commercial Courts and Commercial Divisions. —(1) 1[Any person 
aggrieved by the judgment or order of a Commercial Court below the level of a District Judge may appeal 
to the Commercial Appellate Court within a period of sixty days from the date of judgment or order.  
(1A) Any person aggrieved by the judgment or order of a Commercial Court at the level of District 
Judge exercising original civil jurisdiction or, as the case may be, Commercial Division of a High Court 
may appeal to the Commercial Appellate Division of that High Court within a period of sixty days from 
the date of the judgment or order: 
 Provided that an appeal shall lie from such orders passed by a Commercial Division or a Commercial 
Court that are specifically enumerated under Order XLIII of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908                    
(5 of 1908) as amended by this Act and section 37 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996               
(26 of 1996).] 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or Letters Patent 
of a High Court, no appeal shall lie from any order or decree of a Commercial Division or Commercial 
Court otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
14. Expeditious disposal of appeals. —The 2[Commercial Appellate Court and the Commercial 
Appellate Division] shall endeavour to dispose of appeals filed before it within a period of six months 
from the date of filing of such appeal. 
CHAPTER V 
TRANSFER OF PENDING SUITS 
15. Transfer of pending cases. —(1) All suits and applications, including applications under the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996), relating to a commercial dispute of a Specified 
Value pending in a High Court where a Commercial Division has been constituted, shall be transferred to 
the Commercial Division. 
(2) All suits and applications, including applications under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 
(26 of 1996), relating to a commercial dispute of a Specified Value pending in any civil court in any 
district or area in respect of which a Commercial Court has been constituted, shall be transferred to such 
Commercial Court: 
Provided that no suit or application where the final judgment has been reserved by the Court prior to 
the constitution of the Commercial Division or the Commercial Court shall be transferred either under 
sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2). 
(3) Where any suit or application, including an application under the Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act, 1996 (26 of 1996), relating to a commercial dispute of Specified Value shall stand transferred to the 
Commercial Division or Commercial Court under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2), the provisions of this 
Act shall apply to those procedures that were not complete at the time of transfer. 
(4) The Commercial Division or Commercial Court, as the case may be, may hold case management 
hearings in respect of such transferred suit or application in order to prescribe new timelines or issue such 
further directions as may be necessary for a speedy and efficacious disposal of such suit or application in 
accordance 3[with Order XV-A] of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908): 
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2018, s. 12, for sub-section ( 1) (w.e.f. 3-5-2018).  
2. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for “Commercial Appellate Division” (w.e.f. 3-5-2018). 
3. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “with Order XIV-A” (w.e.f. 3-5-2018)  9 Provided that the proviso to sub-rule ( 1) of Rule 1 of Order V of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  
(5 of 1908) shall not apply to such transferred suit or application and the court may, in its discretion, 
prescribe a new time period within which the written statement shall be filed. 
(5) In the event that such suit or application is not transferred in the manner specified in                    
sub-section ( 1), sub-section ( 2) or sub-section ( 3), the Commercial Appellate Division of the High Court 
may, on the application of any of the parties to the suit, withdraw such suit or application from the court 
before which it is pending and transfer the same for trial or disposal to the Commercial Division or 
Commercial Court, as the case may be, having territorial jurisdiction over such suit, and such order of 
transfer shall be final and binding. 
CHAPTER VI 
AMENDMENTS TO THE PROVISIONS OF THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE , 1908 
16. Amendments to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in its application to commercial 
disputes. —(1) The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) shall, in their application 
to any suit in respect of a commercial dispute of a Specified Value, stand amended in the manner as 
specified in the Schedule. 
(2) The Commercial Division and Commercial Court shall follow the provisions of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), as amended by this Act, in the trial of a suit in respect of a commercial 
dispute of a Specified Value. 
(3) Where any provision of any Rule of the jurisdictional High Court or any amendment to the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), by the State Government is in conflict with the provisions of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, as amended by this Act, the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure as 
amended by this Act shall prevail. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS
17. Collection and disclosure of data by 1[Commercial Courts, Commercial Appellate Courts], 
Commercial Divisions and Commercial Appellate Divisions. —The statistical data regarding the 
number of suits, applications, appeals or writ petitions filed before the 1[Commercial Courts, Commercial 
Appellate Courts], Commercial Division, or Commercial Appellate Division, as the case may be, the 
pendency of such cases, the status of each case, and the number of cases disposed of, shall be maintained 
and updated every month by each 1[Commercial Courts, Commercial Appellate Courts], Commercial 
Division, Commercial Appellate Division and shall be published on the website of the relevant High 
Court. 
18. Power of High Court to issue directions. —The High Court may, by notification, issue practice 
directions to supplement the provisions of Chapter II of this Act or the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908           
(5 of 1908) insofar as such provisions apply to the hearing of commercial disputes of a Specified Value. 
19. Infrastructure facilities. —The State Government shall provide necessary infrastructure to 
facilitate the working of a Commercial Court or a Commercial Division of a High Court. 
20. Training and continuous education. —The State Government may, in consultation with the 
High Court, establish necessary facilities providing for training of Judges who may be appointed to the 
2[Commercial Courts, Commercial Appellate Courts], Commercial Division or the Commercial Appellate 
Division in a High Court. 
21. Act to have overriding effect. —Save as otherwise provided, the provisions of this Act shall have 
effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in 
force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law for the time being in force other than this 
Act. 
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2018, s. 15, for “Commercial Courts” and “Commercial Court” (w.e.f. 3-5-2018). 
2. Subs. by s. 16, ibid.,  for “Commercial Court” (w.e.f. 3-5-2018). 10 1[21A. Power of Central Government to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for or any of the following matters, namely:—  
(a) the manner and procedure of pre-institution mediation under sub-section ( 1) of section 12A;  
(b) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of which 
provision is to be made by rules made by the Central Government. 
 (3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session, or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.] 
22. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of two years 
from the date of commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament. 
23. Repeal and savings. —(1) The Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial 
Appellate Division of High Courts Ordinance, 2015 (Ord. 8 of 2015) is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance, shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
1. Ins. by Act 28 of 2018, s. 17 (w.e.f. 3-5-2018).  11 SCHEDULE 
(See section 16) 
1. Amendment of section 26. —In section 26 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) 
(hereafter referred to as the Code), in sub-section ( 2), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“Provided that such an affidavit shall be in the form and manner as prescribed under Order VI of 
Rule 15A.”. 
2. Substitution of new section for section 35. —For section 35 of the Code, the following section 
shall be substituted, namely:–– 
‘35. Costs. —(1) In relation to any commercial dispute, the Court, notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force or Rule, has the discretion to determine: 
(a) whether costs are payable by one party to another; 
(b) the quantum of those costs; and 
(c) when they are to be paid. 
Explanation .—For the purpose of clause ( a), the expression “costs” shall mean reasonable costs 
relating to— 
(i) the fees and expenses of the witnesses incurred; 
(ii) legal fees and expenses incurred; 
(iii) any other expenses incurred in connection with the proceedings. 
(2) If the Court decides to make an order for payment of costs, the general rule is that the 
unsuccessful party shall be ordered to pay the costs of the successful party: 
Provided that the Court may make an order deviating from the general rule for reasons to be 
recorded in writing. 
Illustration 
The Plaintiff, in his suit, seeks a money decree for breach of contract, and damages. The Court 
holds that the Plaintiff is entitled to the money decree. However, it returns a finding that the claim for 
damages is frivolous and vexatious. 
In such circumstances the Court may impose costs on the Plaintiff, despite the Plaintiff being the 
successful party, for having raised frivolous claims for damages. 
(3) In making an order for the payment of costs, the Court shall have regard to the following 
circumstances, including— 
(a) the conduct of the parties; 
(b) whether a party has succeeded on part of its case, even if that party has not been wholly 
successful; 
(c) whether the party had made a frivolous counterclaim leading to delay in the disposal of 
the case; 
(d) whether any reasonable offer to settle is made by a party and unreasonably refused by the 
other party; and 
(e) whether the party had made a frivolous claim and instituted a vexatious proceeding 
wasting the time of the Court. 
(4) The orders which the Court may make under this provision include an order that a party must 
pay–– 
(a) a proportion of another party’s costs; 12 (b) a stated amount in respect of another party’s costs; 
(c) costs from or until a certain date; 
(d) costs incurred before proceedings have begun; 
(e) costs relating to particular steps taken in the proceedings; 
(f) costs relating to a distinct part of the proceedings; and 
(g) interest on costs from or until a certain date.’. 
3. Amendment of section 35A. —In section 35A of the Code, sub-section ( 2) shall be omitted. 
4. Amendment of First Schedule. —In the First Schedule to the Code,–– 
(A) in the Order V, in Rule 1, in sub-rule ( 1), for the second proviso, the following proviso shall 
be substituted, namely:–– 
“Provided further that where the defendant fails to file the written statement within the said 
period of thirty days, he shall be allowed to file the written statement on such other day, as may 
be specified by the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing and on payment of such costs as 
the Court deems fit, but which shall not be later than one hundred twenty days from the date of 
service of summons and on expiry of one hundred twenty days from the date of service of 
summons, the defendant shall forfeit the right to file the written statement and the Court shall not 
allow the written statement to be taken on record.”; 
(B) in Order VI,–– 
(i) after Rule 3, the following Rule shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“3A. Forms of pleading in Commercial Courts––In a commercial dispute, where forms of 
pleadings have been prescribed under the High Court Rules or Practice Directions made for 
the purposes of such commercial disputes, pleadings shall be in such forms.”; 
(ii) after Rule 15, the following Rule shall be inserted, namely:–– 
‘‘15A. Verification of pleadings in a commercial dispute.— 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Rule 15, every pleading in a commercial 
dispute shall be verified by an affidavit in the manner and form prescribed in the Appendix to 
this Schedule. 
(2) An affidavit under sub-rule ( 1) above shall be signed by the party or by one of the 
parties to the proceedings, or by any other person on behalf of such party or parties who is 
proved to the satisfaction of the Court to be acquainted with the facts of the case and who is 
duly authorised by such party or parties. 
(3) Where a pleading is amended, the amendments must be verified in the form and 
manner referred to in sub-rule ( 1) unless the Court orders otherwise. 
(4) Where a pleading is not verified in the manner provided under sub-rule ( 1), the party 
shall not be permitted to rely on such pleading as evidence or any of the matters set out 
therein. 
(5) The Court may strike out a pleading which is not verified by a Statement of Truth, 
namely, the affidavit set out in the Appendix to this Schedule.”; 
(C) in Order VII, after Rule 2, the following Rule shall be inserted, namely:— 
“2A. Where interest is sought in the suit,— 
(1) Where the plaintiff seeks interest, the plaint shall contain a statement to that effect 
along with the details set out under sub-rules ( 2) and ( 3). 13 (2) Where the plaintiff seeks interest, the plaint shall state whether the plaintiff is seeking 
interest in relation to a commercial transaction within the meaning of section 34 of the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) and, furthermore, if the plaintiff is doing so under the 
terms of a contract or under an Act, in which case the Act is to be specified in the plaint; or 
on some other basis and shall state the basis of that. 
(3) Pleadings shall also state— 
(a) the rate at which interest is claimed; 
(b) the date from which it is claimed; 
(c) the date to which it is calculated; 
(d) the total amount of interest claimed to the date of calculation; and 
(e) the daily rate at which interest accrues after that date.”; 
(D) in Order VIII,–– 
(i) in Rule 1, for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:–– 
“Provided that where the defendant fails to file the written statement within the said 
period of thirty days, he shall be allowed to file the written statement on such other day, as 
may be specified by the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing and on payment of such 
costs as the Court deems fit, but which shall not be later than one hundred twenty days from 
the date of service of summons and on expiry of one hundred twenty days from the date of 
service of summons, the defendant shall forfeit the right to file the written statement and the 
Court shall not allow the written statement to be taken on record.”; 
(ii) after Rule 3, the following Rule shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“3A. Denial by the defendant in suits before the Commercial Division of the High Court 
or the Commercial Court— 
(1) Denial shall be in the manner provided in sub-rules (2), (3), (4) and (5) of this 
Rule. 
(2) The defendant in his written statement shall state which of the allegations in the 
particulars of plaint he denies, which allegations he is unable to admit or deny, but which 
he requires the plaintiff to prove, and which allegations he admits. 
(3) Where the defendant denies an allegation of fact in a plaint, he must state his 
reasons for doing so and if he intends to put forward a different version of events from 
that given by the plaintiff, he must state his own version. 
(4) If the defendant disputes the jurisdiction of the Court he must state the reasons for 
doing so, and if he is able, give his own statement as to which Court ought to have 
jurisdiction. 
(5) If the defendant disputes the plaintiff’s valuation of the suit, he must state his 
reasons for doing so, and if he is able, give his own statement of the value of the suit.”; 
(iii) in Rule 5, in sub-rule ( 1), after the first proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely: —
 ‘‘Provided further that every allegation of fact in the plaint, if not denied in the manner 
provided under Rule 3A of this Order, shall be taken to be admitted except as against a 
person under disability.”; 
(iv) in Rule 10, 1*** the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:–– 
1. The words “after the first proviso” omitted by Act 28 of 2018, s. 18 (w.e.f. 3-5-2018). 14 “1[Provided that] no Court shall make an order to extend the time provided under Rule 1 
of this Order for filing of the written statement.”; 
(E) for Order XI of the Code, the following Order shall be substituted, namely:— 
“ORDER XI 
DISCLOSURE, DISCOVERY AND INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS IN SUITS BEFORE THE COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
OF A HIGH COURT OR A COMMERCIAL COURT 
1. Disclosure and discovery of documents.— (1) Plaintiff shall file a list of all documents and 
photocopies of all documents, in its power, possession, control or custody, pertaining to the suit, along 
with the plaint, including:— 
(a) documents referred to and relied on by the plaintiff in the plaint; 
(b) documents relating to any matter in question in the proceedings, in the power, possession, 
control or custody of the plaintiff, as on the date of filing the plaint, irrespective of whether the same 
is in support of or adverse to the plaintiff’s case; 
(c) nothing in this Rule shall apply to documents produced by plaintiffs and relevant only–– 
(i) for the cross-examination of the defendant’s witnesses, or 
(ii) in answer to any case set up by the defendant subsequent to the filing of the plaint, or 
(iii) handed over to a witness merely to refresh his memory. 
(2) The list of documents filed with the plaint shall specify whether the documents in the power, 
possession, control or custody of the plaintiff are originals, office copies or photocopies and the list shall 
also set out in brief, details of parties to each document, mode of execution, issuance or receipt and line of 
custody of each document. 
(3) The plaint shall contain a declaration on oath from the plaintiff that all documents in the power, 
possession, control or custody of the plaintiff, pertaining to the facts and circumstances of the proceedings 
initiated by him have been disclosed and copies thereof annexed with the plaint, and that the plaintiff does 
not have any other documents in its power, possession, control or custody. 
Explanation .––A declaration on oath under this sub-rule shall be contained in the Statement of Truth 
as set out in the Appendix. 
(4) In case of urgent filings, the plaintiff may seek leave to rely on additional documents, as part of 
the above declaration on oath and subject to grant of such leave by Court, the plaintiff shall file such 
additional documents in Court, within thirty days of filing the suit, along with a declaration on oath that 
the plaintiff has produced all documents in its power, possession, control or custody, pertaining to the 
facts and circumstances of the proceedings initiated by the plaintiff and that the plaintiff does not have 
any other documents, in its power, possession, control or custody. 
(5) The plaintiff shall not be allowed to rely on documents, which were in the plaintiff’s power, 
possession, control or custody and not disclosed along with plaint or within the extended period set out 
above, save and except by leave of Court and such leave shall be granted only upon the plaintiff 
establishing reasonable cause for non–disclosure along with the plaint. 
(6) The plaint shall set out details of documents, which the plaintiff believes to be in the power, 
possession, control or custody of the defendant and which the plaintiff wishes to rely upon and seek leave 
for production thereof by the said defendant. 
(7) The defendant shall file a list of all documents and photocopies of all documents, in its power, 
possession, control or custody, pertaining to the suit, along with the written statement or with its 
counterclaim if any, including— 
(a) the documents referred to and relied on by the defendant in the written statement; 
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2018, s. 18, for “Provided further that” (w.e.f. 3-5-2018). 15 (b) the documents relating to any matter in question in the proceeding in the power, possession, 
control or custody of the defendant, irrespective of whether the same is in support of or adverse to the 
defendant’s defence; 
(c) nothing in this Rule shall apply to documents produced by the defendants and relevant only–– 
(i) for the cross-examination of the plaintiff’s witnesses, 
(ii) in answer to any case set up by the plaintiff subsequent to the filing of the plaint, or 
(iii) handed over to a witness merely to refresh his memory. 
(8) The list of documents filed with the written statement or counterclaim shall specify whether the 
documents, in the power, possession, control or custody of the defendant, are originals, office copies or 
photocopies and the list shall also set out in brief, details of parties to each document being produced by 
the defendant, mode of execution, issuance or receipt and line of custody of each document. 
(9) The written statement or counterclaim shall contain a declaration on oath made by the deponent 
that all documents in the power, possession, control or custody of the defendant, save and except for those 
set out in sub-rule ( 7) (c) (iii) pertaining to the facts and circumstances of the proceedings initiated by the 
plaintiff or in the counterclaim, have been disclosed and copies thereof annexed with the written 
statement or counterclaim and that the defendant does not have in its power, possession, control or 
custody, any other documents. 
(10) Save and except for sub-rule ( 7) (c) (iii), defendant shall not be allowed to rely on documents, 
which were in the defendant’s power, possession, control or custody and not disclosed along with the 
written statement or counterclaim, save and except by leave of Court and such leave shall be granted only 
upon the defendant establishing reasonable cause for non-disclosure along with the written statement or 
counterclaim. 
(11) The written statement or counterclaim shall set out details of documents in the power, 
possession, control or custody of the plaintiff, which the defendant wishes to rely upon and which have 
not been disclosed with the plaint, and call upon the plaintiff to produce the same. 
(12) Duty to disclose documents, which have come to the notice of a party, shall continue till disposal 
of the suit. 
2. Discovery by interrogatories.— (1) In any suit the plaintiff or defendant by leave of the court may 
deliver interrogatories in writing for the examination of the opposite parties or any one or more of such 
parties, and such interrogatories when delivered shall have a note at the foot thereof stating which of such 
interrogatories each of such persons is required to answer: 
Provided that no party shall deliver more than one set of interrogatories to the same party without an 
order for that purpose: 
Provided further that interrogatories which do not relate to any matters in question in the suit shall be 
deemed irrelevant, notwithstanding that they might be admissible on the oral cross-examination of a 
witness. 
(2) On an application for leave to deliver interrogatories, the particular interrogatories proposed to be 
delivered shall be submitted to the court, and that court shall decide within seven days from the day of 
filing of the said application, in deciding upon such application, the court shall take into account any 
offer, which may be made by the party sought to be interrogated to deliver particulars, or to make 
admissions, or to produce documents relating to the matters in question, or any of them, and leave shall be 
given as to such only of the interrogatories submitted as the court shall consider necessary either for 
disposing fairly of the suit or for saving costs. 
(3) In adjusting the costs of the suit inquiry shall at the instance of any party be made into the 
propriety of exhibiting such interrogatories, and if it is the opinion of the taxing officer or of the court, 
either with or without an application for inquiry, that such interrogatories have been exhibited 
unreasonably, vexatiously, or at improper length, the costs occasioned by the said interrogatories and the 
answers thereto shall be paid in any event by the party in fault. 16 (4) Interrogatories shall be in the form provided in Form No. 2 in Appendix C to the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), with such variations as circumstances may require. 
(5) Where any party to a suit is a corporation or a body of persons, whether incorporated or not, 
empowered by law to sue or be sued, whether in its own name or in the name of any officer of other 
person, any opposite party may apply for an order allowing him to deliver interrogatories to any member 
or officer of such corporation or body, and an order may be made accordingly. 
(6) Any objection to answering any interrogatory on the ground that it is scandalous or irrelevant or 
not exhibited bona fide  for the purpose of the suit, or that the matters inquired into are not sufficiently 
material at that stage, or on the ground of privilege or any other ground may be taken in the affidavit in 
answer. 
(7) Any interrogatories may be set aside on the ground that they have been exhibited unreasonably or 
vexatiously, or struck out on the ground that they are prolix, oppressive, unnecessary or scandalous and 
any application for this purpose may be made within seven days after service of the interrogatories. 
(8) Interrogatories shall be answered by affidavit to be filed within ten days, or within such other time 
as the court may allow. 
(9) An affidavit in answer to interrogatories shall be in the form provided in Form No. 3 in Appendix 
C to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), with such variations as circumstances may require. 
(10) No exceptions shall be taken to any affidavit in answer, but the sufficiency or otherwise of any 
such affidavit objected to as insufficient shall be determined by the court. 
(11) Where any person interrogated omits to answer, or answers insufficiently, the party interrogating 
may apply to the court for an order requiring him to answer, or to answer further, as the case may be, and 
an order may be made requiring him to answer, or to answer further, either affidavit or by viva voce
examination, as the court may direct. 
3. Inspection.— (1) All parties shall complete inspection of all documents disclosed within thirty 
days of the date of filing of the written statement or written statement to the counterclaim, whichever is 
later. The Court may extend this time limit upon application at its discretion, but not beyond thirty days in 
any event. 
(2) Any party to the proceedings may seek directions from the Court, at any stage of the proceedings, 
for inspection or production of documents by the other party, of which inspection has been refused by 
such party or documents have not been produced despite issuance of a notice to produce. 
(3) Order in such application shall be disposed of within thirty days of filing such application, 
including filing replies and rejoinders (if permitted by Court) and hearing. 
(4) If the above application is allowed, inspection and copies thereof shall be furnished to the party 
seeking it, within five days of such order. 
(5) No party shall be permitted to rely on a document, which it had failed to disclose or of which 
inspection has not been given, save and except with leave of Court. 
(6) The Court may impose exemplary costs against a defaulting party, who wilfully or negligently 
failed to disclose all documents pertaining to a suit or essential for a decision therein and which are in 
their power, possession, control or custody or where a Court holds that inspection or copies of any 
documents had been wrongfully or unreasonably withheld or refused. 
4. Admission and denial of documents.— (1) Each party shall submit a statement of admissions or 
denials of all documents disclosed and of which inspection has been completed, within fifteen days of the 
completion of inspection or any later date as fixed by the Court. 
(2) The statement of admissions and denials shall set out explicitly, whether such party was admitting 
or denying:— 
(a) correctness of contents of a document; 
(b) existence of a document; 17 (c) execution of a document; 
(d) issuance or receipt of a document; 
(e) custody of a document. 
Explanation .––A statement of admission or denial of the existence of a document made in accordance 
with sub-rule ( 2) (b) shall include the admission or denial of the contents of a document. 
(3) Each party shall set out reasons for denying a document under any of the above grounds and bare 
and unsupported denials shall not be deemed to be denials of a document and proof of such documents 
may then be dispensed with at the discretion of the Court. 
(4) Any party may however submit bare denials for third party documents of which the party denying 
does not have any personal knowledge of, and to which the party denying is not a party to in any manner 
whatsoever. 
(5) An Affidavit in support of the statement of admissions and denials shall be filed confirming the 
correctness of the contents of the statement. 
(6) In the event that the Court holds that any party has unduly refused to admit a document under any 
of the above criteria,–costs (including exemplary costs) for deciding on admissibility of a document may 
be imposed by the Court on such party. 
(7) The Court may pass orders with respect to admitted documents including for waiver of further 
proof thereon or rejection of any documents. 
5. Production of documents.— (1) Any party to a proceeding may seek or the Court may order, at 
any time during the pendency of any suit, production by any party or person, of such documents in the 
possession or power of such party or person, relating to any matter in question in such suit. 
(2) Notice to produce such document shall be issued in the Form provided in Form No. 7 in Appendix 
C to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908). 
(3) Any party or person to whom such notice to produce is issued shall be given not less than seven 
days and not more than fifteen days to produce such document or to answer to their inability to produce 
such document. 
(4) The Court may draw an adverse inference against a party refusing to produce such document after 
issuance of a notice to produce and where sufficient reasons for such non–production are not given and 
order costs. 
6. Electronic records.— (1) In case of disclosures and inspection of Electronic Records (as defined in 
the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000)), furnishing of printouts shall be sufficient 
compliance of the above provisions. 
(2) At the discretion of the parties or where required (when parties wish to rely on audio or video 
content), copies of electronic records may be furnished in electronic form either in addition to or in lieu of 
printouts. 
(3) Where Electronic Records form part of documents disclosed, the declaration on oath to be filed by 
a party shall specify–– 
(a) the parties to such Electronic Record; 
(b) the manner in which such electronic record was produced and by whom; 
(c) the dates and time of preparation or storage or issuance or receipt of each such electronic 
record; 
(d) the source of such electronic record and date and time when the electronic record was printed; 
(e) in case of email ids, details of ownership, custody and access to such email ids; 
(f) in case of documents stored on a computer or computer resource (including on external servers 
or cloud), details of ownership, custody and access to such data on the computer or computer 
resource; 18 (g) deponent’s knowledge of contents and correctness of contents; 
(h) whether the computer or computer resource used for preparing or receiving or storing such 
document or data was functioning properly or in case of malfunction that such malfunction did not 
affect the contents of the document stored; 
(i) that the printout or copy furnished was taken from the original computer or computer resource. 
(4) The parties relying on printouts or copy in electronic form, of any electronic records, shall not be 
required to give inspection of electronic records, provided a declaration is made by such party that each 
such copy, which has been produced, has been made from the original electronic record. 
(5) The Court may give directions for admissibility of Electronic Records at any stage of the 
proceedings. 
(6) Any party may seek directions from the Court and the Court may of its motion issue directions for 
submission of further proof of any electronic record including metadata or logs before admission of such 
electronic record. 
7. Certain provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 not to apply.— For avoidance of doubt, 
it is hereby clarified that Order XIII Rule 1, Order VII Rule 14 and Order VIII Rule 1A of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) shall not apply to suits or applications before the Commercial Divisions 
of High Court or Commercial Courts.”. 
5. Insertion of new Order XIII-A.— After Order XIII of the Code, the following Order shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
‘ORDER XIII-A 
SUMMARY  JUDGMENT
1. Scope of and classes of suits to which this Order applies.— (1) This Order sets out the procedure 
by which Courts may decide a claim pertaining to any Commercial Dispute without recording oral 
evidence. 
(2) For the purposes of this Order, the word “claim” shall include— 
(a) part of a claim; 
(b) any particular question on which the claim (whether in whole or in part) depends; or 
(c) a counterclaim, as the case may be. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, an application for summary judgment under this Order 
shall not be made in a suit in respect of any Commercial Dispute that is originally filed as a summary suit 
under Order XXXVII. 
2. Stage for application for summary judgment.— An applicant may apply for summary judgment 
at any time after summons has been served on the defendant: 
Provided that, no application for summary judgment may be made by such applicant after the Court 
has framed the issues in respect of the suit. 
3. Grounds for summary judgment.— The Court may give a summary judgment against a plaintiff 
or defendant on a claim if it considers that–– 
(a) the plaintiff has no real prospect of succeeding on the claim or the defendant has no real 
prospect of successfully defending the claim, as the case may be; and 
(b) there is no other compelling reason why the claim should not be disposed of before recording 
of oral evidence. 
4. Procedure.— (1) An application for summary judgment to a Court shall, in addition to any other 
matters the applicant may deem relevant, include the matters set forth in sub-clauses ( a) to ( f) mentioned 
hereunder:— 19 (a) the application must contain a statement that it is an application for summary judgment made 
under this Order; 
(b) the application must precisely disclose all material facts and identify the point of law, if any; 
(c) in the event the applicant seeks to rely upon any documentary evidence, the applicant must,–– 
(i) include such documentary evidence in its application, and 
(ii) identify the relevant content of such documentary evidence on which the applicant relies; 
(d) the application must state the reason why there are no real prospects of succeeding on the 
claim or defending the claim, as the case may be; 
(e) the application must state what relief the applicant is seeking and briefly state the grounds for 
seeking such relief. 
(2) Where a hearing for summary judgment is fixed, the respondent must be given at least thirty days’ 
notice of:— 
(a) the date fixed for the hearing; and 
(b) the claim that is proposed to be decided by the Court at such hearing. 
(3) The respondent may, within thirty days of the receipt of notice of application of summary 
judgment or notice of hearing (whichever is earlier), file a reply addressing the matters set forth in clauses 
(a) to ( f) mentioned hereunder in addition to any other matters that the respondent may deem relevant:— 
(a) the reply must precisely–– 
(i) disclose all material facts; 
(ii) identify the point of law, if any; and 
(iii) state the reasons why the relief sought by the applicant should not be granted; 
(b) in the event the respondent seeks to rely upon any documentary evidence in its reply, the 
respondent must— 
(i) include such documentary evidence in its reply; and 
(ii) identify the relevant content of such documentary evidence on which the respondent 
relies; 
(c) the reply must state the reason why there are real prospects of succeeding on the claim or 
defending the claim, as the case may be; 
(d) the reply must concisely state the issues that should be framed for trial; 
(e) the reply must identify what further evidence shall be brought on record at trial that could not 
be brought on record at the stage of summary judgment; and 
(f) the reply must state why, in light of the evidence or material on record if any, the Court should 
not proceed to summary judgment. 
5. Evidence for hearing of summary judgment.— (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Order, if the 
respondent in an application for summary judgment wishes to rely on additional documentary evidence 
during the hearing, the respondent must:— 
(a) file such documentary evidence; and 
(b) serve copies of such documentary evidence on every other party to the application at least 
fifteen days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Order, if the applicant for summary judgment wishes to rely on 
documentary evidence in reply to the defendant’s documentary evidence, the applicant must:— 
(a) file such documentary evidence in reply; and 20 (b) serve a copy of such documentary evidence on the respondent at least five days prior to the 
date of the hearing. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, sub-rules ( 1) and ( 2) shall not require documentary 
evidence to be:— 
(a) filed if such documentary evidence has already been filed; or 
(b) served on a party on whom it has already been served. 
6. Orders that may be made by Court.— (1) On an application made under this Order, the Court 
may make such orders that it may deem fit in its discretion including the following:— 
(a) judgment on the claim; 
(b) conditional order in accordance with Rule 7 mentioned hereunder; 
(c) dismissing the application; 
(d) dismissing part of the claim and a judgment on part of the claim that is not dismissed; 
(e) striking out the pleadings (whether in whole or in part); or 
(f) further directions to proceed for case management under Order XV-A. 
(2) Where the Court makes any of the orders as set forth in sub-rule ( 1) (a) to ( f), the Court shall 
record its reasons for making such order. 
7. Conditional order.— (1) Where it appears to the Court that it is possible that a claim or defence 
may succeed but it is improbable that it shall do so, the Court may make a conditional order as set forth in 
Rule 6 ( 1) (b). 
(2) Where the Court makes a conditional order, it may:— 
(a) make it subject to all or any of the following conditions:— 
(i) require a party to deposit a sum of money in the Court; 
(ii) require a party to take a specified step in relation to the claim or defence, as the case may 
be; 
(iii) require a party, as the case may be, to give such security or provide such surety for 
restitution of costs as the Court deems fit and proper; 
(iv) impose such other conditions, including providing security for restitution of losses that 
any party is likely to suffer during the pendency of the suit, as the Court may deem fit in its 
discretion; and 
(b) specify the consequences of the failure to comply with the conditional order, including 
passing a judgment against the party that have not complied with the conditional order. 
8. Power to impose costs.— The Court may make an order for payment of costs in an application for 
summary judgment in accordance with the provisions of sections 35 and 35A of the Code.’. 
6. Omission of Order XV.— Order XV of the Code shall be omitted. 
7. Insertion of Order XV-A.— 7. After Order XV of the Code, the following Order shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
“ORDER XVA 
CASE MANAGEMENT HEARING 
1. First Case Management Hearing.— The Court shall hold the first Case Management Hearing, not 
later than four weeks from the date of filing of affidavit of admission or denial of documents by all parties 
to the suit. 21 2. Orders to be passed in a Case Management Hearing.— In a Case Management Hearing, after 
hearing the parties, and once it finds that there are issues of fact and law which require to be tried, the 
Court may pass an order–– 
(a) framing the issues between the parties in accordance with Order XIV of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) after examining pleadings, documents and documents produced before it, 
and on examination conducted by the Court under Rule 2 of Order X, if required; 
(b) listing witnesses to be examined by the parties; 
(c) fixing the date by which affidavit of evidence to be filed by parties; 
(d) fixing the date on which evidence of the witnesses of the parties to be recorded; 
(e) fixing the date by which written arguments are to be filed before the Court by the parties; 
(f) fixing the date on which oral arguments are to be heard by the Court; and 
(g) setting time limits for parties and their advocates to address oral arguments. 
3. Time limit for the completion of a trial.— In fixing dates or setting time limits for the purposes of 
Rule 2 of this Order, the Court shall ensure that the arguments are closed not later than six months from 
the date of the first Case Management Hearing. 
4. Recording of oral evidence on a day-to-day basis.— The Court shall, as far as possible, ensure 
that the recording of evidence shall be carried on, on a day-to-day basis until the cross-examination of all 
the witnesses is complete. 
5. Case Management Hearings during a trial.— The Court may, if necessary, also hold Case 
Management Hearings anytime during the trial to issue appropriate orders so as to ensure adherence by 
the parties to the dates fixed under Rule 2 and facilitate speedy disposal of the suit. 
6. Powers of the Court in a Case Management Hearing.— (1) In any Case Management Hearing 
held under this Order, the Court shall have the power to— 
(a) prior to the framing of issues, hear and decide any pending application filed by the parties 
under Order XIII-A; 
(b) direct parties to file compilations of documents or pleadings relevant and necessary for 
framing issues; 
(c) extend or shorten the time for compliance with any practice, direction or Court order if it finds 
sufficient reason to do so; 
(d) adjourn or bring forward a hearing if it finds sufficient reason to do so; 
(e) direct a party to attend the Court for the purposes of examination under Rule 2 of Order X; 
(f) consolidate proceedings; 
(g) strike off the name of any witness or evidence that it deems irrelevant to the issues framed; 
(h) direct a separate trial of any issue; 
(i) decide the order in which issues are to be tried; 
(j) exclude an issue from consideration; 
(k) dismiss or give judgment on a claim after a decision on a preliminary issue; 
(l) direct that evidence be recorded by a Commission where necessary in accordance with Order 
XXVI; 
(m) reject any affidavit of evidence filed by the parties for containing irrelevant, inadmissible or 
argumentative material; 
(n) strike off any parts of the affidavit of evidence filed by the parties containing irrelevant, 
inadmissible or argumentative material; 22 (o) delegate the recording of evidence to such authority appointed by the Court for this purpose; 
(p) pass any order relating to the monitoring of recording the evidence by a commission or any 
other authority; 
(q) order any party to file and exchange a costs budget; 
(r) issue directions or pass any order for the purpose of managing the case and furthering the 
overriding objective of ensuring the efficient disposal of the suit. 
(2) When the Court passes an order in exercise of its powers under this Order, it may— 
(a) make it subject to conditions, including a condition to pay a sum of money into Court; and 
(b) specify the consequence of failure to comply with the order or a condition. 
(3) While fixing the date for a Case Management Hearing, the Court may direct that the parties also 
be present for such Case Management Hearing, if it is of the view that there is a possibility of settlement 
between the parties. 
7. Adjournment of Case Management Hearing.— (1) The Court shall not adjourn the Case 
Management Hearing for the sole reason that the advocate appearing on behalf of a party is not present: 
Provided that an adjournment of the hearing is sought in advance by moving an application, the Court 
may adjourn the hearing to another date upon the payment of such costs as the Court deems fit, by the 
party moving such application. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Rule, if the Court is satisfied that there is a justified 
reason for the absence of the advocate, it may adjourn the hearing to another date upon such terms and 
conditions it deems fit. 
8. Consequences of non-compliance with orders.— Where any party fails to comply with the order 
of the Court passed in a Case Management Hearing, the Court shall have the power to— 
(a) condone such non-compliance by payment of costs to the Court; 
(b) foreclose the non-compliant party’s right to file affidavits, conduct cross-examination of 
witnesses, file written submissions, address oral arguments or make further arguments in the trial, as 
the case may be, or 
(c) dismiss the plaint or allow the suit where such non-compliance is wilful, repeated and the 
imposition of costs is not adequate to ensure compliance.”. 
8. Amendment of Order XVIII.— In Order XVIII of the Code, in Rule 2, for sub-rules ( 3A), (3B), 
(3C), (3D), (3E) and ( 3F), the following shall be substituted, namely:–– 
“(3A) A party shall, within four weeks prior to commencing the oral arguments, submit concisely 
and under distinct headings written arguments in support of his case to the Court and such written 
arguments shall form part of the record. 
(3B) The written arguments shall clearly indicate the provisions of the laws being cited in support 
of the arguments and the citations of judgments being relied upon by the party and include copies of 
such judgments being relied upon by the party. 
(3C) A copy of such written arguments shall be furnished simultaneously to the opposite party. 
(3D) The Court may, if it deems fit, after the conclusion of arguments, permit the parties to file 
revised written arguments within a period of not more than one week after the date of conclusion of 
arguments. 
(3E) No adjournment shall be granted for the purpose of filing the written arguments unless the 
Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, considers it necessary to grant such adjournment. 
(3F) It shall be open for the Court to limit the time for oral submissions having regard to the 
nature and complexity of the matter.”. 23 9. Amendment of Order XVIII.— In Order XVIII of the Code, in Rule 4, after sub-rule ( 1), the 
following sub-rules shall be inserted, namely:–– 
‘‘(1A) The affidavits of evidence of all witnesses whose evidence is proposed to be led by a party 
shall be filed simultaneously by that party at the time directed in the first Case Management Hearing. 
(1B) A party shall not lead additional evidence by the affidavit of any witness (including of a 
witness who has already filed an affidavit) unless sufficient cause is made out in an application for 
that purpose and an order, giving reasons, permitting such additional affidavit is passed by the Court. 
(1C) A party shall however have the right to withdraw any of the affidavits so filed at any time 
prior to commencement of cross-examination of that witness, without any adverse inference being 
drawn based on such withdrawal: 
Provided that any other party shall be entitled to tender as evidence and rely upon any admission 
made in such withdrawn affidavit.”. 
10. Amendment to Order XIX.— In Order XIX of the Code, after Rule 3, the following Rules shall 
be inserted, namely:–– 
“4. Court may control evidence.— (1) The Court may, by directions, regulate the evidence as to 
issues on which it requires evidence and the manner in which such evidence may be placed before the 
Court. 
(2) The Court may, in its discretion and for reasons to be recorded in writing, exclude evidence 
that would otherwise be produced by the parties. 
5. Redacting or rejecting evidence.— A Court may, in its discretion, for reasons to be recorded 
in writing–– 
(i) redact or order the redaction of such portions of the affidavit of examination-in-chief as do 
not, in its view, constitute evidence; or 
(ii) return or reject an affidavit of examination-in-chief as not constituting admissible 
evidence. 
6. Format and guidelines of affidavit of evidence.— An affidavit must comply with the form 
and requirements set forth below:— 
(a) such affidavit should be confined to, and should follow the chronological sequence of, the 
dates and events that are relevant for proving any fact or any other matter dealt with; 
(b) where the Court is of the view that an affidavit is a mere reproduction of the pleadings, or 
contains the legal grounds of any party’s case, the Court may, by order, strike out the affidavit or 
such parts of the affidavit, as it deems fit and proper; 
(c) each paragraph of an affidavit should, as far as possible, be confined to a distinct portion 
of the subject; 
(d) an affidavit shall state— 
(i) which of the statements in it are made from the deponent’s own knowledge and which 
are matters of information or belief; and 
(ii) the source for any matters of information or belief; 
(e) an affidavit should— 
(i) have the pages numbered consecutively as a separate document (or as one of several 
documents contained in a file); 
(ii) be divided into numbered paragraphs; 
(iii) have all numbers, including dates, expressed in figures; and 24 (iv) if any of the documents referred to in the body of the affidavit are annexed to the 
affidavit or any other pleadings, give the annexures and page numbers of such documents that 
are relied upon.”. 
11. Amendment of Order XX.— In Order XX of the Code, for Rule 1, the following Rule shall be 
substituted, namely:–– 
“(1) The 1[Commercial Court, Commercial Appellate Court], Commercial Division, or 
Commercial Appellate Division, as the case may be, shall, within ninety days of the conclusion of 
arguments, pronounce judgment and copies thereof shall be issued to all the parties to the dispute 
through electronic mail or otherwise.”. 
2[12. After Appendix H, the following Appendix shall be inserted, namely:—  
‘‘APPENDIX-I 
STATEMENT OF TRUTH 
(Under First Schedule, Order VI- Rule 15A and Order XI- Rule 3) 
I ----- the deponent do hereby solemnly affirm and declare as under:  
1. I am the party in the above suit and competent to swear this affidavit.  
2. I am sufficiently conversant with the facts of the case and have also examined all relevant 
documents and records in relation thereto.  
3. I say that the statements made in -----paragraphs are true to my knowledge and statements 
made in -----paragraphs are based on information received which I believe to be correct and 
statements made in ---paragraphs are based on legal advice. 
 4. I say that there is no false statement or concealment of any material fact, document or record 
and I have included information that is according to me, relevant for the present suit.  
5. I say that all documents in my power, possession, control or custody, pertaining to the facts and 
circumstances of the proceedings initiated by me have been disclosed and copies thereof annexed 
with the plaint, and that I do not have any other documents in my power, possession, control or 
custody.  
6. I say that the above-mentioned pleading comprises of a total of ---- pages, each of which has 
been duly signed by me. 
 7. I state that the Annexures hereto are true copies of the documents referred to and relied upon 
by me.  
8. I say that I am aware that for any false statement or concealment, I shall be liable for action 
taken against me under the law for the time being in force.  
Place: 
 Date:  
DEPONENT  
VERIFICATION 
I, ………………………. do hereby declare that the statements made above are true to my 
knowledge.  
Verified at [place] on this [date]  
DEPONENT.”.] 
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2018, s. 18, for “Commercial Court” (w.e.f. 3-5-2018).  
2. Ins. by s. 18, ibid.,  (w.e.f. 23-10-2015).  
--------------------------The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act, 2016--------------------------
1 THE COMPENSATORY AFFORESTATION FUND ACT, 2016 
______ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
______ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
SECTIONS 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISHMENT , MANAGEMENT AND UTILISATION OF  NATIONAL  COMPENSATORY  AFFORESTATION
FUND AND STATE  COMPENSATORY  AFFORESTATION  FUNDS
3. Establishment of National Fund. 
4. Establishment of State Fund. 
5. Disbursement and utilisation of National Fund.
6. Disbursement and utilisation of State Fund.
7. Accounting procedure.
CHAPTER III 
CONSTITUTION OF NATIONAL  AUTHORITY AND STATE  AUTHORITIES
8. Constitution of National Authority. 
 9. Executive committee and monitoring group of National Authority. 
10. Constitution of State Authority.
11. Steering committee and executive committee of State Authority.
12. Term of office and conditions of service of members.
13. Disqualifications. 
CHAPTER IV 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF NATIONAL  AUTHORITY AND STATE  AUTHORITIES
14. Powers and functions of National Authority.
15. Powers and functions of executive committee of National Authority. 
16. Functions of monitoring group. 
17. Powers and functions of State Authority. 
 18. Powers and functions of steering committee of State Authority. 
19. Functions and powers of executive committee of State Authority.2 CHAPTER V 
FINANCE , ACCOUNTS , AUDIT AND ANNUAL  REPORT
SECTIONS 
20. Budget of National Authority.
21. Investment of funds by National Authority. 
22. Accounts and audit of National Authority. 
23. Annual report of National Authority.
24. Annual report and audit report of National Authority to be laid before Parliament. 
25. Budget of State Authority.
26.  Investment of funds by State Authority.
27. Accounts and audit of State Authority. 
28. Annual report of State Authority. 
29. Annual report and audit report of State Authority to be laid before State Legislature. 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS
30. Power to make rules. 
31. Transfer of assets, liabilities, etc.
32. Validation. 
33. Power of Central Government to issue directions. 3 THE COMPENSATORY AFFORESTATION FUND ACT, 2016 
ACT NO. 38 OF 2016 
[3rd August , 2016.] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of funds under the public accounts of India and the 
public accounts of each State and crediting thereto the monies received from the user 
agencies towards compensatory afforestation, additional compensatory afforestation, penal 
compensatory afforestation, net present value and all other amounts recovered from such 
agencies under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980; constitution of an authority at national 
level and at each of the State and Union territory Administration for administration of the 
funds and to utilise the monies so collected for undertaking artificial regeneration 
(plantations), assisted natural regeneration, protection of forests, forest related infrastructure 
development, Green India Programme, wildlife protection and other related activities and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
WHEREAS  the Supreme Court in its order in T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad vs. Union of India and 
Others [Writ Petition (Civil) No. 202 of 1995], dated the 30th October, 2002, observed that a 
Compensatory Afforestation Fund be created in which all the monies received from the user agencies 
towards compensatory afforestation, additional compensatory afforestation, penal compensatory 
afforestation, net present value of the diverted forest land or catchment area treatment plan shall be 
deposited; 
AND WHEREAS  it had also been observed that the money received from the user agencies in cases 
where forest land diverted falls within protected areas, that is, the areas notified under the Wild Life 
(Protection) Act, 1972 (35 of 1972) for undertaking activities related to protection of biodiversity or 
wildlife shall also be deposited in the Fund; 
ANDWHEREAS  the Supreme Court has directed that, besides artificial regeneration (Plantations), the 
Fund shall also be utilised for undertaking assisted natural regeneration, protection of forests, 
infrastructure development, wildlife protection and other related activities and an independent system of 
concurrent monitoring and evaluation should be evolved and implemented through the Compensatory 
Afforestation Fund to ensure effective and proper utilisation of funds; 
AND WHEREAS  the Supreme Court in its judgment dated 26th September, 2005 in the said Writ 
Petition observed that the Fund generated for protecting ecology and providing regeneration should not be 
treated as a Fund under article 266 and article 283 of the Constitution; 
ANDWHEREAS  in its direction dated the 5th May, 2006, the Supreme Court had directed that since the 
Government has not constituted a Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority 
(hereinafter referred to as Authority), an ad hoc  Authority should be constituted till the Compensatory 
Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority becomes operational and directed to centrally 
pool the money recovered on behalf of the said Authority lying in the States and Union territories into the 
ad hoc  Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority; 
ANDWHEREAS  Central Government formulated guidelines dated the 2nd July, 2009 on the subject of 
State Authority for utilisation of funds lying with the ad hoc  Authority; 
AND WHEREAS  in its direction dated the 10th July, 2009, the Supreme Court had directed that the 
guidelines and structure of the State Authority prepared by the Central Government may be notified and 
implemented; 
ANDWHEREAS  in its directions dated the 10th July, 2009, the Supreme Court further directed that till 
an alternative system is put in place, after obtaining permission from the Supreme Court, the money 
towards compensatory afforestation, net present value and protected areas (national parks, wildlife 
sanctuaries) shall continue to be deposited in the ad hoc  Authority; 4 ANDWHEREAS  in compliance of the directions of the Supreme Court including its order dated the 5th 
May, 2006, over rupees thirty eight thousand crores as collected by the State Governments and Union 
territory Administrations have been placed under the ad hoc  Authority, and deposited in the nationalised 
banks; 
ANDWHEREAS  absence of permanent institutional mechanism for utilisation of funds collected by the 
State Governments and Union territory Administrations is the main reason for accumulation of huge 
unspent funds in the ad hoc  Authority; 
NOW, THEREFORE , based on the above orders, directions and observations of the Supreme Court to 
ensure safety, security and expeditious utilisation in a transparent manner of funds accumulated with the 
ad hoc  Authority and the funds to be collected by the State Governments and Union territory 
Administrations, it is proposed to create a National Compensatory Afforestation Fund and a National 
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority at the national level, and a State 
Compensatory Afforestation Fund and a State Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and 
Planning Authority in each State and Union territory, by an Act of Parliament. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement. — (1) This Act may be called the Compensatory 
Afforestation Fund Act, 2016. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall come into force on such date1 as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “ad hoc Authority ” means the ad hoc  Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and 
Planning Authority constituted under the order dated the 5th May, 2006 of the Supreme Court in T.N. 
Godavarman Thirumulpad vs. Union of India and Others, [Writ Petition (Civil) No. 202 of 1995]; 
(b) “Chairperson, National Authority” means the Chairperson of the governing body of the 
National Authority; 
(c) “Chairperson, State Authority” means the Chairperson of the governing body of the State 
Authority; 
(d) “compensatory afforestation” means afforestation done in lieu of the diversion of forest land 
for non-forestry use under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 (69 of 1980); 
(e) “environmental services” includes— 
(i) provision of goods such as wood, non-timber forest products, fuel, fodder, water and 
provision of services such as grazing, tourism, wildlife protection and life support; 
(ii) regulating services such as flood moderation, carbon sequestration and health of soil, air 
and water regimes; 
(iii) supporting such other services necessary for the production of ecosystem services, 
biodiversity, nutrient cycling and primary production including pollination and seed dispersal; 
(f) “Head of the regional office” means the senior-most officer appointed by the Central 
Government at regional office to deal with the forest conservation matters under the Forest 
(Conservation) Act, 1980 (69 of 1980); 
1. 30th September, 2018, vide notification NO. S.O. 3967(E), dated 13th August, 2018, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,           
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 5 (g) “monitoring group” means a group of experts to monitor the activities undertaken from 
amounts released from the National Fund and State Fund constituted under sub-section ( 3) of section 
9; 
(h) “National Authority” means National Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and 
Planning Authority constituted under section 8; 
(i) “National Fund” means the National Compensatory Afforestation Fund established under sub-
section ( 1) of section 3; 
(j) “net present value” means the quantification of the environmental services provided for the 
forest area diverted for non-forestry uses, as may be determined by an expert committee appointed by 
the Central Government from time to time in this regard; 
(k) “penal compensatory afforestation” means afforestation work to be undertaken over and above 
the compensatory afforestation specified in the guidelines issued under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 
1980, in lieu of the extent of area over which non-forestry activities have been carried out without 
obtaining prior approval of the competent authority under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 (69 of 
1980); 
(l) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government in consultation with 
the State Governments under this Act; 
(m) “State Authority” means the State Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and 
Planning Authority constituted under section 10; 
(n) “State Fund” means the State Compensatory Afforestation Fund established by each State 
under sub-section ( 1) of section 4; 
(o) “State Government” includes Union territory Administration; 
(p) “user agency” means any person, organisation or company or department of the Central 
Government or State Government making a request for diversion or de-notification of forest land for 
non-forest purpose or using forest land for non-forest purpose in accordance with the provisions 
contained in the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 (69 of 1980) and the rules made and guidelines 
issued, thereunder. 
CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISHMENT , MANAGEMENT AND UTILISATION OF  NATIONAL  COMPENSATORY  AFFORESTATION
FUND AND STATE  COMPENSATORY  AFFORESTATION  FUNDS
3. Establishment of National Fund. — (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established for the 
purposes of this Act, a special Fund to be called the “National Compensatory Afforestation Fund” under 
the public account of India. 
(2) The National Fund shall be under the control of the Central Government and managed by the 
National Authority in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) On the date of establishment of the National Fund, all monies collected by the State Governments 
and Union territory Administrations which has been placed under the ad hoc  Authority and deposited in 
the nationalised banks shall be transferred to the National Fund. 
(4) There shall also be credited into the National Fund, by each State on yearly basis, ten per cent. of 
the funds realised from the user agencies in respect of the forest land diverted in their favour, which have 
been credited directly into the State Fund. 
(5) There shall also be credited to the National Fund— 
(a) grants-in-aid received, if any, by the National Authority; 
(b) any loan taken or any borrowings made by the National Authority; 
(c) any other sums received by the National Authority by way of benefaction, gift or donations. 6 (6) The monies received in the National Fund shall be an interest bearing fund under public accounts 
of India. 
(7) The balance in the National Fund shall be non-lapsable and get interest as per the rate declared by 
the Central Government on year to year basis. 
4. Establishment of State Fund. —(1) With effect from such date as each State Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established for the purposes of 
this Act, a special Fund to be called the “State Compensatory Afforestation                Fund-......... (name 
of State)” under public accounts of such State: 
Provided that in case of Union territory having no legislature, such fund shall be established under the 
public account of Union of India with effect from such date as the Union territory Administration may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf. 
(2) The State Fund in each State shall be under the control of the State Government of such State and 
managed by the State Authority of such State, in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) There shall be credited into the State Fund of a State— 
(i) the unspent balance of all monies which has been transferred by ad hoc  Authority to the State 
Compensatory Afforestation Compensatory Afforestation Funds Management and Planning Authority 
constituted in such State in compliance of guidelines dated the 2nd July, 2009; 
(ii) all monies transferable from the National Fund under clause ( a) of section 5; 
(iii) all monies realised from user agencies by such State towards compensatory afforestation, 
additional compensatory afforestation, penal compensatory afforestation, net present value, catchment 
area treatment plan or any money for compliance of conditions stipulated by the Central Government 
while according approval under the provisions of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 (69 of 1980); 
and 
(iv) the funds recoverable from user agencies by such State in cases where forest land diverted 
falls within the protected areas, that is, areas notified under sections 18, 26A or 35 of the Wild Life 
(Protection) Act, 1972 (53 of 1972) for undertaking activities relating to the protection of biodiversity 
and wildlife. 
(4) A State Government may also credit to the State Fund constituted by it— 
(i) grants-in-aid received, if any, by the State Authority; 
(ii) any loan taken or any borrowings made by the State Authority; 
(iii) any other sums received by the State Authority by way of benefaction, gift or donations. 
(5) The monies received in the State Fund shall be an interest bearing fund under public accounts. 
(6) The balance in each State Fund shall be non-lapsable and get interest as per the rate declared by 
the Central Government on year to year basis. 
5. Disbursement and utilisation of National Fund. —Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the 
monies available in the National Fund shall be disbursed and utilised in the following manner, namely:— 
(a) ninety per cent. of the all monies collected by a State, which has been placed under the    ad 
hoc Authority and the interest accrued thereon, shall be transferred to the State Fund established in 
such state under sub-section ( 1) of section 4; 
(b) the balance ten per cent. of all monies collected by the States and Union territory 
Administrations, which has been placed under the ad hoc  Authority and the interest accrued thereon, 
and all fresh accrual to the National Fund, as provided in sub-section ( 4) of section 3, and the interest 
accrued thereon, shall be utilised for meeting— 
(i) the non-recurring and recurring expenditure for the management of the National Authority 
including the salary and allowances payable to its officers and other employees; 7 (ii) the expenditure incurred on monitoring and evaluation of works executed by the National 
Authority and each State Authority; 
(iii) the expenditure incurred on specific schemes approved by governing body of the 
National Authority. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “scheme” includes any institute, society, centre of 
excellence in the field of forest and wildlife, pilot schemes, standardisation of codes and guidelines and 
such other related activities for the forestry and wildlife sector. 
6. Disbursement and utilisation of State Fund. —Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the monies 
available in a State Fund shall be disbursed and utilised in the following manner, namely:— 
(a) the money received for compensatory afforestation, additional compensatory afforestation, 
penal compensatory afforestation, catchment area treatment plan and for any other site specific 
scheme may be used as per site-specific schemes submitted by the State along with the approved 
proposals for diversion of forest land under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 (69 of 1980); 
(b) the monies received towards net present value and penal net present value shall be used for 
artificial regeneration (plantation), assisted natural regeneration, forest management, forest protection, 
forest and wildlife related infrastructure development, wildlife protection and management, supply of 
wood and other forest produce saving devices and other allied activities in the manner as may be 
prescribed; 
(c) the interest accrued on funds available in a State Fund and the interest accrued on all monies 
collected by the State Governments, which has been placed under the ad hoc  Authority and deposited 
in the nationalised banks, in compliance of the directions of the Supreme Court dated the 5th May, 
2006, shall be used for conservation and development of forest and wildlife in the manner as may be 
prescribed; 
(d) all monies realised from the user agencies in accordance with the decision taken by the 
Standing Committee of the National Board for Wild Life constituted under section 5A of the Wild 
Life (Protection) Act, 1972 (35 of 1972)  or the orders of the Supreme Court involving cases of 
diversion of forest land in protected areas shall form the corpus and the income therefrom shall be 
used exclusively for undertaking protection and conservation activities in protected areas of the State 
including facilitating voluntary relocation from such protected areas and in exceptional circumstance, 
a part of the corpus may also be used subject to prior approval of the National Authority; 
(e) ten per cent. of amount realised from the user agencies, which has been credited directly into 
the State Fund in a year shall be transferred to the National Fund to meet expenditure as provided in 
clause ( b) of section 5; 
(f) the non-recurring and recurring expenditure for the management of a State Authority including 
the salary and allowances payable to its officers and other employees may be met from a part of the 
interest accrued on the amounts available in the State Fund, in the manner as may be prescribed; 
(g) in case of trans-boundary forestry or environmental implication of diversion of forest land for 
non-forest purposes in a particular State, if found expedient and necessary by the National Authority, 
it may, in consultation with the concerned Sate Authorities order that such sum as may be justified for 
reparation of the trans-boundary effects, be transferred to State Fund of such State or States; 
(h) State Authority shall release monies to agencies identified for execution of activities in pre-
determined instalments as per the annual plan of operation finalised by steering committee of such 
State Authority and executive committee of the National Authority. 
7. Accounting procedure. — The accounting procedure to regulate the manner of crediting the 
monies to the National Fund and State Fund in a year shall be in such manner as may be prescribed. 8 CHAPTER III 
CONSTITUTION OF NATIONAL  AUTHORITY AND STATE  AUTHORITIES
8. Constitution of National Authority. — (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be constituted a National 
Authority to be called the “National Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning 
Authority”. 
(2) The National Authority shall manage and utilise the National Fund for the purposes of this Act. 
(3) The National Authority shall consist of a governing body and shall be assisted by an executive 
committee, monitoring group and administrative support mechanism. 
(4) The governing body of the National Authority shall consist of the following, namely:— 
(i) Minister for Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of                      India—
Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(ii) Secretaries of Ministries dealing with Environment, Forest, Climate Change, Finance 
(Expenditure), Rural Development, Land Resources, Agriculture, Panchayati Raj, Tribal 
Development, Science, Technology, Space and Earth Sciences and Chief Executive Officer, National 
Institution for Transforming India Ayog, Government of India—Members, ex officio ; 
(iii) Director General of Forests and Special Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change, Government of India—Member, ex officio ; 
(iv) Additional Director General of Forests (Forest Conservation), Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change, Government of India—Member, ex officio ; 
(v) Additional Director General of Forests (Wildlife), Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change, Government of India—Member, ex officio ; 
(vi) Mission Director, National Mission for a Green India, Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change, Government of India—Member, ex officio ; 
(vii) Financial Adviser, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of 
India—Member, ex officio ; 
(viii) five Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, not more than one from each of the ten regions, 
to be nominated by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India 
on rotation basis for a period of two years, at a time—Members, ex officio ; 
(ix) Inspector General of Forests (Forest Conservation), Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change, Government of India—Member, ex officio ; 
(x) five experts, one each from environmentalists, conservationists, scientists, economists, and 
social scientists appointed by the Central Government for a period of two years subject to not more 
than two consecutive terms—Members. 
(5) The Central Government may appoint an officer of the rank of an Additional Director General of 
Forests as the Chief Executive Officer of the National Authority who shall be the                 Member—
Secretary of the governing body and the executive committee of the National Authority. 
9. Executive committee and monitoring group of National Authority. — (1) The governing body 
of the National Authority shall, in performance of its functions and powers under the Act, be assisted by 
the executive committee and the monitoring group. 
(2) The executive committee of the National Authority shall consist of the following, namely:— 
(i) Director General of Forests and Special Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change, Government of India—Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(ii) Additional Director General of Forests (Forest Conservation), Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change, Government of India—Member, ex officio ; 9 (iii) Additional Director General of Forests (Wildlife), Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change, Government of India—Member, ex officio ; 
(iv) Mission Director, National Mission for a Green India, Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change, Government of India—Member, ex officio ; 
(v) Financial Adviser, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of 
India—Member, ex officio ; 
(vi) Head of all regional offices of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, 
Government of India—Members, ex officio ; 
(vii) Inspector General of Forests (Forest Conservation), Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change, Government of India—Member, ex officio ; 
(viii) a professional ecologist, not being from the Central Government, to be appointed by the 
Central Government— Member; 
(ix) three experts, one each in the fields of forestry, tribal development, forest economy 
development, not being from the Central Government, to be appointed by the Central Government— 
Members; 
(x) Chief Executive Officer of the National Authority—Member-Secretary. 
(3) The monitoring group shall consist of six experts in the field of environment, economics, wildlife, 
forest, remote sensing and geographical information system and social sector and the Director General, 
Forest Survey of India, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India. 
(4) The following officers shall be appointed by the National Authority for a period not exceeding 
five years, to assist the executive committee in performance of its functions and powers under the Act, 
namely:— 
(i) Joint Chief Executive Officer of the rank of Inspector General of Forests; 
(ii) Financial Advisor and Chief Accounts Officer of the rank of Director in the Government of 
India; and 
(iii) Deputy Chief Executive Officers of the rank  of Deputy Inspector General of Forests. 
(5) The governing body of the National Authority may with the prior concurrence of the Central 
Government create posts in the National Authority at the level of Assistant Inspector General of Forests 
and other officials to assist the executive committee and monitoring group in performance of its functions 
under the Act. 
10. Constitution of State Authority. — (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be constituted a State 
Authority to be called the “State Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority” 
in each State. 
(2) The Central Government may, if so desires, appoint different dates for constitution of State 
Authority in each of the States. 
(3) The State Authority constituted in a State shall be responsible for the management of the State 
Fund of such State and its utilisation for the purposes of the Act. 
(4) The State Authority shall consist of a governing body and shall be assisted by a steering 
committee and an executive committee. 
(5) The governing body of a State Authority shall consist of the following, namely:— 
(i) Chief Minister of the State and in case of a Union territory having no legislature, the 
Lieutenant Governor or the Administrator, as the case may be—Chairperson, ex officio ; 10 (ii) Minister of Forests—Member, ex officio ; 
(iii) Chief Secretary—Member, ex officio ; 
(iv) Principal Secretaries of the Departments dealing with Environment, Finance, Planning, Rural 
Development, Revenue, Agriculture, Tribal Development, Panchayati Raj, Science and 
Technology—Members, ex officio ; 
(v) Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Head of Forest Force)-Member, ex officio ; 
(vi) Chief Wildlife Warden—Member, ex officio ; 
(6) Principal Secretary in-charge of the Forest Department in a State shall be Member Secretary of the 
State Authority in such State. 
(7) The State Government shall appoint an officer of the rank not below the rank of a Chief 
Conservator of Forests as the Chief Executive Officer of the State Authority who shall be the Member-
Secretary of the steering committee and the executive committee of the State Authority. 
11. Steering committee and executive committee of State Authority. —(1) The governing body of 
the State Authority shall, in performance of its functions and powers under the Act, be assisted by the 
steering committee and the executive committee. 
(2) The steering committee of a State Authority shall consist of the following, namely:— 
(i) Chief Secretary—Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(ii) Principal Secretaries of the Departments dealing with Forests, Environment, Finance, 
Planning, Rural Development, Revenue, Agriculture, Tribal Development, Panchayati Raj, Science 
and Technology—Members, ex officio ; 
(iii) Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Head of Forest Force)—Member, ex officio ; 
(iv) Chief Wildlife Warden—Member, ex officio ; 
(v) Nodal Officer, the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 (69 of 1980) Member, ex officio ; 
(vi) Head of the concerned regional office of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change—Member, ex officio ; 
(vii) Nodal Officer, State Forest Development Agency—Member, ex officio ; 
(viii) an expert on tribal matters or a representative of tribal communities to be appointed by the 
State Government—Member; 
(ix) Chief Executive Officer, State Authority—Member-Secretary. 
(3) The executive committee of a State Authority shall consist of the following, namely:— 
(i) Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Head of Forest Force) —Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(ii) Chief Wildlife Warden—Member, ex officio ; 
(iii) an officer not below the rank of a Chief Conservator of Forests dealing with forest and 
wildlife related schemes—Member, ex officio ; 
(iv) an officer not below the rank of a Chief Conservator of Forests dealing with forestry 
research—Member, ex officio ; 
(v) Nodal Officer, State Forest Development Agency—Member, ex officio ; 
(vi) a representative each of the Departments dealing with Environment, Finance, Planning, Rural 
Development, Revenue, Agriculture, Tribal Development, Panchayati Raj, Science and 
Technology—Members, ex officio ; 
(vii) Financial Controller or Financial Adviser, to be nominated by the Finance                  
Department—Member, ex officio ; 11 (viii) two eminent non-government organisations to be appointed by the State        Government—
Members; 
(ix) two representatives of district level Panchayati Raj Institutions to be appointed by the State 
Government—Members; 
(x) an expert on tribal matters or a representative of tribal community to be appointed by the State 
Government—Member; 
(xi) Chief Executive Officer, State Authority—Member-Secretary. 
(4) The State Authority may appoint the following officers for a period not exceeding five years, to 
assist the steering committee and executive committee in performance of its functions under the Act, 
namely:— 
(i) Joint Chief Executive Officer of the rank not below the rank of a Conservator of Forests; 
(ii) Financial Advisor and Chief Accounts Officer of the rank not below the rank of a Deputy 
Secretary in the State Government; 
(iii) Deputy Chief Executive Officer of the rank not below the rank of a Deputy Conservator of 
Forests. 
(5) The governing body of the State Authority may with the prior concurrence of the State 
Government create posts in the State Authority at the level of Assistant Conservator of Forests and other 
officials to assist the steering committee and executive committee in performance of its functions under 
the Act. 
12. Term of office and conditions of service of members. — Save as otherwise provided in this Act, 
the terms of office and other conditions of the service of the members of the National Authority, 
executive committee, monitoring group, Chief Executive Officer and officials appointed by the National 
Authority, members of State Authority, steering committee and executive committee of each State 
Authority shall be such as may be prescribed. 
13. Disqualifications. — A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as a member of the 
National Authority, executive committee of the National Authority, a State Authority, steering committee 
and executive committee of a State Authority, monitoring group, if he— 
(i) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which, in the opinion of the 
Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or 
(ii) is an undischarged insolvent; or 
(iii) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by the competent court; or 
(iv) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the Government or organisation or 
undertaking owned by the Government; or 
(v) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, such financial or other interest in the National 
Authority or the concerned State Authority as is likely to affect the duties discharged by him of his 
function as a member. 
CHAPTER IV 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF NATIONAL  AUTHORITY AND STATE  AUTHORITIES
14. Powers and functions of National Authority. —(1) The governing body of the National 
Authority shall— 
(i) formulate broad policy framework for functioning of the National Authority and State 
Authorities as may be notified by the Central Government; 
(ii) approve the annual report and audited accounts of the National Authority; 
(iii) review reports on decision taken by executive committee and monitoring group of the 
National Authority including investment decisions; 
(iv) approve the proposal for the schemes specified in sub-clause ( iii) of clause ( b) of    section 5; 12 (v) approve the proposals for creation of posts in the National Authority, subject to prior 
permission of the Central Government; 
(vi) provide a mechanism to State Authorities to resolve issues of inter-State or Centre-State 
character; 
(vii) formulate such procedures for delegation of financial and administrative powers to the 
National Authority and State Authorities as may be notified by the Central Government. 
(2) The governing body of the National Authority shall meet at least once in six months. 
(3) The governing body and executive committee of the National Authority and the monitoring group 
of the National Authority shall meet at such places and shall observe such rules and procedures in regard 
to transaction of business at its meeting, including the quorum thereat, as may be prescribed. 
15. Powers and functions of executive committee of National Authority. —(1) The executive 
committee of the National Authority shall— 
(i) approve within three months from the date of receipt, annual plan of operations of State 
Authorities, with such amendments as it deems fit and proper; 
(ii) formulate proposals for schemes specified in sub-clause ( iii) of clause ( b) of section 5; 
(iii) execute schemes specified in sub-clause ( iii) of clause ( b) of section 5; 
(iv) deploy staff on contract or on deputation basis to the posts in the National Authority; 
(v) formulate proposals for creation of posts in the National Authority at the level of Assistant 
Inspector General of Forests and other officers; 
(vi) invest surplus amounts available in the National Fund; 
(vii) execute other day-to-day work in respect of receipt of amounts in the National Fund; 
(viii) maintain books of account and such other records; 
(ix) facilitate scientific, technological and other assistance that may be required by State 
Authorities; 
(x) present its decisions to the governing body of the National Authority for information; 
(xi) maintain and update a public information system on the National Authority and present all 
information on its transaction in the public domain; 
(xii) undertake any other work as may be assigned by the governing body of the National 
Authority or the Central Government, from time to time. 
(2) The executive committee of the National Authority shall meet at least once in every three months. 
16. Functions of monitoring group. — (1) The monitoring group shall— 
(i) evolve independent system for concurrent monitoring and evaluation of the works 
implemented in the States and Union territories utilising the funds released by the National 
Authority and State Authorities to ensure effective and proper utilisation of funds by utilising the 
services of the regional offices, of the Central Government in the Ministry of Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change: 
Provided that the Central Government may also undertake third party monitoring and evaluation 
of the works implemented in the States and Union territories utilising the funds released by the 
National Authority and State Authorities through individual and institutional experts including 
remote sensing agencies; 
(ii) inspect and undertake financial audit of works executed by utilising the funds released by the 
National Authority and State Authorities in the State and Union territories; 
(iii) devise measures for transparency and accountability. 13 (2) The monitoring group shall meet at least once in three months. 
17. Powers and functions of State Authority. —(1) The governing body of a State Authority shall— 
(i) lay down the broad policy framework for the functioning of such State Authority within the 
overall framework notified by the Central Government on the recommendations of the National 
Authority; 
(ii) review the working of the State Authority from time to time. 
(2) The governing body of a State Authority shall meet at least once in six months. 
(3) The governing body, steering committee and executive committee of a State Authority shall meet 
at such places and shall observe such rules and procedures in regards to transaction of business at its 
meeting, including the quorum thereat, as may be prescribed. 
18. Powers and functions of steering committee of State Authority. —(1) The steering committee 
of a State Authority shall— 
(i) scrutinise and approve with such amendments as it may deems fit and proper the annual plan 
of operations prepared by the executive committee of such State Authority and send the same to the 
executive committee of the National Authority for final approval; 
(ii) monitor the progress of the utilisation of funds released from the State Fund; 
(iii) review reports on decision taken by executive committee including investment decisions; 
(iv) approve, subject to prior concurrence of the State Government, proposals formulated by the 
executive committee for creation of posts in the State Authority; 
(v) approve annual report of the State Authority and send the same to the State Government to lay 
it, each year, in each House of the State Legislature; 
(vi) ensure inter-departmental coordination. 
(2) The steering committee of a State Authority shall meet at least once in every three months. 
19. Functions and powers of executive committee of State Authority. —(1) The executive 
committee of a State Authority shall— 
(i) formulate and submit annual plan of operations to the steering committee of the State 
Authority for its concurrence; 
(ii) undertake qualitative and quantitative supervision, monitoring and evaluation of the works 
being implemented from amounts available in the State Fund; 
(iii) invest surplus amounts available in the State Fund of such State; 
(iv) maintain books of account and other records; 
(v) submit reports to the steering committee of the State Authority; 
(vi) prepare annual report of the State Authority; 
(vii) deploy staff on contractual basis or on deputation to the posts in the State Authority; 
(viii) formulate proposals for creation of posts in the State Authority; 
(ix) be responsible for delegation of financial or administrative powers; 
(x) be responsible for other day-to-day working in respect of the State Authority; 
(xi) maintain and update public information system on the State Authority and present all 
information on its transaction in the public domain; 
(xii) undertake any other work as may be assigned by the governing body or steering committee 
of the State Authority or the State Government, from time to time. 
(2) The executive committee of a State Authority shall meet at least once in every three months. 14 CHAPTER V 
FINANCE , ACCOUNTS , AUDIT AND ANNUAL  REPORT
20. Budget of National Authority. — (1) The National Authority shall prepare its budget for the next 
financial year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the National Authority and forward the 
same to the Central Government, in such form and at such time in each financial year as may be 
prescribed. 
(2) The National Authority, shall adopt financial regulation and procedures, in particular the 
procedure for drawing up and implementing the budget of the National Authority as may be prescribed. 
21. Investment of funds by National Authority. — The National Authority may invest its funds, 
including any reserve fund, in the securities of the Central Government and in scheduled banks in such 
manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the grants received from the Central Government shall not be invested and shall be 
utilised for the purposes and in the manner attached to it. 
22. Accounts and audit of National Authority. —(1) The National Authority shall maintain proper 
accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be 
prescribed in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the National Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with 
such audit shall be payable by the National Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any other person appointed by him in connection with 
the audit of the accounts of the National Authority shall have the same right and privileges and authority 
in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in connection with 
the audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the office of the 
National Authority. 
(4) The accounts of the National Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General or 
any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government by the National Authority. 
(5) The Comptroller and Auditor-General shall, within a period of six months from the date of 
commencement of the Act, audit the accounts of the all monies collected by the State Governments and 
Union territory Administrations, which has been placed under the ad hoc  Authority and deposited in the 
nationalised banks and submit the report to the Central Government under this section. 
(6) The Central Government shall have the power to conduct the special audit or performance audit of 
the National Fund and of the National Authority through the Comptroller and Auditor- General. 
23. Annual report of National Authority. — (1) The National Authority shall prepare, its annual 
report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial year and forward a copy thereof 
to the Central Government, in such form and at such time, for each financial year, as may be prescribed. 
(2) The annual report shall, inter  alia , provide for— 
(i) the summary of monitoring and evaluation of activities undertaken from amounts released 
from the National Fund and State Funds during the year; 
(ii) the summary of specific schemes specified in sub-clause ( iii) of clause ( b) of section 5 
executed during the year; 
(iii) the amount of money received and expended. 
24. Annual report and audit report of National Authority to be laid before               
Parliament. —The Central Government shall cause the annual report and audit report together with a 
memorandum of action taken on the recommendations contained therein to be laid as soon as may be after 
the reports are received before each House of Parliament. 15 25. Budget of State Authority. —(1) Each State Authority shall prepare its budget for the next 
financial year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the State Authority and forward the 
same to the State Government, in such form and at such time, in each financial year, as may be 
prescribed. 
(2) Each State Authority shall adopt financial regulation and procedures, in particular the procedure 
for drawing up and implementing the budget of the State Authority as may be prescribed. 
26.  Investment of funds by State Authority. —State Authority may invest funds available in the 
State Fund of such State in the securities of the Central Government and in scheduled banks in such 
manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the grants received from the State Government shall not be invested and shall be 
utilised for the purpose and in the manner prescribed. 
27. Accounts and audit of State Authority. —(1) Each State Authority shall maintain proper 
accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be 
prescribed in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(2) The accounts of each State Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General at 
such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the State Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any other person appointed by him in connection with 
the audit of the accounts of the State Authority shall have the same right and privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in connection with the 
audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected vouchers, other documents and papers and to inspect the office of the State 
Authority. 
(4) The Accounts of the State Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded 
annually to the State Government by the State Authority. 
(5) The Comptroller and Auditor-General shall, within a period of six months from the date of 
commencement of the Act, audit the accounts of all the monies which have been transferred by the     ad
hoc Authority to the State Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authorities 
constituted in the States in compliance of guidelines dated the 2nd July, 2009 and submit the report to the 
State Government under this section. 
(6) The Central Government and the State Government concerned shall have the power to conduct the 
special audit or performance audit of the State Fund and of the State Authority through the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General. 
28. Annual report of State Authority. —(1) Each State Authority shall prepare its annual report, 
giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial year and forward a copy thereof to the 
concerned State Government, in such form and at such time, for each financial year, as may be 
prescribed. 
(2) The annual report of a State Authority shall, inter alia , provide for—  
(i) the number and location of each reforestation, afforestation and conservation activity subject 
to the requirement of this section; 
(ii) the amount and location of lands in hectares, cleared, conserved and planted in connection 
with the activity; and 
(iii) the amount of afforestation money collected and expended. 
29. Annual report and audit report of State Authority to be laid before State      Legislature. —
The State Government shall cause the annual report and the audit report together with a memorandum of 
action taken on the recommendations contained therein to be laid as soon as may be after the reports are 
received before each House of the State Legislature: 16 Provided that in case of a Union territory having no legislature, the Central Government shall cause 
the annual report and the audit report together with a memorandum of action taken on the 
recommendations contained therein to be laid as soon as may be after the reports are received before each 
House of the Parliament. 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS
30. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government in consultation with the State Governments 
may, after previous publication, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the management of the National Fund by the National Authority under sub-section ( 2) of 
section 3; 
(b) the management of State Fund by the State Authorities under sub-section ( 2) of section 4; 
(c) the manner of using the money for purposes specified in clause ( b) of section 6; 
(d) the manner of utilising the money for purposes specified in clause ( c) of section 6; 
(e) the manner of payment of the salary and allowances payable to the officers and other 
employees of the State Authority under clause ( f) of section 6; 
(f) the accounting procedure regulating the manner of crediting the monies to the National Fund 
and State Funds under section 7; 
(g) the terms of office and other conditions of the service of the members of the National 
Authority, executive committee, monitoring group, Chief Executive Officer and officials appointed 
by the National Authority, members of State Authority, steering committee and executive committee 
of each State Authority under section 12; 
(h) the rules and procedures in respect of the transaction of business of the governing body and 
executive committee of the National Authority and monitoring group of the National Authority and 
the place of meeting, including the quorum under sub-section ( 3) of section 14; 
(i) the rules and procedures in respect of the transaction of business of the governing body, 
steering committee and executive committee of a State Authority and the place of meeting, including 
the quorum under sub-section ( 3) of section 17; 
(j) the preparation of the budget of the National Authority under sub-section ( 1) of section 20; 
(k) the financial regulation and procedures, in particular the procedure for drawing up and 
implementing the budget of the National Authority under sub-section ( 2) of section 20; 
(l) the investment of the funds of the National Authority under section 21; 
(m) the maintenance of the accounts and other relevant records and preparation of an annual 
statement of accounts by the National Authority under sub-section ( 1) of section 22; 
(n) the preparation of the annual report by the National Authority under sub-section ( 1) of    
section 23; 
(o) the preparation of the budget of the State Authority under sub-section ( 1) of section 25; 
(p) the financial regulation and procedures, in particular the procedure for drawing up and 
implementing the budget of the State Authorities under sub-section ( 2) of section 25; 
(q) the investment of funds by the State Authorities under section 26; 
(r) the maintenance of the accounts and other relevant records and preparation of annual 
statement of accounts by each State Authority under sub-section ( 1) of section 27; 17 (s) the preparation of the annual report by the State Authorities under sub-section ( 1) of section 
28; and 
(t) any other matter which is required to be, or may be prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall, thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
31. Transfer of assets, liabilities, etc. —(1) On and from the date of constitution of the National 
Authority— 
(i) all the assets and liabilities of the ad hoc  Authority shall stand transferred to, and vested in, the 
National Authority; 
Explanation .—The assets of the ad hoc  Authority shall be deemed to include all rights and 
powers, all properties, whether movable or immovable, including in particular, cash balances, 
deposits, and all other interests and rights in, or arising of, such properties as may be in the possession 
of the ad hoc  Authority and all books of account and other documents relating to the same, and 
liabilities shall include all debts, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind; 
(ii) without prejudice to the provisions of clause ( i), all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, 
all contracts entered into and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for the ad hoc
Authority immediately before constitution of the National Authority, for or in connection with the 
purpose of the ad hoc  Authority, shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into or engaged to be 
done by, with or for, the National Authority; 
(iii) all sums of money due to the ad hoc  Authority immediately before constitution of the 
National Authority shall be due to the National Authority; 
(iv) all suits and legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or against the 
ad hoc  Authority may be continued or may be instituted by or against the National Compensatory 
Authority. 
(2) On and from the date of constitution of a State Authority— 
(i) all the assets and liabilities of the State Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and 
Planning Authority constituted in such State in compliance of guidelines dated the 2nd July, 2009 
shall stand transferred to, and vested in, the State Authority. 
Explanation. —The assets of the State Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and 
Planning Authority constituted in such State in compliance of guidelines dated the 2nd July, 2009 
shall be deemed to include all rights and powers, all properties, whether movable or immovable, 
including in particular, cash balances, deposits, and all other interests and rights in, or arising of, such 
properties as may be in the possession of the State Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management 
and Planning Authority constituted in such State in compliance of guidelines dated the 2nd July, 2009 
and all books of account and other documents relating to the same, and liabilities shall include all 
debts, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind; 
(ii) without prejudice to the provisions of clause ( i), all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, 
all contracts entered into and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for the State 
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority constituted in such State in 
compliance of guidelines dated the 2nd July, 2009 before this Act came into force, for or in 
connection with the purpose of the State Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and 
Planning Authority constituted in such State in compliance of guidelines dated the 2nd July, 2009, 
shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into or engaged to be done by, with or for, the State 
Authority; 18 (iii) all sums of money due to the State Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and 
Planning Authority constituted in such State in compliance of guidelines dated the 2nd July, 2009 
before constitution of the State Authority shall be due to the State Authority; 
(iv) all suits and legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or against the 
State Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority constituted in such 
State in compliance of guidelines dated the 2nd July, 2009 may be continued or may be instituted by 
or against the State Authority. 
32. Validation. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any 
court, the amount credited to the National Fund shall be deemed to be credited and shall always be 
deemed to have been credited to the public account of India within the meaning of articles 266 and 283 of 
the Constitution, and it shall be regulated by law made by Parliament in this behalf. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment or order of any court, all the monies 
collected by the State Governments and the Union territory Administrations which has been placed under 
the ad hoc  Authority and deposited in the nationalised banks and the interest accrued thereon shall stand 
transferred to the National Fund. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment or any order of any court, the amount 
credited to the State Fund shall be deemed to be credited and shall always be deemed to have been 
credited to the public account of the State within the meaning of articles 266 and 283 of the Constitution, 
and it shall be regulated by law made by the State Legislature in this behalf. 
33. Power of Central Government to issue directions. —(1) The Central Government may, if it 
finds necessary or expedient in the public interest, issue such policy directives to the National Authority 
or any State Authority, in writing and such policy directives shall be binding upon the National Authority 
or the State Authority, as the case may be. 
(2) The decision of the Central Government, whether a question is one of policy or not, shall be final. 
--------------------------The Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agricultural University Act, 2016--------------------------
1 
 THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Declaration of Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agricultural University as an institution of national 
importance  
3. Definitions.  
4. Establishment and incorporation of Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agricultural University.  
5. Objects of the University.  
6. Powers of the University . 
7. Jurisdiction.  
8. University open to all classes, castes and creed.  
9. The Visitor.  
10. Officers of the University.  
11. The Chancellor.  
12. The Vice -Chancellor.  
13. Deans and Director . 
14.  The Registrar . 
15. The Comptroller.   
16. Other officers.  
17. Authorities of the University . 
18. Board of Management.   
19. The Academic Council.   
20. The Research Council . 
21. The Extension Education Council . 
22. The Finance Committee . 
23. Faculties.  
24. The Board of Studies.  
25. Other authorities  
26. Power to make Statutes.   
27. Statutes how to be made.  
 2 
 SECTIONS  
28. Power to make Ordinances.  
29. Regulations.   
30. Annual report.  
31. Annual accounts.   
32. Conditions of service of employees . 
33. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students . 
34. Right to  appeal.   
35. Provident and pension funds.   
36. Disputes as to constitution of University authorities.  
37. Constitution of committees.   
38. Filling of casual vacancies.  
39. Proceedings of University authorities not invalidated by vacancy.  
40. Protection of  action taken in good faith.  
41. Mode of proof of University records.  
42. Effect of establishment of University.  
43. Power to remove difficulties.  
44. Transitional provisions.   
45. Repeal of Bihar Agricultural University Act.  
46. Statutes, Ordinances and R egulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid 
before Parliament.  
  3 
  
THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016  
ACT NO. 32 OF 2016  
[28th May , 2016 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment and incorporation of a University by conversion of 
the existing Rajendra Agricultural University, Pusa, Bihar to Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central 
Agricultural University for the development of agriculture and for the furtherance of the 
advancement of learning and pursuit of research in agriculture and allied sciences and to 
declare it to be an institution of national importance.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central 
Agricultural University Act, 2016.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration of Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agricultural University  as an institution of 
national importance .— Whereas the objects of the institution known as the Dr. Rajendra Prasad 
Central Agricultural University are such as to make the institution one of the national importance, it is 
hereby declared that the instituti on known as the Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agricultural University 
is an institution of national importance.  
3. Definitions .— In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless the context otherwise 
requires,  — 
(a) “Academic Council ” means the Academic Council of the University;  
(b) “academic staff ” means such categories of staff as are designated as academic staff by the 
Ordinances;  
(c) “agriculture ” means the basic and applied sciences of the soil and water management, crop 
producti on including production of all garden crops, control of plants, pests and diseases, horticulture 
including floriculture, animal husbandry including veterinary and dairy science, fisheries, forestry 
including farm forestry, home -science, agricultural engine ering and technology, marketing and 
processing of agricultural and animal husbandry products, land use and management;  
(d) “Board ” means the Board of Management of the University;  
(e) “Board of Studies ” means the Board of Studies of the University;  
(f) “Chancellor ” means the Chancellor of the University;  
(g) “college ” means a constituent college of the University whether located at the headquarters, 
campus or elsewhere;  
(h) “Department ” means a Department of Studies of the University;  
(i) “employee ” means a ny person appointed by the University and includes teachers and other 
staff of the University;  
(j) “extension education ” means the educational activities concerned with the training of 
orchardists, farmers and other groups serving agriculture, horticulture , fisheries and improved 
practices related thereto and the various phases of scientific technology related to agriculture and 
agricultural production including post -harvest technology and marketing;  
(k) “Faculty ” means Faculty of the University;  
(l) “Ordinances ” means the Ordinances of the University;  
                                                           
1. 7th October, 2016, vide notification  S.O. 3184 (E), dated 7 th October, 2016, see Gazette of India,  Extraordinary Part II,    
s. 3 (ii).  4 
 (m) “Regulations ” means the Regulations made by any prescribed authority of the University;  
(n) “Research Advisory Committee ” means the Research Advisory Committee of the University;  
(o) “Statutes ” means the Statutes of the University;  
(p) “student ” means a person enrolled in the University for undergoing a course of study for 
obtaining a degree, diploma or other academic distinction duly instituted;  
(q) “teachers ” means Professors, Associate Profes sors, Assistant Professors, Teaching Faculty 
Members and their equivalent appointed for imparting instruction or conducting research or extension 
education programmes or combination of these in the University, college or any institute maintained 
by the Uni versity and designated as teachers by the Ordinances;  
(r) “University ” means the Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agricultural University established under 
this Act;  
(s) “Vice -Chancellor ” means the Vice -Chancellor of the University; and  
(t) “Visitor ” means the Visitor of the University.  
4. Establishment and incorporation of Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agricultural 
University . —(1) The University established and incorporated under the Bihar Agricultural 
University Act, 1987 (Bihar Act 8 of 1988), in so far as it relates to the Rajendra Agricultural 
University shall be established as a body corporate under this Act by the name of th e “Dr. Rajendra 
Prasad Central Agricultural University ”. 
(2) The headquarters of the University shall be at Pusa in the State of Bihar and it may also 
establish campuses at such other places within its jurisdiction as it may deem fit ; 
Provided that the Uni versity shall integrate the existing campus and other associated facilities of 
the Rajendra Agricultural University, Pusa and the effective date of take -over shall be as specified in 
the notification published in the Official Gazette.  
(3) The first Chancel lor, the first Vice -Chancellor and the first members of the Board, the 
academic Council and all persons who may hereafter become such officers or members, so long as 
they continue to hold such office or membership are hereby constituted a body corporate by  the name 
of the Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agricultural University.  
(4) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall sue and be sued 
by the said name.  
5. Objects of the University .—The objects of the University shall be — 
(a) to impart education in different branches of agriculture and allied sciences as it may deem 
fit; 
(b) to further the advancement of learning and conducting of research in agricultural and 
allied sciences;  
(c) to undertake programmes of extension education in the country with particular attention to 
the State of Bihar;  
(d) to promote partnership and linkages with national and international educational 
institutions; and  
(e) to undertake such other activities as it may, from time to time, determine.  
6. Powers of the University .— The University shall have the following powers, namely:  — 
(i) to make provisions for instructions in agriculture and allied sciences;  
(ii) to make provisions for conduct of research in agriculture and allied branches of learning;  
(iii) to make provisions for dissemination of the findings of research and technical 
information through extension programmes;  5 
 (iv) to grant, subject to such conditions as it may determine, diplomas or certificates to, and 
confer degrees or other academic distin ctions on the basis of examination, evaluation or any other 
method of testing, on persons, and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or other 
academic distinction for good and sufficient cause;  
(v) to confer honorary degrees or other distinc tions in the manner prescribed by the Statutes;  
(vi) to provide lectures and instructions for field workers, village leaders and other persons 
not enrolled as regular students of the University and to grant certificates to them as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes;  
(vii) to co -operate or collaborate or associate with any other University or authority or 
institution of higher learning in such manner and for such purpose as the University may 
determine;  
(viii) to establish and maintain colleges relating to ag riculture, horticulture, fisheries, forestry, 
veterinary and animal science, dairying, home -science and allied sciences, as necessary;  
(ix) to establish and maintain such campuses, Krishi Vigyan Kendras, special centres, 
specialised laboratories, libraries , museums or other units for research and institution as are, in its 
opinion, necessary for the furtherance of its objects;  
(x) to create teaching, research and extension education posts and to make appointments 
thereto;  
(xi) to create administrative, mini sterial and other posts and to make appointments thereto;  
(xii) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(xiii) to determine standards of admission to the University which may include examination, 
evaluation or any  other method of testing;  
(xiv) to provide and maintain residential accommodation for students and employees;  
(xv) to supervise the residences of the students of the University and to make arrangements 
for promoting their health and general welfare;  
(xvi) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, including their code of 
conduct;  
(xvii) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the employees and to take 
such disciplinary measures in this regard as it may deem necessary;  
(xviii) to fix, demand and receive such fees and other charges as may be prescribed by the 
Statutes;  
(xix) to borrow, with the approval of the Central Government on the security of its property, 
money for the purpose of the University;  
(xx) to r eceive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of 
any property, movable or immovable including trust and endowment properties, for its purposes; 
and 
(xxi) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incident al or conducive to the 
attainment of all or any of its objects.  
7. Jurisdiction .— (1) The jurisdiction and responsibility of the University with respect to 
teaching, research and programmes of extension education at the University level, in the field of 
agriculture and allied subjects shall extend to the whole country with special reference to the State of 
Bihar.  
(2) All colleges, directorates, research stations, experiment stations and Krishi Vigyan Kendras of 
the existing Rajendra Agricultural University and other institutions coming under the jurisdiction and 
authority of the University shall be constituent unit and no other units shall be recognised as affiliated 
units.  6 
 (3) The University may assume responsibility for the training of field extension work ers and 
others and may develop such training centres as may be required in various regions under its 
jurisdiction.  
8. University open to all classes, castes and creed .— The University shall be open to persons of 
every sex, caste, creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt or impose 
on any person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be 
appointed as a teacher of the University or to hold any other office therein or be admitted as a  student 
in the University or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University from making 
special provisions for the employment or admission of women, persons with disability or of  persons 
belonging to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes, the 
Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes.  
 9. The Visitor .—(1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4), the Visitor shall have the right to cause 
an inspection to be made, by such person or persons as he may direct, of the University, its buildings, 
laboratories, libraries, museums, workshops and equipments, and of any  institution or college and also 
of the examination, instruction and other work conducted or done by the University, and to cause an 
inquiry to be made in like manner in respect of any matter connected with the administration and 
finances of the University . 
(3) The Visitor shall, in every case, give notice to the University of his intention to cause, an 
inspection or inquiry to be made and the University shall, on receipt of such notice, have the right to 
make, within thirty days from the date of receipt of  the notice or such other period as the Visitor may 
determine, such representations to him as it may consider necessary.  
(4) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University, the Visitor may cause to 
be made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in sub -section ( 2). 
(5) Where an inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the University shall 
be entitled to appoint a representative who shall have the right to appear in person and to be heard on 
such inspection  or inquiry.  
(6) The Visitor may address the Vice -Chancellor with reference to the results of such inspection 
or inquiry together with such views and advice with regard to the action to be taken thereon as the 
Visitor may be pleased to offer and on receipt  of the address made by the Visitor, the Vice -Chancellor 
shall communicate forthwith to the Board, the results of the inspection or inquiry and the views of the 
Visitor and the advice tendered by him upon the action to be taken thereon.  
(7) The Board shall  communicate through the Vice -Chancellor to the Visitor such action, if any, 
as it proposes to take or has been taken by it upon the results of such inspection or inquiry.  
(8) Where the Board does not, within reasonable time, take action to the satisfactio n of the 
Visitor, the Visitor may, after considering any explanation furnished or representation made by the 
Board, issue such directions as he may think fit and the Board shall be bound to comply with such 
directions.  
(9) Without prejudice to the foregoin g provisions of this section, the Visitor may, by an order in 
writing, annul any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with this Act, the Statutes 
or the Ordinances:  
Provided that before making any such order, he shall call upon the Unive rsity to show cause why 
such an order should not be made and, if any cause is shown within a reasonable time, he shall 
consider the same.  
(10) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  7 
 10. Officers of the University .—The following shall be the officers of the University,        
namely:  — 
(1) the Chancellor;  
(2) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(3) the Deans;  
(4) the Directors;  
(5) the Registrar;  
(6) the Comptroller;  
(7) the University Librarian; and  
(8) such other officers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
11. The Chancellor .—(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner as 
may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the Head of the University.  
(3) The Chancellor shall, if present, preside at the convocations of the University held for 
conferring degrees.  
12. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of the University 
and shall exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of the University and give effect to 
the decisions of all the authorities of the University.  
(3) The  Vice -Chancellor may, if he is of the opinion that immediate action is necessary on any 
matter, exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under this Act and shall 
report to such authority the action taken by him on such matter:  
Provided that if the authority concerned is of opinion that such action ought not to have been 
taken, it may refer the matter to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final:  
Provided further that any person in the service of the University who is agg rieved by the action 
taken by the Vice -Chancellor under this sub -section shall have the right to appeal against such action 
to the Board within three months from the date on which decision on such action is communicated to 
him and thereupon the Board may c onfirm, modify or reverse the action taken by the Vice -
Chancellor.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that any decision of any authority of the 
University is beyond the powers of the authority conferred by the provisions of this Act, the Stat utes 
of the Ordinances or that any decision taken is not in the interest of the University, may ask the 
authority concerned to review its decision within sixty days of such decision and if the authority 
refuses to review the decision either in whole or in part or no decision is taken by it within the said 
period of sixty days, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may 
be pre scribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
13. Deans and Director .— Every Dean and every Director shall be appointed in such manner 
and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
14.  The Registrar .— (1) The Re gistrar shall be appointed in such manner as may be prescribed 
by the Statutes.  
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreements, sign documents and authenticate 
records on behalf of the University and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  8 
 15. The Comptroller .—The Comptroller shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
16. Other officers .—The manner of appointment and powers and duties of the other officers of 
the University shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
17. Authorities of the University .—The following shall be the authorities of the University, 
namely:  — 
(1) the Board;  
(2) the Academic Council;  
(3) the Research Council;  
(4) the Extension Education Council;  
(5) the Finance Committee;  
(6) the Faculties and Board of Studies; and  
(7) such other authorities as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
18. Board of Management . —(1) The Board shall be the principal executive body of the 
University.  
(2) The constitution of the Board, the term of office of its members and its powers and functions 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
19. The Academic Council . —(1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of 
the University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes and Ordinances, have 
the control and general regulation of, and be responsible for the maintenance of standards of learning, 
education, instruction, evaluatio n and examination within the University and shall exercise such other 
powers and perform such other functions as may be conferred or imposed upon it by the Statutes.  
(2) The constitution of the Academic Council and the term of office of its members shall b e 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
20. The Research Council .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Research Council 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
21. The Extension Education Council .—The constitution, powers and functions of the 
Extension Education Council shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
22. The Finance Committee .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
23. Faculties .—The University shall have such Faculties as may be presc ribed by the Statutes.  
24. The Board of Studies .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Studies shall 
be prescribed by the Statutes.  
25. Other authorities .—The constitution, powers and functions of other authorities of the 
University refe rred to in clause ( 7) of section 17 shall be such as may be prescribed by the Statutes  
26. Power to make Statutes .— Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for 
all or any of the following matters, namely:  — 
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of the authorities of the University, as may be 
constituted from time to time;  
(b) the appointment and continuance in office of the members of the authorities, the filling up 
of vacancies, and all other matters relating to the authorit ies for which it may be necessary or 
desirable to provide;  
(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the University and their emoluments;  9 
 (d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees of the University and 
their emolum ents;  
(e) the appointment of teachers and academic staff working in any other University or 
organisation for a specific period for undertaking a joint project;  
(f) the conditions of service of employees including provision for pension, insurance and 
provid ent fund, the manner of termination of service and disciplinary action;  
(g) the principles governing the seniority of service of employees of the University;  
(h) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or students and the 
Univer sity; 
(i) the procedure for appeal to the Board by any employee or student against the action of any 
officer or authority of the University;  
(j) the establishment and abolition of departments, centres, colleges and institutions;  
(k) the conferment of honor ary degrees;  
(l) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions;  
(m) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(n) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the  University;  
(o) the maintenance of discipline among the employees and students; and  
(p) all other matters which are to be, or may be, prescribed by the Statutes.  
27. Statutes how to be made .— (1) The first Statutes are those set out in the Schedule.  
(2) The Board may from time to time make Statutes or may amend or repeal the Statutes referred 
to in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that the Board shall not make, amend or repeal any Statute affecting the status, powers 
or constitution of any authority of the Unive rsity until such authority has been given an opportunity of 
expressing an opinion in writing on the proposed changes, and any opinion so expressed shall be 
considered by the Board.  
(3) Every Statute or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require the  assent of the Visitor 
who may assent thereto or withhold assent therefrom or remit it to the Board for consideration.  
(4) A Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless it 
has been assented to by the Visitor . 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may amend or 
repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1) during the period of three years immediately after the 
commencement of this Act.  
(6) Notwithstanding anythin g contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may direct the 
University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by him and if the 
Board is unable to implement such direction within sixty days of its receipt, the Visit or may, after 
considering the reasons, if any, communicated by the Board for its inability to comply with such 
direction, make or amend the Statutes suitably.  
28. Power to make Ordinances .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and Statutes, the 
Ordinan ces may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of the 
University;  
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;  10 
 (d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions, the 
qualifications for the same and the means to be taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the 
same;  
(e) the fees to be charge d for courses of study in the University and for admission to the 
examinations, degrees, diplomas and certificates of the University;  
(f) the conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(g) the conduct of examination s, including the term of office and manner of appointment and 
duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators;  
(h) the conditions of residence of the students;  
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence, discipline and 
teaching of women students and the prescribing of special courses of studies for them;  
(j) the appointment and emoluments of employees other than those for whom provision has 
been made in the Statutes;  
(k) the establishment of special centres, specialised l aboratories and other committees;  
(l) the manner of co -operation and collaboration with other Universities and authorities 
including learned bodies or associations;  
(m) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is considered necessary  
for improving the academic life of the University;  
(n) such other terms and conditions of service of teachers and other academic staff as are not 
prescribed by the Statutes;  
(o) the management of colleges and institutions established by the University;  
(p) the setting up of a mechanism for redressal of grievances of employees; and  
(q) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes may be provided for by the Ordinances.  
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice -Chancellor with the previous app roval of the 
Central Government and the Ordinances so made may be amended or repealed at any time by the 
Board in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.  
29. Regulations . —The authorities of the University may make Regulations, consistent with this 
Act, the  Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business and that of the Committees 
appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances in the manner 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
30. Annual report .— (1) The annual re port of the University shall be prepared under the 
direction of the Board, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the University 
towards the fulfilment of its objects and shall be submitted to the Board on or after such date as may 
be prescribed by the Statutes and the Board shall consider the report in its annual meeting.  
(2) The Board shall submit the annual report to the Visitor along with its comments, if any.  
(3) A copy of the annual report as prepared under sub -section ( 1) shall also be submitted to the 
Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both the Houses 
of Parliament.  
31. Annual accounts .—(1) The annual accounts of the University shall be prepared under the 
directions of the Board and shall, once at least every year and at intervals of not more than fifteen 
months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or by such persons as he may 
authorise in this behalf.  
(2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audi t report thereon shall be submitted to the 
Board and the Visitor along with the observations of the Board.  11 
 (3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall be brought to the notice of 
the Board and observations of the Board, if any, sh all be submitted to the Visitor.  
(4) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report as submitted to the Visitor, shall 
also be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be 
laid before both the Hous es of Parliament.  
(5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before both the Houses of Parliament shall 
be published in the Official Gazette.  
32. Conditions of service of employees .— (1) Every employee of the University shall be 
appointed under  a written contract which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which 
shall be furnished to the employee concerned . 
(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any employee shall, at the 
request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed 
by the Board, one member nominated by the employee concerned and an umpire appointed by the 
Visitor.  
(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final, and no suit shall lie in any civi l court in respect of 
the matters decided by the Tribunal.  
(4) Every request made by the employee under sub -section ( 2) shall be deemed to be a submission 
to arbitration upon the terms of this section within the meaning of the Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act, 1996 (26 of 1996).  
(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
33. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students .— (1) Any 
student or candidate for an examination whose na me has been removed from the rolls of the 
University by the orders or resolution of the Vice -Chancellor, Discipline Committee or Examination 
Committee, as the case may be, and who has been debarred from appearing at the examinations of the 
University for m ore than one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt of such orders or copy 
of such resolution by him, appeal to the Board and the Board may confirm, modify or reverse the 
decision of the Vice -Chancellor or the Committee, as the case may be.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against a student 
shall, at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of sub -
sections ( 2), (3), (4) and ( 5) of section 32 shall, as far as may be, apply to a reference made under this 
sub-section.  
34. Right to appeal .— Every employee or student of the University or of a college or institution 
maintained by the University shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, have a rig ht to 
appeal, within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes, to the Board against the decision of any 
officer or authority of the University or any college or an institution, as the case may be, and 
thereupon the Board may confirm, modify or revers e the decision appealed against.  
35. Provident and pension funds .— (1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its 
employees such provident or pension fund or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit in 
such manner and subject to such c onditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Where such provident fund or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central Government 
may, if deem fit, declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925), shall 
apply to such f und, as if it were a Government provident fund.  
36. Disputes as to constitution of University authorities .—If any question arises as to whether 
any person has been duly appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority of the 
University, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.  
37. Constitution of committees .— Where any authority of the University is given power by this 
Act or the Statutes to appoint Committees, such Committees shall, save as otherwise  provided, consist 12 
 of the members of the authority concerned and of such persons, if any, as the authority in each case 
may think fit.  
38. Filling of casual vacancies .— All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio  
members) of any authority  or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the 
person or body who appoints or co -opts the member whose place has become vacant and the person or 
body appointed or co -opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority  or body for the 
residue of the term, for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member.  
39. Proceedings of University authorities not invalidated by vacancy .— No act or proceedings 
of any authority of the University shall be invalid merel y by reason of the existence of a vacancy or 
vacancies among its members.  
40. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings 
shall lie against the Board, Vice -Chancellor, any authority or officer or other employee  of the 
University for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of any of the 
provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances . 
41. Mode of proof of University records .—A copy of any receipt, application, notice, order, 
proceeding, resolution of any authority or Committee of the University, or other documents in 
possession of the University, or any entry in any register duly maintained by the University, if verified 
by th e Registrar, shall be received as prima facie  evidence of such receipt, application, notice, order, 
proceeding, resolution or documents or the existence of entry in the register and shall be admitted as 
evidence of the matters and transactions therein wher e the original thereof would, if produced, have 
been admissible in evidence, notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence                 
Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) , or in any other law for the time being in force.  
42. Effect of establishment of Un iversity .—(1) On and from the date of commencement of this 
Act,— 
(a) any reference to the Rajendra Agricultural University in any contract or other instrument 
shall be deemed as a reference to the University;  
(b) all property, movable and immovable, of or  belonging to the Rajendra Agricultural 
University shall vest in the University;  
(c) all rights and liabilities of the Rajendra Agricultural University shall be transferred to, and 
be the rights and liabilities of, the University.  
(2) Every person permanen tly employed in the Rajendra Agricultural University immediately 
before the commencement of the Act who meets the requisite qualification and criteria of recruitment 
in the University shall be provided an opportunity to be employed as such:  
Provided that e very member of the academic staff and member of Faculty who does not meet the 
requisite qualification and criteria shall be given an opportunity for two years to upgrade the 
qualification and to meet the criteria:  
Provided further that every other person p ermanently employed shall be given an opportunity to 
upgrade the qualification and to meet the criteria, in the manner provided by the Regulations:  
Provided also that the tenure, remuneration, terms and conditions, rights and privileges as to 
pension, leave, gratuity, provident fund and all other matters of every other person permanently 
employed by the Rajendra Agricultural University shall be determined by the State Government of 
Bihar.  
(3) All efforts shall be made by the State Government of Bihar to  engage any surplus or 
temporary academic staff, teacher, member of Faculty or other employee of the Rajendra Agricultural 
University, by or against whom any dispute is pending.  
(4) Any dispute or litigation, the cause of action for which has arisen betwee n any member of 
academic staff, teacher, member of Faculty or other employee and the Rajendra Agricultural 
University before the commencement of this Act shall be instituted, prosecuted or continued between 
the academic staff, teacher, member of Faculty or  other employee and the Rajendra Agricultural 
University, as if this Act had not been enacted, and all such cases shall be managed by a special cell to 13 
 be constituted by the State Government of Bihar and all expenses relating to the management of such 
cases including any compensation payable to any person thereof shall be borne by the State 
Government.  
(5) Any academic course, programme or scheme as on the date of commencement of the Act shall 
be continued, till the completion of the course, programme or sc heme with such modifications as the 
University may deem fit.  
(6) The State Government of Bihar and the University shall bear the proportionate cost of pension 
and other liabilities of every academic staff, teacher, member of Faculty or other employee, 
proportionate to the extent of the respective period of service of the person and the State Government 
shall provide its contribution to the University which may discharge any liability on account of this.  
(7) Any matter relating to permanent record of student s, teachers, academic staff, Faculty and 
every other employee shall be provided by Regulations.  
(8) Pension and all other post -retirement benefits including medical benefits of every academic 
staff, teacher, faculty member and every other employee who has superannuated before the 
commencement of this Act shall be borne by the State Government of Bihar, the payment of which 
shall be made through the University and shall be governed by the rules relating thereof made by the 
State Government of Bihar in this b ehalf.  
(9) The retirement age of every teacher, academic staff, Faculty and every other employee of the 
University shall be governed by any law for the time being in force.  
(10) Any matter governing the conditions of service relating to the teacher, academ ic staff, 
Faculty and every other employee for which no provision has been made in this Act, shall be 
determined by the corresponding provisions made by the Central Government.  
43. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provision of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient 
for removing the difficulties:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from 
the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament.  
44. Transitional provisions .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, and the       
Statutes, — 
(a) the first Chancellor and the first Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor and 
shall hold office for a term of five years;  
(b) the first Registrar and the first Comptroller shall be appointed by the Visitor and each of 
the said officers shall hold office for a term of three years;  
(c) the first members of the Board shall be nominated by the Visitor and shall hold office for a 
term of three years;  
(d) the first members of the Academic Council shall be nominated by the Visitor and shall 
hold office for a term of three years:  
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or authorities, the same shall be filled 
by appointment or nomi nation, as the case may be, by the Visitor, and the person so appointed or 
nominated shall hold office for so long as the officer or member in whose place he is appointed or 
nominated would have held office, if such vacancy had not occurred.  
45. Repeal of Bihar Agricultural University Act .—(1) The Bihar Agricultural University     
Act, 1987 (Bihar Act 8 of 1988) , in so far as it relates to the Rajendra Agricultural University, Pusa, 
Bihar is hereby repealed . 
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal,  — 14 
 (a) all appointments made, orders issued, degrees and other academic distinctions conferred, 
diplomas and certificates awarded, privileges granted or other things done under the Bihar 
Agricultural University Act, 1987  (Bihar Act 8 of 1988) , in so far as it relates  to the Rajendra 
Agricultural University, Pusa, Bihar, shall be deemed to have been respectively made, issued, 
conferred, awarded, granted or done under the corresponding provisions of this Act, and, except 
as otherwise provided by or under this Act or the  Statues, continue in force unless and until they 
are superseded by any order made under this Act or the Statues; and  
(b) all proceedings of Selection Committees for the appointment or promotions of teachers 
that took place before the commencement of this Act and all actions of the Governing Body in 
respect of the recommendations of such Selection Committees where no orders of appointment on 
the basis thereof were passed before the commencement of this Act, in so far as it relates to 
Rajendra Agricultural U niversity, shall, notwithstanding that the procedure for selection has been 
modified by this Act, be deemed to have been valid but further proceeding in connection with 
such pending selections shall be taken in accordance with the provisions of this Act an d be 
continued from the stage where they stood immediately before such commencement, except if the 
concerned authorities take, with the approval of the Visitor, a decision to the contrary.  
46. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Off icial Gazette and to be 
laid before Parliament .—(1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be 
published in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the Statutes, Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses 
agree that the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation should not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or 
Regulation shall therea fter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that Statute, Ordinance or Regulation.  
(3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shall include the power to give 
retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the Statutes, 
Ordinances or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective ef fect shall be given to any Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such 
Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations may be applicable.  
  15 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 27)  
THE STATUTES  OF THE UNIVERSITY  
The Chancellor:  
1. (1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less than three persons 
recommended by the Board from amongst persons of eminence in education in general and 
agricultural sciences in particular:  
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve any of the persons so recommended, he may call for 
fresh recommendations from the Board.  
(2) The Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years and shall not be eligible for 
reappointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the e xpiry of his term of office, the Chancellor shall continue to 
hold office until his successor enters upon his office.  
The Vice -Chancellor:  
2. (1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less than three 
persons who shall be  recommended by a Committee as constituted under clause ( 2). 
(2) The Committee referred to in clause ( 1) shall consist of the following: — 
(i) Secretary, Department of Agricultural Research and Education, Government of India who 
shall be the Chairman;  
(ii) one nominee of the Visitor as Member, who shall also be the convener;  
(iii) one nominee of the Central Government.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall hold office for a term of fiv e years from the date on which he enters 
upon his office, or until he attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier, and he shall be 
eligible for reappointment for a further term of five years, or until he attains the age of seventy years 
whicheve r is earlier:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of five years, he shall continue in 
office for a period not exceeding one year or until his successor is appointed and enters upon his 
office.  
(5) The emoluments and other conditions  of service of the Vice -Chancellor shall be as follows:  — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor shall be paid a monthly salary and allowances other than the house 
rent allowance, at the rate fixed by the Central Government from time to time and he shall be 
entitled, without payment of rent, to use a furnished residence throughout his term of office and 
no charge shall fall on the Vice -Chancellor in respect of the maintenance of such residence;  
(ii) the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to such terminal benefits and allowances as may be 
fixed by the Board with the approval of the Visitor from time to time:  
Provided that where an employee of the University or a college or an institution maintained 
by it, or any other University or any institution maintained by or affil iated to such other 
University, is appointed as the Vice -Chancellor, he may be allowed to continue to contribute to 
any provident fund of which he is a member and the University shall contribute to the account of 
such person in that provident fund at the s ame rate at which the person had been contributing 
immediately before his appointment as the Vice -Chancellor:  16 
 Provided further that where such employee had been a member of any pension scheme, the 
University shall make the necessary contribution to such sc heme;  
(iii) the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to travelling and other allowances as per rate fixed 
from time to time by the Government of India for the officers equivalent to the rank of Secretary 
to the Government of India;  
(iv) the Vice -Chancellor sh all be entitled to transfer travelling allowances and other 
allowances as admissible to officers of the rank of Secretary to the Government of India for 
joining and after relinquishing the post;  
(v) the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full pa y at the rate of thirty days in a 
calendar year and the leave shall be credited to his account in advance in two half -yearly 
instalments of fifteen days each on the first day of January and July every year:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor assumes or r elinquishes charge of the office of the           
Vice -Chancellor during the currency of a half year, the leave shall be credited proportionately at 
the rate of two and -a-half days for each completed month of service;  
(vi) in addition to the leave referred  to in sub -clause ( iv), the Vice -Chancellor shall also be 
entitled to half -pay leave at the rate of twenty days for each completed year of service. This     
half-pay leave may also be availed of as commuted leave on full pay on medical certificate:  
Provide d that when commuted leave is available, twice the amount of half -pay leave shall be 
debited against half -pay leave due;  
(vii) the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to Leave Travel Concession and Home Travel 
Concession as per rules of Government of India;  
(viii) the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to the benefit of leave encashment at the time of 
laying down the office as per rules of Government of India.  
(6) If the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or otherwise, or 
if he is unable to perform his duties due to ill health or any other cause, the senior -most Dean or 
Director, as the case may be, shall perform the duties of the Vice -Chancellor until a new Vice -
Chancellor assumes office or until the Vice -Chancellor attends to the duties of his office, as the case 
may be.  
Powers and duties of the Vice -Chancellor:  
3. (1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be ex officio  Chairman of the Board, the Academic Council, the 
Finance Committee, the Research Council and the Extension Education Council and shall, in the 
absence of the Chancellor, preside over the Convocations held for conferring degrees.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor sh all be entitled to be present at, and address, any meeting of any 
authority of the University, but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he is a member of such 
authority.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice -Chancellor to see that this Act, the Stat utes, the Ordinances and 
the Regulations are duly observed, and he shall have all the powers necessary to ensure such 
observance.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise control over the affairs of the University and shall give 
effect to the decisions of al l the authorities of the University.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall have all the powers necessary for the proper maintenance of 
discipline in the University and he may delegate any such powers to such person or persons as he may 
deem fit.  
(6) The Vice -Chancellor shall have the power to convene or cause to be convened the meetings of 
the Board, the Academic Council, the Research Council, the Extension Education Council and the 
Finance Committee.  17 
 The Dean of colleges and Faculties:  
4. (1) Each Facult y shall have a Dean who shall also be the head of the college concerned.  
(2) If any Faculty has more than one college, the Vice -Chancellor may nominate one of the Deans 
as the Dean of the Faculty.  
(3) The Dean of the college shall be appointed by the Board  on the recommendations of the 
Selection Committee constituted for the purpose as per statute 18 and he shall be a whole -time 
salaried officer of the University.  
(4) The Dean shall be entitled to rent free and unfurnished residential accommodation.  
(5) The  Dean shall hold the office for a term of five years and shall be eligible for reappointment:  
Provided that a Dean on attaining the age of sixty -five years shall cease to hold office as such.  
(6) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, b y reason of illness, absence or 
any other cause, unable to perform duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by 
such persons as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(7) The Dean shall be responsible to the Vice -Chancello r for the conduct and maintenance of the 
standards of teaching in the college and Faculty and shall perform such other functions as may be 
prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(8) The Dean shall be the ex officio  Chairman of the Board of Studies of the Faculty, a  member of 
the Academic Council, the Research Council and the Extension Education Council of the University.  
The Director of Education:  
5. (1) The Director of Education shall be appointed by the Board on the recommendations of the 
Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be  a whole -time salaried officer of the 
University.  
(2) The Director of Education shall be entitled to rent free and unfurnished residential 
accommodation.  
(3) The Director of Education shall hold office for a term of five years and shall be eligible for 
reappointment:  
Provided that Director of Education on attaining the age of sixty -five years shall cease to hold 
office as such.  
(4) The Director of Education shall be responsible for planning, co -ordination and super vision for 
all educational programmes in the various Faculties of the University.  
The Director of Research:  
6. (1) The Director of Research shall be appointed by the Board on the recommendations of the 
Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he  shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the 
University.  
(2) The Director of Research shall be entitled to rent free and unfurnished accommodation.  
(3) The Director of Research shall hold office for a term of five years and shall be eligible for 
reappoin tment:  
Provided that the Director of Research on attaining the age of sixty -five years shall cease to hold 
office as such.  
(4) The Director of Research shall be responsible for supervision and coordination of all research 
programmes of the University and s hall be responsible to the Vice -Chancellor for performance of his 
duties.  
(5) The Director of Research shall be ex officio  Member -Secretary of the Research Council of the 
University.  18 
 The Director of Extension Education:  
7. (1) The Director of Extension Edu cation shall be appointed by the Board on the 
recommendations of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time 
salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The Director of Extension Education shall be entitled to rent free and  unfurnished 
accommodation.  
(3) The Director of Extension Education shall hold office for a term of five years and shall be 
eligible for reappointment:  
Provided that the Director of Extension Education on attaining the age of sixty -five years shall 
cease t o hold office as such.  
(4) The Director of Extension Education shall be responsible for supervision and coordination of 
all Extension Education Programmes in the University and shall be responsible to the Vice -Chancellor 
for performance of his duties.  
(5) The Director of Extension Education shall be ex officio  Member -Secretary of the Extension 
Education Council of the University.  
The Registrar:  
8. (1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Board on the recommendations of a duly constituted 
Selection Committee under Statute 18 and he shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The Registrar shall be responsible to the Vice -Chancellor for performance of his duties.  
(3) The Registrar shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall  be eligible for 
reappointment.  
(4) He may also be appointed on deputation for a specified period not exceeding five years.  
(5) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Registrar shall be such as 
may be prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that the Registrar shall retire on attaining the age of sixty years.  
(6) In case of a person appointed on deputation, his tenure, emoluments and other terms of service 
shall be according to the terms of deputation.  
(7) When the office of the Regis trar is vacant or when the Registrar is, by reason of illness, 
absence, or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be 
performed by such person as the Vice -Chancellor  may appoint for the purpose.  
(8)  (a) The Registrar shall have the power to take disciplinary action against such of the 
employees excluding teachers, as may be specified in the order of the Board and to suspend them 
pending inquiry, to administer warnings to them or to impose on them the pena lty of censure or the 
withholding of increment:  
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person concerned has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him.  
(b) An appeal shal l lie to the Vice -Chancellor against any order of the Registrar imposing any of 
the penalties specified in sub -clause ( a). 
(c) In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the power of the Registrar is 
called for, the Registrar shall, upo n conclusion of inquiry, make a report to the Vice -Chancellor along 
with his recommendations:  
Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Board against an order of the Vice -Chancellor imposing 
any penalty.  
(9) The Registrar shall be the ex officio  Secretary o f the Board and the Academic Council, but 
shall not be deemed to be a member of any of these authorities.  19 
 (10) It shall be the duty of the Registrar  — 
(a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such other property of the 
University as the Board shall commit to his charge;  
(b) to issue all notice convening meeting of the Board, the Academic Council and of any 
Committee appointed by those authorities;  
(c) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Board, the Academic Council and of any 
committees appointed by those authorities;  
(d) to conduct the official correspondence of the Board and the Academic Council;  
(e) to arrange for the examinations of the University in accordance with the manner 
prescribed by the Ordinances or notifications;  
(f) to supply to the Visitor, copies of the agenda of the meetings of the authorities of the 
University as soon as they are issued and the minutes of such meetings;  
(g) to represent the University in suits or proceedings by or against the University, sign 
powers of attorney and verify pleadings or depute his representatives for the purpose; and  
(h) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances or the 
Regulations or as may be required, from time to time, by the Board or the V ice-Chancellor.  
The Comptroller:  
9. (1) The Comptroller shall be appointed by the Board on the recommendations of a duly 
constituted Selection Committee under Statute 18 and he shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the 
University.  
(2) The Comptroller s hall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for 
reappointment.  
(3) The Comptroller may also be appointed on deputation for a specified period not exceeding 
five years.  
(4) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the  Comptroller shall be such as 
may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(5) In case of a person being appointed as Comptroller on deputation, his tenure, emoluments and 
other terms of service shall be according to the standard of deputation:  
Provided that the C omptroller shall retire on attaining the age of sixty years.  
(6) When the office of the Comptroller is vacant or when the Comptroller is, by reason of illness, 
absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office  shall be 
performed by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(7) The Comptroller shall be the ex officio  Secretary of the Finance Committee, but shall not be 
deemed to be a member of such Committee.  
(8) The Comptroller shall — 
(a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the University and shall advise it as regards 
its financial policy; and  
(b) perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances or as may be 
required, from time to time, by the Board or the Vice -Chancellor.  
(9) Subject to the control of the Board, the Comptroller shall — 
(a) hold and manage the property and investments of the University including trust and 
endowed property;  20 
 (b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Board for recurring and  non-recurring expenditure for a 
year are not exceeded and that all moneys are expended on the purpose for which they are granted 
or allotted;  
(c) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget of the University and 
for their presenta tion to the Board;  
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank balances and on the state of 
investments;  
(e) watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advise on the methods of collection 
employed;  
(f) ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture and equipment are maintained up -to-
date and that stock -checking is conducted, of equipment and other consumable materials in all 
offices, specialised laboratories, colleges and institutions maintained by the University;  
(g) bring  to the notice of the Vice -Chancellor unauthorised expenditure and other financial 
irregularities and suggest disciplinary action against persons at fault; and  
(h) call for from any office, laboratory, college or institution maintained by the University an d 
information or returns that he may consider necessary for performance of his duties.  
(10) Any receipt given by the Comptroller or the person or persons duly authorised in this behalf 
by the Board for any money payable to the University shall be sufficien t discharge for payment of 
such money.  
Heads of Departments:  
10. (1) Each Department shall have a Head appointed by the Vice -Chancellor who shall be not 
below the rank of an Associate Professor and whose duties and functions and terms and conditions of 
appointment shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(2) The Head of Department shall be responsible to the Dean for teaching, to Director of Research 
for research, to Director of Extension Education for extension education work.  
(3) The Dean shall be the admin istrative controlling officer of the Heads of Departments in 
college concerned:  
Provided that if there is more than one Professor in any Department, the Head of the Department 
shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor from amongst the Professors:  
Provided further that in the case of Department where there is only one Professor, the Vice -
Chancellor shall have the option, to appoint either the Professor or an Associate Professor as the Head 
of the Department.  
(4) It shall be open to a Professor or an Associat e Professor to decline the offer of appointment as 
the Head of the Department.  
(5) A Professor or an Associate Professor appointed as Head of the Department shall hold office 
as such for a period of three years and shall be eligible for reappointment.  
(6) A Head of the Department may resign his office at any time during his tenure of office.  
(7) A Head of the Department shall perform such functions as may be prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(8) The Head of the Department shall retire at the age of sixty -five y ears. 
Librarians:  
11. (1) Every Librarian shall be appointed by the Board on the recommendations of the Selection 
Committee constituted for the purpose under Statute 18 and he shall be a whole -time salaried officer 
of the University.  21 
 (2) Every Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to him 
by the Vice -Chancellor.  
Constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Management:  
12. (1) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:  — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor, ex officio  Chairman;  
(ii) three Secretaries, from amongst the Secretaries -in-charge of the Departments of 
Agriculture or Animal Husbandry, Fishery and Horticulture of the State of Bihar to be nominated 
by the Visitor by rotation;  
(iii) three eminent scientists to be nominated by the Visitor;  
(iv) one distinguished person representing Agro -based industries or a manufacturer having a 
special knowledge in agricultural development to be nominated by the Visitor;  
(v) the Deputy Director -General (Education) representing the Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research;  
(vi) one Dean of college and one Director to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor on 
rotational basis;  
(vii) two persons representing farmers to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor;  
(viii) one woman social worker representing woman social organisation to be nominated by 
the Vice -Chancellor;  
(ix) an Advisor (Agriculture), NITI Aayog;  
(x) a distinguished authority on natural resource or environment management to be nominated 
by the Vis itor; 
(xi) two persons not below the rank of Joint Secretary representing respectively the 
Departments of Government of India dealing with the Agriculture and Animal Husbandry to be 
nominated by the concerned Secretary to the Government of India;  
(xii) nom inee of the Secretary representing the Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education, Government of India;  
(xiii) the Registrar of the University -Secretary.  
(2) The term of office of the members of the Board, other than ex officio  members, shall be thr ee 
years.  
(3) The Board shall have the power of management and administration of the revenue and 
property of the University and the conduct of all administrative affairs of the University not otherwise 
provided for.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Ac t, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Board shall in 
addition to all other powers vested in it, have the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to create teaching and academic posts, to determine the number and emoluments of such 
posts and to define the duties and conditions of service of University staff, subject to the approval 
of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research;  
(ii) to appoint such teachers and other academic staff, as may be necessary, and Deans of 
colleges, Director and Heads of other instituti ons maintained by the University on the 
recommendations of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and to fill up temporary 
vacancies therein;  
(iii) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts and to make appointments 
thereto in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances;  22 
 (iv) to regulate and enforce discipline among employees in accordance with the Statutes and 
Ordinances;  
(v) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, investments, property, business and all 
other adm inistrative affairs of the University, and for that purpose to appoint such agents as it 
may think fit;  
(vi) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non -recurring expenditure for a year on the 
recommendations of the Finance Committee;  
(vii) to i nvest any money belonging to the University, including any unapplied income, in 
such stocks, funds shares or securities, from time to time, as it may think fit or in the purchase of 
immovable property in India, with the like powers of varying such investme nt from time to time;  
(viii) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immovable property on behalf of the 
University;  
(ix) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus and other means needed for 
carrying on the work of the University;  
(x) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on behalf of the University;  
(xi) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and, if thought fit, to redress any grievances of the 
employees and students of the University;  
(xii) to fix fees, honorarium, emolument s and travelling allowances of examiners or experts or 
consultants, advisors and officers on special duty;  
(xiii) to select a common seal for the University and provide for the custody and use of such 
seal; 
(xiv) to make such special arrangements as may be  necessary for the residence and discipline 
of women students;  
(xv) to delegate any of its powers to the Vice -Chancellor, Deans, Directors, Registrar or 
Comptroller or such other employee or authority of the University or to a Committee appointed 
by it as it may deem fit;  
(xvi) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(xvii) to provide for appointment of Visiting Professor, Emeritus Professor, Consultant and 
Officers on Special Duty and scholars and to determine the terms and  conditions of such 
appointment;  
(xviii) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred on it 
by the Act, or the Statutes.  
Quorum for meetings of the Board:  
13. Five members of the Board shall form the quorum for a meeting of the Board.  
Constitution and powers of the Academic Council:  
14. (1) The Academic Council shall consist of the following members, namely:  — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor, ex officio  Chairman;  
(ii) all the Deans of the colleges of the University;  
(iii) the Director of Research of the University;  
(iv) the Director of Extension Education of the University;  
(v) the Director of Education;  
(vi) a Librarian to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor on rotational basis;  23 
 (vii) two eminent scientists to be co -opted from  outside the University to be nominated by 
the Vice -Chancellor;  
(viii) seven Heads of the Departments, at least one from each Faculty to be nominated by 
the Vice -Chancellor;  
(ix) the Registrar of the University, ex officio  Secretary.  
(2) The term of office  of the members of the Academic Council other than ex officio  members 
shall be three years.  
(3) Subject to the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Academic Council shall, in addition to 
all other powers vested in it, have the following powers, namely :— 
(a) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University and to give 
directions regarding methods of instruction, co -operative teaching among colleges and institutions, 
evaluation and improvements in academic standards;  
(b) to br ing about inter -college coordination and establish or appoint Committee on academic 
matters;  
(c) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own initiative or on a reference 
by a college or the Board and to take appropriate action thereo n; and  
(d) to frame such regulations and rules consistent with the Statutes and the Ordinances regarding 
the academic functioning of the University, discipline, residences, admissions, award of fellowships 
and studentships, fees, concessions, corporate life and attendance.  
Quorum for meetings of the Academic Council:  
15. One-third members of the Academic Council shall form the quorum for a meeting of the 
Academic Council.  
Board of Studies:  
16. (1) Each Faculty shall have a Board of Studies.  
(2) The Board  of Studies of each Faculty shall be constituted as under:  — 
(i) Dean of Faculty —Chairperson;  
(ii) Director of Research —Member;  
(iii) Director of Extension Education —Member;  
(iv) All Heads of Departments of the Faculty not below the rank of Associate           
Professor —Member;  
(v) One representative of the Academic Council not belonging to the particular Faculty to be 
nominated by the Vice -Chancellor;  
(vi) Two eminent scientists from agricultural education system not belonging to the 
University to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor;  
(vii) One final year Post -Graduate student with highest Overall Grade Point Average     
(OGPA)  —Member;  
(viii) Assistant Registrar (Academic) of the Faculty —Member;  
(ix) Director of Education —Member.  
(3) The functions of th e Board of Studies shall be to recommend to the Academic Council, the 
course curriculum to be prescribed for various degrees to be offered by the concerned faculty and to 
make suitable recommendations for the teaching of the prescribed approved course, nam ely: — 
(a) courses of studies and appointment of examiners for courses, but excluding research 
degrees;  
(b) appointment of supervisors of research; and  
(c) measures for the improvement of the standard of teaching and research.  
 24 
 Finance Committee:  
17. (1) The Finance Committee shall consist of the following members, namely:  — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor —Chairman;  
(ii) Financial Advisor, Department of Agricultural Research and Education or his nominee not 
below the rank of Deputy Secretary;  
(iii) three persons to be nominated by the Board, out of whom at least one shall be a member 
of the Board;  
(iv) three persons to be nominated by the Visitor; and  
(v) the Comptroller of the University —Member -Secretary.  
(2) Three members of the Finance Committee shall form the quorum for meeting of the Finance 
Committee.  
(3) The members of the Finance Committee other than ex officio  members, shall hold office for a 
term of three years.  
(4) A member of the Finance Committee shall have the right to record a minute of dissent if he  
does not agree with any decision of the Finance Committee.  
(5) The Finance Committee shall meet at least twice a year to examine the accounts and to 
scrutinise proposals for expenditure.  
(6) Every proposal relating to creation of posts and those items whi ch have not been included in 
the Budget, shall be examined by the Finance Committee before they are considered by the Board.  
(7) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University prepared by the 
Comptroller, shall be laid before the Finance  Committee for consideration and comments and 
thereafter submitted to the Board for approval.  
(8) The Finance Committee shall recommend limits for the total recurring expenditure and the 
total non -recurring expenditure for the year, based on the income and  resources of the University 
(which, in case of productive works, may include the proceeds of loans).  
Selection Committees:  
18. (1) There shall be a selection Committee for making recommendations to the Board for 
appointment to the post of teachers, Comptr oller, Registrar, Librarians, Deans of colleges, Directors 
and Heads of other institutions maintained by the University.  
(2) The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts specified in column 1 of the Table 
below shall consist of members as specified  in the corresponding entries in column 2 of the said 
Table:  
TABLE  
 
1 2 3 
A. Directors/Deans  (i) Vice -Chancellor or his nominee —Chairman  
(ii) One nominee of the Visitor —Member  
(iii) Three eminent scientists not below the rank of Vice -
Chancellor or equivalent (serving or retired) to be 
nominated by the Vice -Chancellor from a panel of six 
names approved by the Board -Member.  
B. Professors/Equivalent  (i) Vice Chancellor or his nominee —Chairman  
(ii) One nominee of the Visitor —Member  25 
 (iii) Dean of concerned Faculty —Member  
(iv) Director of Research or Director of Extension 
Education or Director of Education to be nominated by 
the Vice -Chancellor —Member  
(v) Three eminent subject specialists not below the rank 
of Head of Departments (serving or retired ) to be 
nominated by the Vice -Chancellor out of a panel of six 
names approved by the Board —Member.  
C. Associate Professor/Assistant 
Professor/Equivalent  (i) Vice -Chancellor or his nominee —Chairman  
(ii) One nominee of the Visitor —Member  
(iii) Dean of conce rned Faculty —Member  
(iv) Director of Education or Director of Research or 
Director of Extension Education to be nominated by the 
Vice -Chancellor —Member  
(v) Two eminent teachers or scientists not below the rank 
of Professor or equivalent (serving or retired ) to be 
nominated by the Vice -Chancellor out of a panel of six 
names approved by the Board —Members.  
D. Registrar/Comptroller/Librarian  (i) Vice -Chancellor or his nominee —Chairman             
(ii) One nominee of the Visitor —Member  
(iii) One Director/Dean to be nominated by the           
Vice -Chancellor —Member  
(iv) Two experts in the concerned subject to be nominated 
by the Vice -Chancellor, out of a panel of six names 
approved by the Board —Members.  
 (3) The Vice -Chancellor, or in his absence, his nominee shall preside at the meeting of the 
Selection Committee:  
Provided that the meetings of the Selection Committee shall be fixed after prior consultation with 
the nominees of the Visitor:  
Provided further that the proceedings of th e Selection Committee shall not be valid unless at least 
two members, not in the service of the University are present in the meeting.  
(4) The meeting of the Selection Committee shall be convened by the Vice -Chancellor or in his 
absence by his nominee.  
(5) The procedure to be followed by the Selection Committee in making recommendations shall 
be decided by the Committee prior to the interview.  
(6) If the Board is unable to accept the recommendations made by the Selection Committee, it 
shall record its reaso ns and submit the case to the Visitor for final orders.  
(7) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made in the manner indicated below: — 
(i) The Vice -Chancellor shall have the authority to appoint a person on ad hoc  basis for a 
period not exceeding six months extendable by a further period of six months with the approval of 
the Board:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor is satisfied that in the interest of work it is necessary to 
fill the vacancy, the appointment ma y be made on a purely temporary basis by the local Selection 
Committee referred to in sub -clause ( ii) for the period not exceeding six months.    1 2 3 26 
 (ii) If the temporary vacancy is for a period less than one year, an appointment to such 
vacancy shall be made on  the recommendation of the local Selection Committee consisting of the 
Dean of the college concerned, the Head of the Department and a nominee of the                     
Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and th e Head of the 
Department, the Selection Committee may contain two nominees of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that in case of sudden casual vacancies of teaching posts caused by death or 
any other reason, the Dean may, in consultation with the Head o f the Department concerned, 
make a temporary appointment for one month and report to the Vice -Chancellor and the Registrar 
about such appointment.  
(iii) No teacher appointed temporarily shall, if he is not recommended by the regular 
Selection Committee for  appointment under the Statutes, be continued in service on such 
temporary employment, unless he is subsequently selected by the local Selection Committee or 
the regular Selection Committee, for a temporary or permanent appointment, as the case may be.  
(8) Mode of constitution of the Selection Committee for non -academic staff, not prescribed in the 
Statutes, shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
Special mode of appointment:  
19. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 18, the Board may invite a person of high 
academic distinction and professional attainments to accept a post of Professor or Associate Professor 
or any other academic post in the University, as the case may be, on such terms and conditions as it 
deems fit, and on the person agreeing  to do so, appoint him to the post.  
(2) The Board may appoint a teacher or any other academic staff working in any other University 
or organisation for undertaking a joint project in accordance with the manner laid down in the 
Ordinances.  
Appointment for a  fixed tenure:  
20. The Board may appoint a person selected in accordance with the procedure laid down in 
Statute 18 for a fixed tenure on such terms and conditions as it deems fit.  
Qualifications of Director, Dean, Professor, etc.:  
21. (1) Qualifications o f Director, Dean, Professor, Associate Professor and Assistant Professor of 
different Faculties and their equivalents in Research and Extension Education shall be as prescribed 
by the Ordinances.  
(2) Qualification of non -academic staff shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
Committees:  
22. (1) The authorities of the University specified in section 17 may appoint as many standing or 
special Committees as it may deem fit, and may appoint to such Committees persons who are not 
members of such authority.  
(2) Any such Committee appointed under clause ( 1) may deal with any subject delegated to it 
subject to confirmation by the authority appointing it.  
Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of the teachers, etc.:  
23. (1) All the teachers and other ac ademic staff of the University shall, in the absence of any 
agreement to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as 
are specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations.  
(2) Every teacher and other staff of the University shall be appointed on a written contract, the 
term of which shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(3) A copy of every contract referred to in clause ( 2) shall be deposited with the Registrar.  27 
 Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of other employees:  
24. All the non -academic employees of the University, shall in the absence of any contract to the 
contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as are specified in 
the Statutes, the Ord inances and the Regulations as made from time to time.  
Seniority list:  
25. (1) Whenever, in accordance with the Statutes, any person is to hold an office or be a member 
of an authority of the University by rotation according to seniority, such seniority sh all be determined 
according to the length of continuous service of such person in his grade and, in accordance with such 
other principles as the Board may, from time to time, prescribe.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain, in respect of each class of persons 
to whom the provisions of these Statutes apply, a complete and up -to-date seniority list in accordance 
with the provisions of clause ( 1). 
(3) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous service in a particular gr ade or the 
relative seniority of any persons is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar may, on his own motion and 
shall, at the request of any person, submit the matter to the Board whose decision thereon shall be 
final.  
Removal of employees of the University:  
26. (1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct against a teacher, a member of the academic 
staff or other employee of the University, the Vice -Chancellor, in case of the teacher or member of the 
academic staff and the authority competent to appoint (hereinafter referred to as the appointing 
authority) in the case of other employee, may, by order in writing, place such teacher, member of the 
academic staff or other employee, as the case may be, under suspension and shall forthwith report to 
the Board,  the circumstances in which the order was made:  
Provided that the Board may, if it is of the opinion, that the circumstances of the case do not 
warrant the suspension of the teacher or a member of the academic staff, revoke such order.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of the contract of appointment or of any 
other terms and conditions of service of the employees, the Board in respect of teacher and other 
academic staff and the appointing authority, in respect of other employees, shall hav e the power to 
remove a teacher or a member of the academic staff, or other employees, as the case may be, on 
grounds of misconduct.  
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Board or the appointing authority, as the case may be, shall not be 
entitled to remove any teach er, member of the academic staff or other employees except for a good 
cause and after giving three months, notice or on payment of three months salary in lieu thereof.  
(4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall be removed under cl ause 
(2) or clause ( 3) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the 
action proposed to be taken in regard to him.  
(5) The removal of a teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall take effect 
from the date  on which the order of removal is made:  
Provided that where the teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee is under 
suspension at the time of his removal, such removal shall take effect from the date on which he was 
placed under suspension.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Statute, a teacher, 
member of the academic staff or other employee may resign, — 
(a) if he is a permanent employee, only after giving three months' notice in writing to the Board or 
the appointing authority, as the case may be, or by paying three months' salary in lieu thereof;  
(b) if he is not a permanent employee, only after giving one month's notice in writing to the Board 
or, the appointing authority, as the case may be, or by payin g one month's salary in lieu thereof:  28 
 Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date from which the resignation is 
accepted by the Board or the appointing authority, as the case may be.  
Honorary degrees:  
27. (1) The Board may, on the recommendation of the Academic Council and by a resolution 
passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting, make proposals to 
the Visitor for the conferment of honorary degrees:  
Provided that in case of emergency, the Boa rd may, on its own motion, make such proposals.  
(2) The Board may, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the 
members present and voting, withdraw, with the previous sanction of the Visitor, any honorary degree 
conferred by the  University.  
Withdrawal of degrees, etc.:  
28. The Board may, by a special resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the 
members present and voting, withdraw any degree or academic distinction conferred on, or any 
certificate or diploma  granted to, any person by the University for good and sufficient cause:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been given to that 
person calling upon him to show cause within such time as may be specified in the not ice why such a 
resolution should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in 
support of them, have been considered by the Board.  
Maintenance of discipline among students of the University:  
29. (1) All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in relation to students of the 
University shall vest in the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor may delegate all or any of his powers as he deems proper to such 
officers as he may specify in this behalf.  
(3) Witho ut prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to the maintenance of discipline and 
taking such action, as may seem to him appropriate for the maintenance of discipline, the              
Vice -Chancellor may, in exercise of his powers, by order, dire ct that any student or students be 
expelled, or rusticated, for a specified period, or be not admitted to a course or courses of study in a 
college, institution or Department of the University for a stated period, or be punished with fine for an 
amount to be specified in the order, or be debarred from taking an examination or examinations 
conducted by the University, college, institution or Department for one or more years, or that the 
results of the student or students concerned in the examination or exami nations in which he or they 
have appeared be cancelled.  
(4) The Dean of colleges, institutions and Heads of the teaching Departments in the University 
shall have the authority to exercise all such disciplinary powers over the students in their respective 
colleges, institutions and teaching Departments in the University as may be necessary for the proper 
conduct of such colleges, institutions and teaching in the Departments.  
(5) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice -Chancellor, the Deans and other persons specified 
in clause ( 4), detailed rules of disciplines and proper conduct shall be made by the University.  
(6) The Deans of the colleges, institutions and Heads of the teaching Departments in the 
University may also make the supplementary rules as they deem necessary for the purposes referred to 
in clause ( 5). 
(7) At the time of admission, every student shall be required to sign a declaration to the effect that 
he submits himself to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Vice -Chancellor and other auth orities of the 
University.  
Maintenance of discipline among students of colleges, etc.:  
30. All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in relation to the students of the 
college or an institution maintained by the University, shall vest in th e Dean of the College or 
institution, as the case may be, in accordance with the procedure prescribed by the Ordinances.   29 
  
Convocations:  
31. Convocations of the University for the conferring of the degrees or for other purposes shall be 
held in such manner  as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
Acting Chairman:  
32. When no provision is made for a Chairman to preside over a meeting of any Committee or 
when the Chairman so provided for is absent, or the Vice -Chancellor has not in writing made any 
arrangement , the members shall elect one from among themselves to preside over meeting.  
Resignation:  
33. Any member, other than an ex officio member of the Board, Academic Council or any other 
authority of the University or any Committee of such authority may resign by letter addressed to the 
Registrar and the resignation shall take effect as soon as such letter is received by the Registrar.  
Disqualifications:  
34. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of any of the 
authorities  of the University, — 
(i) if he is of unsound mind;  
(ii) if he is an undischarged insolvent;  
(iii) if he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving moral turpitude and 
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for a period of not less t han six months.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or has been subjected to any of the 
disqualifications mentioned in clause ( 1), the question shall be referred to the Visitor and his decision 
thereon shall be final and no suit or other p roceeding shall lie in any civil court against such decision.  
Residence condition for membership and office:  
35. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, a person who is not ordinarily resident in 
India shall not be eligible to be an officer of the University or a member of any authority of the 
University.  
Membership of authorities by virtue of membership of other bodies:  
36. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, a person who holds any post in the 
University or is a member of any au thority of the University in his capacity as a member of a 
particular authority or as the holder of a particular appointment shall hold such office or membership 
only for so long as he continues to be a member of that particular authority or the holder of that 
particular appointment, as the case may be.  
Alumni Association:  
37. (1) There shall be an Alumni Association for the University.  
(2) The subscription for membership of the Alumni Association shall be prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(3) No member of the Alumni Association shall be entitled to vote or stand for election unless he 
has been a member of the said association for at least one year prior to the date of the election and is a 
degree holder of the University of at least five years standing:  
Provide d that the condition relatin g to the completion of one year’ s membership shall not apply in 
the case of the first election.  
Students' Council:  
38. (1) There shall be, in each Colleg e of the University, a Students’  Council for each academic 
session for the purpose of making recommendations to the authorities of the University with regard to 30 
 various activities relating to students welfare, including games, sports, dramatics, debates, cultural 
activities, etc., and su ch Council shall consist of:  — 
(i) the Dean of the College —Chairperson;  
(ii) all Hostel Wardens;  
(iii) Campus Estate Officer;  
(iv) five Heads of the Departments to be nominated by the Dean;  
(v) Hostel Prefects;  
(vi) one student from each class or year who has secured the Highest Overall Grade Point 
Average (OGPA) in the previous academic session;  
(vii) Students Welfare Officer —Member -Secretary.  
(2) The Students Council shall meet at least once in each semester.  
Ordinances how made:  
39. (1) The first Ordinan ces made under sub -section ( 2) of section 27 may be amended or 
repealed at any time by the Board in the manner specified below.  
(2) No Ordinances in respect of the matters enumerated in section 27, other than those enumerated 
in clause ( n) of sub -section ( 1) thereof shall be made by the Board unless a draft of such Ordinance 
has been proposed by the Academic Council.  
(3) The Board shall not have power to amend any draft of any Ordinance proposed by the 
Academic Council under clause ( 2), but may reject the p roposal or return the draft to the Academic 
Council for reconsideration either in whole or in part, together with any amendment which the Board 
may suggest.  
(4) Where the Board has rejected or returned the draft of an Ordinance proposed by the Academic 
Council, the Academic Council may consider the question afresh and in case the original draft is 
reaffirmed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting and more than 
half the total member of numbers of the Academic Council, the  draft may be sent back to the Board 
which shall either adopt it or refer it to the Visitor whose decision shall be final.  
(5) Every Ordinance made by the Board shall come into effect immediately.  
(6) Every Ordinance made by the Board shall be submitted to  the Visitor within two weeks from 
the date of its adoption.  
(7) The Visitor shall have the power to direct the University within four weeks of the receipt of 
the Ordinance to suspend the operation of any such Ordinance and he shall, as soon as possible, 
inform the Board about his objection to the proposed Ordinance.  
(8) The Visitor may, after receiving the comments of the University, either withdraw the order 
suspending the Ordinance, or disallow the Ordinance and his decision shall be final.  
 Regulations:  
40. (1) The authorities of the University may make Regulations consistent with the Act, the 
Statutes and the Ordinances for the following matters, namely: — 
(i) laying down the procedure to be observed at meetings and the number of members 
required to form  a quorum;  
(ii) providing for all matters which are required by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances to 
be specified by the Regulations;  
(iii) providing for all other matters concerning such authority or Committees appointed by 
them and not provided for  by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  31 
 (2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the giving of notice to 
the members of such authorities of the dates of meetings and of the business to be considered at 
meetings and fo r the keeping of a record of the proceedings of meetings.  
(3) The Board may direct the amendment in such manner as it may specify of any Regulation 
made under the Statutes or the annulment of any such Regulation.  
Delegation of Powers:  
41. Subject to the provisions of the Act and the Statutes, any officer or authority of the University 
may delegate his or its power to any other officer or authority or person under his or its respective 
control and subject to the condition that overall responsibility for th e exercise of power so delegated 
shall continue to vest in the officer or authority delegating such power.  
Collaboration with other Institution and Organisations:  
42. The University shall have the authority to enter into an agreement through a Memorandum o f 
Understanding with any research and/or academic institution of higher learning to conduct 
collaborative Post -Graduate Research Programme to fulfil the partial requirement for the award of 
Master's and Ph. D. degrees of the University.  
Constitution and Fu nction of Research Council:  
43. (1) There shall be a Research Council of the University to exercise general supervision over 
the research policies and programmes of the University in the area of Agriculture and allied 
disciplines.  
(2) The Research Council shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor —Chairman;  
(ii) Director of Extension Education —Member;  
(iii) Director of Education —Member;   
(iv) all Deans of the colleges of the University —Members;  
(v) Nominee of the State Governments not below the rank of Director —Members;  
(vi) all coordinators of the Research Teams of the University —Members;  
(vii) two eminent agricultural scientists to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor for three 
years —Members;  
(viii) Director of Research —Member -Secretary.  
(3) The Research Council shall meet at least once in a year.  
(4) One -third members of the Research Council shall form a quorum for the meeting of the 
Research Council.  
(5) If a vacancy occurs due to resignation or otherwise the same shal l be filled up for the 
remaining period.  
Constitution and function of the Extension Education Council:  
44. (1) There shall be an Extension Education Council of the University to exercise general 
supervision over the extension education policies and program mes of the University in the area of 
Agriculture and allied disciplines.  
(2) The Extension Education Council shall consist of the following members, namely:  — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor —Chairman;  
(ii) Director of Research —Member;  
(iii) Director of Education —Member;  32 
 (iv) all Deans of the colleges of the University —Members;  
(v) Nominee of the State Governments not below the rank of Director —Members;  
(vi) two farmers' representatives and one woman social worker to be nominated by the      
Vice -Chancellor for a t erm of three years —Members;  
(vii) two eminent scientists from outside the University to be nominated by the                  
Vice -Chancellor for two years —Members;  
(viii) Director of Extension Education —Member -Secretary.  
(3) The Extension Education Council  shall meet at least once in a year.  
(4) One -third members of the Extension Education Council shall form a quorum for the meeting 
of the Extension Education Council.  
Application of the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972, etc.:  
45. (1) All regular  employees of the University shall be governed by the provisions of the Central 
Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972, and the General Provident Fund (Central Services) Rules, 1960, 
in respect of grant of Pension and Gratuity and General Provident Fund.  
(2) Any amendment made by the Government of India in the Central Civil Services (Pension) 
Rules, 1972, and the General Provident Fund (Central Services) Rules, 1960, shall also be applicable 
to employees of the University.  
(3) In respect of commutation of pen sion, with any amendments there to the provisions of the 
Central Civil Services (Commutation of Pension) Rules, 1981, shall apply.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the pension sanctioning authority and the pension authorisation 
authority.  
(5) Pension payme nt shall be centralised and controlled by Comptroller's office.  
--------------------------The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016--------------------------
1 THE INSOLVENCY AND BANKRUPTCY CODE, 2016 
___________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
___________   
PART I 
PRELIMINARY
SECTIONS 
1.  Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Application. 
3. Definitions. 
PART II 
INSOLVENCY RESOLUTION AND LIQUIDATION FOR CORPORATE PERSONS
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
4. Application of this Part. 
5. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
CORPORATE INSOLVENCY RESOLUTION PROCESS 
6. Persons who may initiate corporate insolvency resolution process. 
7. Initiation of corporate insolvency resolution process by financial creditor. 
8. Insolvency resolution by operational creditor. 
9. Application for initiation of corporate insolvency resolution process by operational creditor. 
10. Initiation of corporate insolvency resolution process by corporate applicant. 
11. Persons not entitled to make application. 
12. Time-limit for completion of insolvency resolution process. 
12A. Withdrawal of application admitted under section 7, 9 or 10. 
13. Declaration of moratorium and public announcement. 
14. Moratorium. 
15. Public announcement of corporate insolvency resolution process. 
16. Appointment and tenure of interim resolution professional. 
17. Management of affairs of corporate debtor by interim resolution professional. 
18. Duties of interim resolution professional. 2 SECTIONS
19. Personnel to extend co-operation to interim resolution professional. 
20. Management of operations of corporate debtor as going concern. 
21. Committee of creditors. 
22. Appointment of resolution professional. 
23. Resolution professional to conduct corporate insolvency resolution process. 
24. Meeting of committee of creditors. 
25. Duties of resolution professional. 
25A. Rights and duties of authorised representative of financial creditors. 
26. Application for avoidance of transactions not to affect proceedings. 
27. Replacement of resolution professional by committee of creditors. 
28. Approval of committee of creditors for certain actions. 
29.  Preparation of information memorandum. 
29A. Person not eligible to be resolution applicant. 
30. Submission of resolution plan. 
31.  Approval of resolution plan. 
32. Appeal. 
CHAPTER III 
LIQUIDATION PROCESS
33. Initiation of liquidation. 
34. Appointment of liquidator and fee to be paid. 
35. Powers and duties of liquidator. 
36. Liquidation estate. 
37. Powers of liquidator to access information. 
38. Consolidation of claims. 
39. Verification of claims. 
40. Admission or rejection of claims. 
41. Determination of valuation of claims. 
42. Appeal against the decision of liquidator. 
43. Preferential transactions and relevant time. 
44. Orders in case of preferential transactions. 
45. Avoidance of undervalued transactions. 
46. Relevant period for avoidable transactions. 3 SECTIONS
47. Application by creditor in cases of undervalued transactions. 
48. Order in cases of undervalued transactions. 
49. Transactions defrauding creditors. 
50. Extortionate credit transactions. 
51. Orders of Adjudicating Authority in respect of extortionate credit transactions. 
52. Secured creditor in liquidation proceedings. 
53. Distribution of assets. 
54. Dissolution of corporate debtor. 
CHAPTER IV 
FAST TRACK CORPORATE INSOLVENCY RESOLUTION PROCESS 
55. Fast track corporate insolvency resolution process. 
56. Time period for completion of fast track corporate insolvency resolution process. 
57. Manner of initiating fast track corporate insolvency resolution process. 
58. Applicability of Chapter II to this Chapter. 
CHAPTER V 
VOLUNTARY LIQUIDATION OF CORPORATE PERSONS 
59. Voluntary liquidation of corporate persons. 
CHAPTER VI 
ADJUDICATING  AUTHORITY FOR CORPORATE  PERSONS
60. Adjudicating Authority for corporate persons. 
61. Appeals and Appellate Authority. 
62. Appeal to Supreme Court. 
63. Civil court not to have jurisdiction. 
64. Expeditious disposal of applications. 
65. Fraudulent or malicious initiation of proceedings. 
66. Fraudulent trading or wrongful trading. 
67. Proceedings under section 66. 
CHAPTER VII 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
68. Punishment for concealment of property. 
69. Punishment for transactions defrauding creditors. 
70. Punishment for misconduct in course of corporate insolvency resolution process. 4 SECTIONS
71. Punishment for falsification of books of corporate debtor. 
72. Punishment for wilful and material omissions from statements relating to affairs of corporate 
debtor. 
73. Punishment for false representations to creditors. 
74. Punishment for contravention of moratorium or the resolution plan. 
75. Punishment for false information furnished in application. 
76. Punishment for non-disclosure of dispute or payment of debt by operational creditor. 
77. Punishment for providing false information in application made by corporate debtor. 
PART III 
INSOLVENCY  RESOLUTION AND BANKRUPTCY FOR INDIVIDUALS AND PARTNERSHIP  FIRMS
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
78. Application. 
79. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
FRESH START PROCESS
80. Eligibility for making an application. 
81. Application for fresh start order. 
82. Appointment of resolution professional. 
83. Examination of application by resolution professional. 
84. Admission or rejection of application by Adjudicating Authority. 
85. Effect of admission of application. 
86. Objections by creditor and their examination by resolution professional. 
87. Application against decision of resolution professional. 
88. General duties of debtor. 
89. Replacement of resolution professional. 
90. Directions for compliances of restrictions, etc. 
91. Revocation of order admitting application. 
92. Discharge order. 
93. Standard of conduct. 5 CHAPTER III 
INSOLVENCY RESOLUTION PROCESS
SECTIONS 
94. Application by debtor to initiate insolvency resolution process. 
95. Application by creditor to initiate insolvency resolution process. 
96. Interim moratorium. 
97. Appointment of resolution professional. 
98. Replacement of resolution professional. 
99. Submission of report by resolution professional. 
100. Admission or rejection of application. 
101. Moratorium. 
102. Public notice and claims from creditors. 
103. Registering of claims by creditors. 
104. Preparation of list of creditors. 
105. Repayment plan. 
106. Report of resolution professional on repayment plan. 
107. Summoning of meeting of creditors. 
108. Conduct of meeting of creditors. 
109. Voting rights in meeting of creditors. 
110. Rights of secured creditors in relation to repayment plan. 
111. Approval of repayment plan by creditors. 
112. Report of meeting of creditors on repayment plan. 
113. Notice of decisions taken at meeting of creditors. 
114. Order of Adjudicating Authority on repayment plan. 
115. Effect of order of Adjudicating Authority on repayment plan. 
116. Implementation and supervision of repayment plan. 
117. Completion of repayment plan. 
118. Repayment plan coming to end prematurely. 
119. Discharge order. 
120. Standard of conduct. 6 CHAPTER IV 
BANKRUPTCY ORDER FOR INDIVIDUALS AND PARTNERSHIP FIRMS 
SECTIONS
121. Application for bankruptcy. 
122. Application by debtor. 
123. Application by creditor. 
124. Effect of application. 
125. Appointment of insolvency professional as bankruptcy trustee. 
126. Bankruptcy order. 
127. Validity of bankruptcy order. 
128. Effect of bankruptcy order. 
129. Statement of financial position. 
130. Public notice inviting claims from creditors. 
131. Registration of claims. 
132. Preparation of list of creditors. 
133. Summoning of meeting of creditors. 
134. Conduct of meeting of creditors. 
135. Voting rights of creditors. 
136. Administration and distribution of estate of bankruptcy. 
137. Completion of administration. 
138. Discharge order. 
139. Effect of discharge. 
140. Disqualification of bankrupt. 
141. Restrictions on bankrupt. 
142. Modification or recall of bankruptcy order. 
143. Standard of conduct. 
144. Fees of bankruptcy trustee. 
145. Replacement of bankruptcy trustee. 
146. Resignation by bankruptcy trustee. 
147. Vacancy in office of bankruptcy trustee. 
148. Release of bankruptcy trustee. 7 CHAPTER V 
ADMINISTRATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF THE ESTATE OF THE BANKRUPT
SECTIONS
149. Functions of bankruptcy trustee. 
150. Duties of bankrupt towards bankruptcy trustee. 
151. Rights of bankruptcy trustee. 
152. General powers of bankruptcy trustee. 
153. Approval of creditors for certain acts. 
154. Vesting of estate of bankrupt in bankruptcy trustee. 
155. Estate of bankrupt. 
156. Delivery of property and documents to bankruptcy trustee. 
157. Acquisition of control by bankruptcy trustee. 
158. Restrictions on disposition of property. 
159. After-acquired property of bankrupt. 
160. Onerous property of bankrupt. 
161. Notice to disclaim onerous property. 
162. Disclaimer of leaseholds. 
163. Challenge against disclaimed property. 
164. Undervalued transactions. 
165. Preference transactions. 
166. Effect of order. 
167. Extortionate credit transactions. 
168. Obligations under contracts. 
169. Continuance of proceedings on death of bankrupt. 
170. Administration of estate of deceased bankrupt. 
171. Proof of debt. 
172. Proof of debt by secured creditors. 
173. Mutual credit and set-off. 
174. Distribution of interim dividend. 
175. Distribution of property. 
176. Final dividend. 8 SECTIONS
177. Claims of creditors. 
178. Priority of payment of debts. 
CHAPTER VI 
ADJUDICATING AUTHORITY FOR INDIVIDUALS AND PARTNERSHIP FIRMS 
179. Adjudicating authority for individuals and partnership firms. 
180. Civil court not to have jurisdiction. 
181. Appeal to Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunal. 
182. Appeal to Supreme Court. 
183. Expeditious disposal of applications. 
CHAPTER VII 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
184. Punishment for false information, etc., by creditor in insolvency resolution process. 
185. Punishment for contravention of provisions. 
186. Punishment for false information, concealment, etc., by bankrupt. 
187. Punishment for certain actions. 
PART IV 
REGULATION OF INSOLVENCY PROFESSIONALS, AGENCIES AND INFORMATION UTILITIES 
CHAPTER I 
THE INSOLVENCY AND BANKRUPTCY BOARD OF INDIA 
188. Establishment and incorporation of Board. 
189. Constitution of Board. 
190. Removal of member from office. 
191. Powers of Chairperson. 
192. Meetings of Board. 
193. Member not to participate in meetings in certain cases. 
194. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Board, Officers and employees of Board. 
195. Power to designate financial sector regulator. 
CHAPTER II 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE BOARD 
196. Powers and functions of Board. 9 SECTIONS
197. Constitution of advisory committee, executive committee or other committee. 
198. Condonation of delay. 
CHAPTER III 
INSOLVENCY PROFESSIONAL AGENCIES
199. No person to function as insolvency professional agency without valid certificate of registration. 
200. Principles governing registration of insolvency professional agency. 
201. Registration of insolvency professional agency. 
202. Appeal to National Company Law Appellate Tribunal. 
203. Governing Board of insolvency professional agency. 
204. Functions of insolvency professional agencies. 
205. Insolvency professional agencies to make bye-laws. 
CHAPTER IV 
INSOLVENCY PROFESSIONALS 
206. Enrolled and registered persons to act as insolvency professionals. 
207. Registration of insolvency professionals. 
208. Functions and obligations of insolvency professionals. 
CHAPTER V 
INFORMATION UTILITIES 
209. No person to function as information utility without certificate of registration. 
210. Registration of information utility. 
211. Appeal to National Company Law Appellate Tribunal. 
212. Governing Board of information utility. 
213. Core services, etc., of information utilities. 
214. Obligations of information utility. 
215. Procedure for submission, etc., of financial information. 
216. Rights and obligations of persons submitting financial information. 
CHAPTER VI 
INSPECTION AND INVESTIGATION
217. Complaints against insolvency professional agency or its member or information utility. 
218. Investigation of insolvency professional agency or its member or information utility. 10 SECTIONS 
219. Show cause notice to insolvency professional agency or its member or information utility. 
220. Appointment of disciplinary committee. 
CHAPTER VII 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
221. Grants by Central Government. 
222. Board’s Fund. 
223. Accounts and audit. 
PART V 
MISCELLANEOUS
224. Insolvency and Bankruptcy Fund. 
225. Power of Central Government to issue directions. 
226. Power of Central Government to supersede Board. 
227. Power of Central Government to notify financial service providers, etc. 
228. Budget. 
229. Annual report. 
230. Delegation. 
231. Bar of jurisdiction. 
232. Members, officers and employees of Board to the public servants. 
233. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
234. Agreements with foreign countries. 
235. Letter of request to a country outside India in certain cases. 
235A. Punishment where no specific penalty or punishment is provided. 
236. Trial of offences by Special Court. 
237. Appeal and revision. 
238. Provisions of this Code to override other laws. 
238A. Limitation. 
239. Power to make rules. 
240. Power to make regulations. 
240A. Application of this Code to micro, small and medium enterprises. 
241. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament. 11 SECTIONS
242. Power to remove difficulties. 
243. Repeal of certain enactments and savings. 
244. Transitional provisions. 
245. Amendments of Act 9 of 1932. 
246. Amendments of Act 1 of 1944. 
247. Amendments of Act 43 of 1961. 
248. Amendments of Act 52 of 1962. 
249. Amendments of Act 51 of 1993. 
250. Amendments of Act 32 of 1994. 
251. Amendments of Act 54 of 2002. 
252. Amendments of Act 1 of 2004. 
253. Amendments of Act 51 of 2007. 
254. Amendments of Act 6 of 2009. 
255. Amendments of Act 18 of 2013. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE. 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE. 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE. 
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE. 
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE. 
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE. 
THE NINTH SCHEDULE. 
THE TENTH SCHEDULE. 
THE ELEVENTH SCHEDULE. 
THE TWELFTH SCHEDULE. 12 THE INSOLVENCY AND BANKRUPTCY CODE, 2016 
ACT NO. 31 OF 2016 
[28th May , 2016.] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the laws relating to reorganisation and insolvency resolution of 
corporate persons, partnership firms and individuals in a time bound manner for 
maximisation of value of assets of such persons, to promote entrepreneurship, availability of 
credit and balance the interests of all the stakeholders including alteration in the order of 
priority of payment of Government dues and to establish an Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Board of India, and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY
1.  Short title, extent and commencement.— (1) This Code may be called the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code, 2016. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India: 
Provided that Part III of this Code shall not extend to the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint: 
1. 5th August, 2016, vide Notification no. S.O. 2618(E), dated 5th August, 2016 (ss. 188 to 194),  see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii). 
19th August, 2016—S. 3, cls. (1), (5), (22), (26), (28), (37), ss. 221, 222, 225, 230, 232, 233, sub-section ( 1) of cls. ( zd), sub-
section ( 2) of section 239, sub-section ( 1) and cls. ( zt), sub-section (2) of section 240; ss. 241 and 242;  vide  notification No. 
S.O. 2746(E), dated 19th August 2016, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
1st November, 2016—S. 3 of Cla. (2), (3), (4), (6), (7), (8), (9), (10), (11), (12),(13), (14), (15), (16), (17), (18), (19), (20), 
(21), (23), (24), (25), (27), (29), (30), (31), (32), (33), (34), (35), (36), ss. 196, 197, 223, sub-section (2) of section 239, clause 
(ze), (zf), (zg), (zh), (zl), (zm), sub-section (2) of section 240;cls. (a) to ( zm); (zu) to ( zzzc); s. 244, 246 to 248 (both 
inclusive); 250, 252 , vide  notification No. S.O. 3344(E), see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii). 
15th November, 2016—S. 199 to 207 (both inclusive), sub-section (1) of 208, Cl.( c), (e), s. 208(2), s. 217 to 220 (both 
inclusive), ss. 251, 253, 254 and 255, vide Notification No. S.O. 3453(E), dated 15th November, 2016  
1st December, 2016 —S. 2, Cl.(a) to (d)(except with regard to voluntary liquidation or Bankruptcy), s. 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 
66, 67, 68, 69, 70 (both inclusive), ss. 198, 231, 236, 237, 238(both inclusive), sub-section (2) of s. 239, cl ( a), (b), (c), (d), 
(e), (d), (f), vide notification No. S.O. 3594(E) dated 30th November 2016, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 
3(ii). 
15th December 2016—Ss 33 to 54 (both inclusive), vide notification No. S.O. 3687(E), dated 9th December 2016, see Gazette 
of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii). 
1st April 2017—Sub-section (2) of cls. ( a) to ( d), vide notification No. S.O. 1570(E), dated 15th May 2017, see Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii). 
1st April 2017—S. 59; Ss. 209 to 215 (both inclusive); Sub-section ( 1) of S 216; Ss. 234 and 235 vide notification No. S.O. 
1005(E), dated 30th March 2017, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii). 
14th June 2017—Ss 55 to 58 (both inclusive), vide notification No. S.O. 1910(E), dated 14th June 2017, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii). 
1st May, 2018—Ss. 227 to 229 (both inclusive), vide notification No. S.O. 1817(E), dated 1st May 2018, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii). 13 Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Code and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement of this Code shall be construed as a reference to the 
commencement of that provision. 
2. Application .—The provisions of this Code shall apply to— 
(a) any company incorporated under the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013) or under any previous 
company law;  
(b) any other company governed by any special Act for the time being in force, except in so far as 
the said provisions are inconsistent with the provisions of such special Act; 
(c) any Limited Liability Partnership incorporated under the Limited Liability Partnership                 
Act, 2008 (6 of 2009);  
(d) such other body incorporated under any law for the time being in force, as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf; 1*** 
2[(e) personal guarantors to corporate debtors;  
(f) partnership firms and proprietorship firms; and 
(g) individuals, other than persons referred to in clause ( e),] 
3. Definitions .—In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(1) “Board” means the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India established under                       
sub-section ( 1) of section 188; 
(2) “bench” means a bench of the Adjudicating Authority; 
(3) “bye-laws” mean the bye-laws made by the insolvency professional agency under section 205; 
(4) “charge” means an interest or lien created on the property or assets of any person or any of its 
undertakings or both, as the case may be, as security and includes a mortgage; 
(5) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Board; 
(6) “claim” means— 
(a) a right to payment, whether or not such right is reduced to judgment, fixed, disputed, 
undisputed, legal, equitable, secured or unsecured; 
(b) right to remedy for breach of contract under any law for the time being in force, if such 
breach gives rise to a right to payment, whether or not such right is reduced to judgment, fixed, 
matured, unmatured, disputed, undisputed, secured or unsecured; 
(7) “corporate person” means a company as defined in clause ( 20) of section 2 of the Companies 
Act, 2013 (18 of 2013), a limited liability partnership, as defined in clause ( n) of sub-section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009), or any other person incorporated 
with limited liability under any law for the time being in force but shall not include any financial 
service provider; 
(8) “corporate debtor” means a corporate person who owes a debt to any person; 
(9) “core services” means services rendered by an information utility for— 
(a) accepting electronic submission of financial information in such form and manner as may be 
specified; 
1. The word “and” omitted by Act 8 of 2018, s. 2 (w.e.f. 23-11-2017). 
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 23-11-2017).14 (b) safe and accurate recording of financial information; 
(c) authenticating and verifying the financial information submitted by a person; and 
(d) providing access to information stored with the information utility to persons as may be 
specified; 
(10) “creditor” means any person to whom a debt is owed and includes a financial creditor, an 
operational creditor, a secured creditor, an unsecured creditor and a decree-holder; 
(11) “debt” means a liability or obligation in respect of a claim which is due from any person and 
includes a financial debt and operational debt; 
(12) “default” means non-payment of debt when whole or any part or instalment of the amount of 
debt has become due and payable and is not 1[paid] by the debtor or the corporate debtor, as the case 
may be; 
(13) “financial information”, in relation to a person, means one or more of the following 
categories of information, namely:— 
(a) records of the debt of the person; 
(b) records of liabilities when the person is solvent; 
(c) records of assets of person over which security interest has been created; 
(d) records, if any, of instances of default by the person against any debt; 
(e) records of the balance sheet and cash-flow statements of the person; and 
(f) such other information as may be specified; 
(14) “financial institution” means— 
(a) a scheduled bank; 
(b) financial institution as defined in section 45-I of the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934 (2 of 1934); 
(c) public financial institution as defined in clause ( 72) of section 2 of the Companies          
Act, 2013 (18 of 2013); and 
(d) such other institution as the Central Government may by notification specify as a financial 
institution; 
(15) “financial product” means securities, contracts of insurance, deposits, credit arrangements 
including loans and advances by banks and financial institutions, retirement benefit plans, small 
savings instruments, foreign currency contracts other than contracts to exchange one currency 
(whether Indian or not) for another which are to be settled immediately, or any other instrument as 
may be prescribed; 
(16) “financial service” includes any of the following services, namely:— 
(a) accepting of deposits; 
(b) safeguarding and administering assets consisting of financial products, belonging to 
another person, or agreeing to do so; 
(c) effecting contracts of insurance; 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 2 for “repaid” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 15 (d) offering, managing or agreeing to manage assets consisting of financial products 
belonging to another person; 
(e) rendering or agreeing, for consideration, to render advice on or soliciting for the purposes 
of— 
(i) buying, selling, or subscribing to, a financial product; 
(ii) availing a financial service; or 
(iii) exercising any right associated with a financial product or financial service; 
(f) establishing or operating an investment scheme; 
(g) maintaining or transferring records of ownership of a financial product; 
(h) underwriting the issuance or subscription of a financial product; or 
(i) selling, providing, or issuing stored value or payment instruments or providing payment 
services; 
(17) “financial service provider” means a person engaged in the business of providing financial 
services in terms of authorisation issued or registration granted by a financial sector regulator; 
(18) “financial sector regulator” means an authority or body constituted under any law for the 
time being in force to regulate services or transactions of financial sector and includes the Reserve 
Bank of India, the Securities and Exchange Board of India, the Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority of India, the Pension Fund Regulatory Authority and such other regulatory 
authorities as may be notified by the Central Government; 
(19) “insolvency professional” means a person enrolled under section 206 with an insolvency 
professional agency as its member and registered with the Board as an insolvency professional under 
section 207; 
(20) “insolvency professional agency” means any person registered with the Board under           
section 201 as an insolvency professional agency; 
(21) “information utility” means a person who is registered with the Board as an information 
utility under section 210; 
(22) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette, and the terms “notified” 
and “notify” shall be construed accordingly; 
(23) “person” includes— 
(a) an individual; 
(b) a Hindu Undivided Family; 
(c) a company; 
(d) a trust; 
(e) a partnership; 
(f) a limited liability partnership; and 
(g) any other entity established under a statute, 
and includes a person resident outside India; 
(24) “person resident in India” shall have the meaning as assigned to such term in clause ( v) of 
section 2 of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999); 16 (25) “person resident outside India” means a person other than a person resident in India; 
(26) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government; 
(27) “property” includes money, goods, actionable claims, land and every description of property 
situated in India or outside India and every description of interest including present or future or vested 
or contingent interest arising out of, or incidental to, property; 
(28) “regulations” means the regulations made by the Board under this Code; 
(29) “Schedule” means the Schedule annexed to this Code; 
(30) “secured creditor” means a creditor in favour of whom security interest is created; 
(31) “security interest” means right, title or interest or a claim to property, created in favour of, or 
provided for a secured creditor by a transaction which secures payment or performance of an 
obligation and includes mortgage, charge, hypothecation, assignment and encumbrance or any other 
agreement or arrangement securing payment or performance of any obligation of any person:  
Provided that security interest shall not include a performance guarantee; 
(32) “specified” means specified by regulations made by the Board under this Code and the term 
“specify” shall be construed accordingly; 
(33) “transaction” includes a agreement or arrangement in writing for the transfer of assets, or 
funds, goods or services, from or to the corporate debtor; 
(34) “transfer” includes sale, purchase, exchange, mortgage, pledge, gift, loan or any other form 
of transfer of right, title, possession or lien; 
(35) “transfer of property” means transfer of any property and includes a transfer of any interest 
in the property and creation of any charge upon such property; 
(36) “workman” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( s) of section 2 of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947); 
(37) words and expressions used but not defined in this Code but defined in the Indian Contract 
Act, 1872 (9 of 1872), the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (9 of 1932), the Securities Contact 
(Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956), the Securities Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992), 
the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 (51 of 1993), the Limited 
Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009) and the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013), shall have the 
meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts. 
PART II 
INSOLVENCY RESOLUTION AND LIQUIDATION FOR CORPORATE PERSONS 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
4.Application of this Part .—This Part shall apply to matters relating to the insolvency and liquidation of 
corporate debtors where the minimum amount of the default is one lakh rupees:  
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, specify the minimum amount of default 
of higher value which shall not be more than one crore rupees. 
5. Definitions .—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(1) “Adjudicating Authority”, for the purposes of this Part, means National Company Law 
Tribunal constituted under section 408 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013); 17 (2) “auditor” means a chartered accountant certified to practice as such by the Institute of 
Chartered Accountants of India under section 6 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949); 
(3) “Chapter” means a Chapter under this Part; 
(4) “constitutional document”, in relation to a corporate person, includes articles of association, 
memorandum of association of a company and incorporation document of a Limited Liability 
Partnership; 
(5) “corporate applicant” means— 
(a) corporate debtor; or 
(b) a member or partner of the corporate debtor who is authorised to make an application for 
the corporate insolvency resolution process under the constitutional document of the corporate 
debtor; or  
(c) an individual who is in charge of managing the operations and resources of the corporate 
debtor; or 
(d) a person who has the control and supervision over the financial affairs of the corporate 
debtor;  
1[(5A) “corporate guarantor” means a corporate person who is the surety in a contract of 
guarantee to a corporate debtor;] 
(6) “dispute” includes a suit or arbitration proceedings relating to— 
(a) the existence of the amount of debt; 
(b) the quality of goods or service; or 
(c) the breach of a representation or warranty; 
(7) “financial creditor” means any person to whom a financial debt is owed and includes a person 
to whom such debt has been legally assigned or transferred to; 
(8) “financial debt” means a debt along with interest, if any, which is disbursed against the 
consideration for the time value of money and includes— 
(a) money borrowed against the payment of interest; 
(b) any amount raised by acceptance under any acceptance credit facility or its                       
de-materialised equivalent; 
(c) any amount raised pursuant to any note purchase facility or the issue of bonds, notes, 
debentures, loan stock or any similar instrument; 
(d) the amount of any liability in respect of any lease or hire purchase contract which is 
deemed as a finance or capital lease under the Indian Accounting Standards or such other 
accounting standards as may be prescribed; 
(e) receivables sold or discounted other than any receivables sold on non-recourse basis; 
(f) any amount raised under any other transaction, including any forward sale or purchase 
agreement, having the commercial effect of a borrowing. 
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 3 (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 18 1[Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-clause,— 
(i) any amount raised from an allottee under a real estate project shall be deemed to be an 
amount having the commercial effect of a borrowing; and 
 (ii) the expressions, “allottee” and “real estate project” shall have the meanings 
respectively assigned to them in clauses ( d) and ( zn) of section 2 of the Real Estate 
(Regulation and Development) Act, 2016 (16 of 2016);] 
(g) any derivative transaction entered into in connection with protection against or benefit 
from fluctuation in any rate or price and for calculating the value of any derivative transaction, 
only the market value of such transaction shall be taken into account; 
(h) any counter-indemnity obligation in respect of a guarantee, indemnity, bond, documentary 
letter of credit or any other instrument issued by a bank or financial institution; 
(i) the amount of any liability in respect of any of the guarantee or indemnity for any of the 
items referred to in sub-clauses ( a) to ( h) of this clause; 
(9) “financial position”, in relation to any person, means the financial information of a person as 
on a certain date; 
(10) “information memorandum” means a memorandum prepared by resolution professional 
under sub-section ( 1) of section 29; 
(11) “initiation date” means the date on which a financial creditor, corporate applicant or 
operational creditor, as the case may be, makes an application to the Adjudicating Authority for 
initiating corporate insolvency resolution process; 
(12) “insolvency commencement date” means the date of admission of an application for 
initiating corporate insolvency resolution process by the Adjudicating Authority under sections 7, 9 or 
section 10, as the case may be; 
2[Provided that where the interim resolution professional is not appointed in the order admitting 
application under section 7, 9 or section 10, the insolvency commencement date shall be the date on 
which such interim resolution professional is appointed by the Adjudicating Authority;] 
(13) “insolvency resolution process costs” means— 
(a) the amount of any interim finance and the costs incurred in raising such finance; 
(b) the fees payable to any person acting as a resolution professional; 
(c) any costs incurred by the resolution professional in running the business of the corporate 
debtor as a going concern; 
(d) any costs incurred at the expense of the Government to facilitate the insolvency resolution 
process; and 
(e) any other costs as may be specified by the Board; 
(14) “insolvency resolution process period” means the period of one hundred and eighty days 
beginning from the insolvency commencement date and ending on one hundred and eightieth day; 
(15) “interim finance” means any financial debt raised by the resolution professional during the 
insolvency resolution process period; 
1. The Explanation  ins. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 3 (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 
2. The proviso ins. by s. 3, ibid (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 19 (16) “liquidation cost” means any cost incurred by the liquidator during the period of liquidation 
subject to such regulations, as may be specified by the Board; 
(17) “liquidation commencement date” means the date on which proceedings for liquidation 
commence in accordance with section 33 or section 59, as the case may be; 
(18) “liquidator” means an insolvency professional appointed as a liquidator in accordance with 
the provisions of Chapter III or Chapter V of this Part, as the case may be; 
(19) “officer” for the purposes of Chapter VII of this Part, means an officer who is in default, as 
defined in clause ( 60) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013) or a designated partner as 
defined in clause ( j) of section 2 of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009), as the 
case may be; 
(20) “operational creditor” means a person to whom an operational debt is owed and includes any 
person to whom such debt has been legally assigned or transferred; 
(21) “operational debt” means a claim in respect of the provision of goods or services including 
employment or a debt in respect of the 1[payment] of dues arising under any law for the time being in 
force and payable to the Central Government, any State Government or any local authority; 
(22) “personal guarantor” means an individual who is the surety in a contract of guarantee to a 
corporate debtor; 
(23) “personnel” includes the directors, managers, key managerial personnel, designated partners 
and employees, if any, of the corporate debtor; 
(24) “related party”, in relation to a corporate debtor, means— 
(a) a director or partner of the corporate debtor or a relative of a director or partner of the 
corporate debtor; 
(b) a key managerial personnel of the corporate debtor or a relative of a key managerial 
personnel of the corporate debtor; 
(c) a limited liability partnership or a partnership firm in which a director, partner, or manager 
of the corporate debtor or his relative is a partner; 
(d) a private company in which a director, partner or manager of the corporate debtor is a 
director and holds along with his relatives, more than two per cent. of its share capital; 
(e) a public company in which a director, partner or manager of the corporate debtor is a 
director and holds along with relatives, more than two per cent. of its paid-up share capital; 
(f) any body corporate whose board of directors, managing director or manager, in the 
ordinary course of business, acts on the advice, directions or instructions of a director, partner or 
manager of the corporate debtor; 
(g) any limited liability partnership or a partnership firm whose partners or employees in the 
ordinary course of business, acts on the advice, directions or instructions of a director, partner or 
manager of the corporate debtor; 
(h) any person on whose advice, directions or instructions, a director, partner or manager of 
the corporate debtor is accustomed to act; 
(i) a body corporate which is a holding, subsidiary or an associate company of the corporate 
debtor, or a subsidiary of a holding company to which the corporate debtor is a subsidiary; 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 3, for “repayment” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 20 (j) any person who controls more than twenty per cent. of voting rights in the corporate 
debtor on account of ownership or a voting agreement; 
(k) any person in whom the corporate debtor controls more than twenty per cent. of voting 
rights on account of ownership or a voting agreement; 
(l) any person who can control the composition of the board of directors or corresponding 
governing body of the corporate debtor; 
(m) any person who is associated with the corporate debtor on account of— 
(i) participation in policy making processes of the corporate debtor; or 
(ii) having more than two directors in common between the corporate debtor and such 
person; or 
(iii) interchange of managerial personnel between the corporate debtor and such person; 
or 
(iv) provision of essential technical information to, or from, the corporate debtor; 
1[(24A) “related party”, in relation to an individual, means—  
(a) a person who is a relative of the individual or a relative of the spouse of the 
individual; 
 (b) a partner of a limited liability partnership, or a limited liability partnership or a 
partnership firm, in which the individual is a partner;  
(c) a person who is a trustee of a trust in which the beneficiary of the trust includes the 
individual, or the terms of the trust confers a power on the trustee which may be exercised for 
the benefit of the individual;  
(d) a private company in which the individual is a director and holds along with his 
relatives, more than two per cent. of its share capital;  
(e) a public company in which the individual is a director and holds along with relatives, 
more than two per cent. of its paid-up share capital;  
(f) a body corporate whose board of directors, managing director or manager, in the 
ordinary course of business, acts on the advice, directions or instructions of the individual; 
(g) a limited liability partnership or a partnership firm whose partners or employees in the 
ordinary course of business, act on the advice, directions or instructions of the individual; 
(h) a person on whose advice, directions or instructions, the individual is accustomed to 
act;  
(i) a company, where the individual or the individual along with its related party, own 
more than fifty per cent. of the share capital of the company or controls the appointment of 
the board of directors of the company. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause,—  
(a) “relative”, with reference to any person, means anyone who is related to another, in 
the following manner, namely:— 
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 3 (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  21  (i) members of a Hindu Undivided Family, 
 (ii) husband, 
 (iii) wife,  
(iv) father,  
(v) mother,  
(vi) son,  
(vii) daughter, 
(viii) son’s daughter and son, 
 (ix) daughter’s daughter and son,  
(x) grandson’s daughter and son,  
(xi) granddaughter’s daughter and son,  
(xii) brother,  
(xiii) sister, 
 (xiv) brother’s son and daughter, 
 (xv) sister’s son and daughter,  
(xvi) father’s father and mother, 
 (xvii) mother’s father and mother,  
(xviii) father’s brother and sister, 
 (xix) mother’s brother and sister, and 
 (b) wherever the relation is that of a son, daughter, sister or brother, their spouses shall 
also be included;] 
1[(25) “resolution applicant” means a person, who individually or jointly with any other person, 
submits a resolution plan to the resolution professional pursuant to the invitation made under clause 
(h) of sub-section ( 2) of section 25]; 
(26) “resolution plan” means a plan proposed by 2[resolution applicant] for insolvency resolution 
of the corporate debtor as a going concern in accordance with Part II; 
(27) “resolution professional”, for the purposes of this Part, means an insolvency professional 
appointed to conduct the corporate insolvency resolution process and includes an interim resolution 
professional; and 
(28) “voting share” means the share of the voting rights of a single financial creditor in the 
committee of creditors which is based on the proportion of the financial debt owed to such financial 
creditor in relation to the financial debt owed by the corporate debtor. 
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 2018, s.3, for clause ( 25) (w.e.f. 23-11-2017). 
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “any person” (w.e.f. 23-11-2017). 22 CHAPTER II 
CORPORATE INSOLVENCY RESOLUTION PROCESS 
6. Persons who may initiate corporate insolvency resolution process .—Where any corporate 
debtor commits a default, a financial creditor, an operational creditor or the corporate debtor itself may 
initiate corporate insolvency resolution process in respect of such corporate debtor in the manner as 
provided under this Chapter. 
7. Initiation of corporate insolvency resolution process by financial creditor .—(1) A financial 
creditor either by itself or jointly with 1[other financial creditors, or any other person on behalf of the 
financial creditor, as may be notified by the Central Government,] may file an application for initiating 
corporate insolvency resolution process against a corporate debtor before the Adjudicating Authority 
when a default has occurred.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section, a default includes a default in respect of a 
financial debt owed not only to the applicant financial creditor but to any other financial creditor of the 
corporate debtor. 
(2) The financial creditor shall make an application under sub-section ( 1) in such form and manner 
and accompanied with such fee as may be prescribed. 
(3) The financial creditor shall, along with the application furnish— 
(a) record of the default recorded with the information utility or such other record or evidence of 
default as may be specified; 
(b) the name of the resolution professional proposed to act as an interim resolution professional; 
and  
(c) any other information as may be specified by the Board. 
(4) The Adjudicating Authority shall, within fourteen days of the receipt of the application under    
sub-section ( 2), ascertain the existence of a default from the records of an information utility or on the 
basis of other evidence furnished by the financial creditor under sub-section ( 3). 
(5) Where the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that— 
(a) a default has occurred and the application under sub-section ( 2) is complete, and there is no 
disciplinary proceedings pending against the proposed resolution professional, it may, by order, admit 
such application; or 
(b) default has not occurred or the application under sub-section ( 2) is incomplete or any 
disciplinary proceeding is pending against the proposed resolution professional, it may, by order, 
reject such application: 
Provided that the Adjudicating Authority shall, before rejecting the application under clause ( b) of 
sub-section ( 5), give a notice to the applicant to rectify the defect in his application within seven days of 
receipt of such notice from the Adjudicating Authority. 
(6) The corporate insolvency resolution process shall commence from the date of admission of the 
application under sub-section ( 5). 
(7) The Adjudicating Authority shall communicate— 
(a) the order under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 5) to the financial creditor and the corporate debtor; 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 4, for “other financial creditors” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  23 (b) the order under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 5) to the financial creditor, 
within seven days of admission or rejection of such application, as the case may be. 
8. Insolvency resolution by operational creditor .—(1) An operational creditor may, on the 
occurrence of a default, deliver a demand notice of unpaid operational debtor copy of an invoice 
demanding payment of the amount involved in the default to the corporate debtor in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) The corporate debtor shall, within a period of ten days of the receipt of the demand notice or copy 
of the invoice mentioned in sub-section ( 1) bring to the notice of the operational creditor— 
(a) existence of a dispute, 1[if any, or] record of the pendency of the suit or arbitration 
proceedings filed before the receipt of such notice or invoice in relation to such dispute; 
(b) the 2[payment] of unpaid operational debt— 
(i) by sending an attested copy of the record of electronic transfer of the unpaid amount from 
the bank account of the corporate debtor; or 
(ii) by sending an attested copy of record that the operational creditor has encashed a cheque 
issued by the corporate debtor. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, a “demand notice” means a notice served by an 
operational creditor to the corporate debtor demanding 2[payment] of the operational debt in respect of 
which the default has occurred. 
9. Application for initiation of corporate insolvency resolution process by operational 
creditor .—(1) After the expiry of the period of ten days from the date of delivery of the notice or invoice 
demanding payment under sub-section ( 1) of section 8, if the operational creditor does not receive 
payment from the corporate debtor or notice of the dispute under sub-section ( 2) of section 8, the 
operational creditor may file an application before the Adjudicating Authority for initiating a corporate 
insolvency resolution process. 
(2) The application under sub-section ( 1) shall be filed in such form and manner and accompanied 
with such fee as may be prescribed. 
(3) The operational creditor shall, along with the application furnish— 
(a) a copy of the invoice demanding payment or demand notice delivered by the operational 
creditor to the corporate debtor; 
(b) an affidavit to the effect that there is no notice given by the corporate debtor relating to a 
dispute of the unpaid operational debt; 
(c) a copy of the certificate from the financial institutions maintaining accounts of the operational 
creditor confirming that there is no payment of an unpaid operational debt 3[by the corporate debtor, 
if available;] 
4[(d) a copy of any record with information utility confirming that there is no payment of an 
unpaid operational debt by the corporate debtor, if available; and 
 (e) any other proof confirming that there is no payment of an unpaid operational debt by the 
corporate debtor or such other information, as may be prescribed.] 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 5, for “if any, and”  (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 
2. Subs. by s. 5,  ibid for “repayment” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for “by the corporate debtor; and” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 
4. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 24 (4) An operational creditor initiating a corporate insolvency resolution process under this section, 
may propose a resolution professional to act as an interim resolution professional. 
(5) The Adjudicating Authority shall, within fourteen days of the receipt of the application under    
sub-section ( 2), by an order— 
(i) admit the application and communicate such decision to the operational creditor and the 
corporate debtor if,— 
(a) the application made under sub-section ( 2) is complete; 
(b) there is no 1[payment] of the unpaid operational debt; 
(c) the invoice or notice for payment to the corporate debtor has been delivered by the 
operational creditor; 
(d) no notice of dispute has been received by the operational creditor or there is no record of 
dispute in the information utility; and 
(e) there is no disciplinary proceeding pending against any resolution professional proposed 
under sub-section ( 4), if any; 
(ii) reject the application and communicate such decision to the operational creditor and the 
corporate debtor, if— 
(a) the application made under sub-section ( 2) is incomplete; 
(b) there has been 1[payment] of the unpaid operational debt; 
(c) the creditor has not delivered the invoice or notice for payment to the corporate debtor; 
(d) notice of dispute has been received by the operational creditor or there is a record of 
dispute in the information utility; or 
(e) any disciplinary proceeding is pending against any proposed resolution professional: 
Provided that Adjudicating Authority, shall before rejecting an application under sub-clause 
(a) of clause ( ii) give a notice to the applicant to rectify the defect in his application within seven 
days of the date of receipt of such notice from the Adjudicating Authority. 
(6) The corporate insolvency resolution process shall commence from the date of admission of the 
application under sub-section ( 5) of this section. 
10.Initiation of corporate insolvency resolution process by corporate applicant .—(1) Where a 
corporate debtor has committed a default, a corporate applicant thereof may file an application for 
initiating corporate insolvency resolution process with the Adjudicating Authority. 
(2) The application under sub-section ( 1) shall be filed in such form, containing such particulars and 
in such manner and accompanied with such fee as may be prescribed. 
2[(3) The corporate applicant shall, along with the application, furnish—  
(a) the information relating to its books of account and such other documents for such period as 
may be specified;  
(b) the information relating to the resolution professional proposed to be appointed as an interim 
resolution professional; and  
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2018,  s. 6, for “repayment” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for sub-section ( 3) (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 25 (c) the special resolution passed by shareholders of the corporate debtor or the resolution passed by 
at least three-fourth of the total number of partners of the corporate debtor, as the case may be, 
approving filing of the application.] 
 (4) The Adjudicating Authority shall, within a period of fourteen days of the receipt of the 
application, by an order— 
(a) admit the application, if it is complete 1[and no disciplinary proceeding is pending against the 
proposed resolution professional]; or 
(b) reject the application, if it is incomplete: 1[or any disciplinary proceeding is pending against 
the proposed resolution professional:] 
Provided that Adjudicating Authority shall, before rejecting an application, give a notice to the 
applicant to rectify the defects in his application within seven days from the date of receipt of such notice 
from the Adjudicating Authority. 
(5) The corporate insolvency resolution process shall commence from the date of admission of the 
application under sub-section ( 4) of this section. 
11. Persons not entitled to make application .—The following persons shall not be entitled to make 
an application to initiate corporate insolvency resolution process under this Chapter, namely:— 
(a) a corporate debtor undergoing a corporate insolvency resolution process; or 
(b) a corporate debtor having completed corporate insolvency resolution process twelve months 
preceding the date of making of the application; or 
(c) a corporate debtor or a financial creditor who has violated any of the terms of resolution plan 
which was approved twelve months before the date of making of an application under this Chapter; or 
(d) a corporate debtor in respect of whom a liquidation order has been made. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, a corporate debtor includes a corporate applicant in 
respect of such corporate debtor. 
12. Time-limit for completion of insolvency resolution process .—(1) Subject to sub-section ( 2), 
the corporate insolvency resolution process shall be completed within a period of one hundred and eighty 
days from the date of admission of the application to initiate such process. 
(2) The resolution professional shall file an application to the Adjudicating Authority to extend the 
period of the corporate insolvency resolution process beyond one hundred and eighty days, if instructed to 
do so by a resolution passed at a meeting of the committee of creditors by a vote of 2[sixty-six] per cent. 
of the voting shares. 
(3) On receipt of an application under sub-section ( 2), if the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that 
the subject matter of the case is such that corporate insolvency resolution process cannot be completed 
within one hundred and eighty days, it may by order extend the duration of such process beyond one 
hundred and eighty days by such further period as it thinks fit, but not exceeding ninety days: 
Provided that any extension of the period of corporate insolvency resolution process under this 
section shall not be granted more than once. 
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 7 (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid. for “seventy-five” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  26 1[12A. Withdrawal of application admitted under section 7, 9 or 10. —The Adjudicating Authority 
may allow the withdrawal of application admitted under section 7 or section 9 or section 10, on an 
application made by the applicant with the approval of ninety per cent. voting share of the committee of 
creditors, in such manner as may be specified.]. 
13. Declaration of moratorium and public announcement .— (1) The Adjudicating Authority, after 
admission of the application under section 7 or section 9 or section 10, shall, by an order— 
(a) declare a moratorium for the purposes referred to in section 14; 
(b) cause a public announcement of the initiation of corporate insolvency resolution process and 
call for the submission of claims under section 15; and 
(c) appoint an interim resolution professional in the manner as laid down in section 16. 
(2) The public announcement referred to in clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) shall be made immediately 
after the appointment of the interim resolution professional. 
14. Moratorium .—(1) Subject to provisions of sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3), on the insolvency 
commencement date, the Adjudicating Authority shall by order declare moratorium for prohibiting all of 
the following, namely:— 
(a) the institution of suits or continuation of pending suits or proceedings against the corporate 
debtor including execution of any judgment, decree or order in any court of law, tribunal, arbitration 
panel or other authority; 
(b) transferring, encumbering, alienating or disposing of  by the corporate debtor any of its assets or 
any legal right or beneficial interest therein; 
(c) any action to foreclose, recover or enforce any security interest created by the corporate debtor 
in respect of its property including any action under the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial 
Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (54 of 2002); 
(d) the recovery of any property by an owner or lessor where such property is occupied by or in the 
possession of the corporate debtor. 
(2) The supply of essential goods or services to the corporate debtor as may be specified shall not be 
terminated or suspended or interrupted during moratorium period. 
2[(3) The provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall not apply to— 
 (a) such transaction as may be notified by the Central Government in consultation with any 
financial regulator; 
 (b) a surety in a contract of guarantee to a corporate debtor.]. 
 (4) The order of moratorium shall have effect from the date of such order till the completion of the 
corporate insolvency resolution process: 
Provided that where at any time during the corporate insolvency resolution process period, if the 
Adjudicating Authority approves the resolution plan under sub-section ( 1) of section 31 or passes an order 
for liquidation of corporate debtor under section 33, the moratorium shall cease to have effect from the 
date of such approval or liquidation order, as the case may be. 
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 9 (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  
2. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for sub-section ( 3) (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 27 15. Public announcement of corporate insolvency resolution process. —(1) The public 
announcement of the corporate insolvency resolution process under the order referred to in section 13 
shall contain the following information, namely:— 
(a) name and address of the corporate debtor under the corporate insolvency resolution process; 
(b) name of the authority with which the corporate debtor is incorporated or registered; 
(c) the last date for submission of 1[claims, as may be specified]; 
(d) details of the interim resolution professional who shall be vested with the management of the 
corporate debtor and be responsible for receiving claims; 
(e) penalties for false or misleading claims; and 
(f) the date on which the corporate insolvency resolution process shall close, which shall be the 
one hundred and eightieth day from the date of the admission of the application under sections 7, 9 or 
section 10, as the case may be. 
(2) The public announcement under this section shall be made in such manner as may be specified.  
16.Appointment and tenure of interim resolution professional.— (1) The Adjudicating Authority 
shall appoint an interim resolution professional within fourteen days from the insolvency commencement 
date. 
(2) Where the application for corporate insolvency resolution process is made by a financial creditor 
or the corporate debtor, as the case may be, the resolution professional, as proposed respectively in the 
application under section 7 or section 10, shall be appointed as the interim resolution professional, if no 
disciplinary proceedings are pending against him. 
(3) Where the application for corporate insolvency resolution process is made by an operational 
creditor and— 
(a) no proposal for an interim resolution professional is made, the Adjudicating Authority shall 
make a reference to the Board for the recommendation of an insolvency professional who may act as 
an interim resolution professional; 
(b) a proposal for an interim resolution professional is made under sub-section ( 4) of section 9, 
the resolution professional as proposed, shall be appointed as the interim resolution professional, if no 
disciplinary proceedings are pending against him. 
(4) The Board shall, within ten days of the receipt of a reference from the Adjudicating Authority 
under sub-section ( 3), recommend the name of an insolvency professional to the Adjudicating Authority 
against whom no disciplinary proceedings are pending. 
(5) The term of the interim resolution professional 2[shall continue till the date of appointment of the 
resolution professional under section 22]. 
17.Management of affairs of corporate debtor by interim resolution professional.— (1) From the 
date of appointment of the interim resolution professional,— 
(a) the management of the affairs of the corporate debtor shall vest in the interim resolution 
professional; 
(b) the powers of the board of directors or the partners of the corporate debtor, as the case may 
be, shall stand suspended and be exercised by the interim resolution professional; 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 11, for “claims” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 
2. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for “shall not exceed thirty days from date of his appointment” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 28 (c) the officers and managers of the corporate debtor shall report to the interim resolution 
professional and provide access to such documents and records of the corporate debtor as may be 
required by the interim resolution professional; 
(d) the financial institutions maintaining accounts of the corporate debtor shall act on the 
instructions of the interim resolution professional in relation to such accounts and furnish all 
information relating to the corporate debtor available with them to the interim resolution professional. 
(2) The interim resolution professional vested with the management of the corporate debtor shall—  
(a) act and execute in the name and on behalf of the corporate debtor all deeds, receipts, and other 
documents, if any; 
(b) take such actions, in the manner and subject to such restrictions, as may be specified by the 
Board;  
(c) have the authority to access the electronic records of corporate debtor from information utility 
having financial information of the corporate debtor; 
(d) have the authority to access the books of account, records and other relevant documents of 
corporate debtor available with government authorities, statutory auditors, accountants and such other 
persons as 1[may be specified; and]. 
2[(e) be responsible for complying with the requirements under any law for the time being in 
force on behalf of the corporate debtor.]. 
18.Duties of interim resolution professional.— The interim resolution professional shall perform 
the following duties, namely:— 
(a) collect all information relating to the assets, finances and operations of the corporate debtor 
for determining the financial position of the corporate debtor, including information relating to— 
(i) business operations for the previous two years; 
(ii) financial and operational payments for the previous two years; 
(iii) list of assets and liabilities as on the initiation date; and 
(iv) such other matters as may be specified; 
(b) receive and collate all the claims submitted by creditors to him, pursuant to the public 
announcement made under sections 13 and 15; 
(c) constitute a committee of creditors; 
(d) monitor the assets of the corporate debtor and manage its operations until a resolution 
professional is appointed by the committee of creditors; 
(e) file information collected with the information utility, if necessary; and 
(f) take control and custody of any asset over which the corporate debtor has ownership rights as 
recorded in the balance sheet of the corporate debtor, or with information utility or the depository of 
securities or any other registry that records the ownership of assets including— 
(i) assets over which the corporate debtor has ownership rights which may be located in a 
foreign country; 
(ii) assets that may or may not be in possession of the corporate debtor; 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 13, for “may be specified” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 
2. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  29 (iii) tangible assets, whether movable or immovable; 
(iv) intangible assets including intellectual property; 
(v) securities including shares held in any subsidiary of the corporate debtor, financial 
instruments, insurance policies; 
(vi) assets subject to the determination of ownership by a court or authority; 
(g) to perform such other duties as may be specified by the Board. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this 1[section], the term “assets” shall not include the following, 
namely:— 
(a) assets owned by a third party in possession of the corporate debtor held under trust or under 
contractual arrangements including bailment; 
(b) assets of any Indian or foreign subsidiary of the corporate debtor; and 
(c) such other assets as may be notified by the Central Government in consultation with any 
financial sector regulator. 
19.Personnel to extend co-operation to interim resolution professional.— (1) The personnel of the 
corporate debtor, its promoters or any other person associated with the management of the corporate 
debtor shall extend all assistance and co-operation to the interim resolution professional as may be 
required by him in managing the affairs of the corporate debtor. 
(2) Where any personnel of the corporate debtor, its promoter or any other person required to assist or 
cooperate with the interim resolution professional does not assist or cooperate, the interim resolution 
professional may make an application to the Adjudicating Authority for necessary directions. 
(3) The Adjudicating Authority, on receiving an application under sub-section ( 2), shall by an order, 
direct such personnel or other person to comply with the instructions of the resolution professional and to 
cooperate with him in collection of information and management of the corporate debtor. 
20. Management of operations of corporate debtor as going concern .—(1) The interim resolution 
professional shall make every endeavour to protect and preserve the value of the property of the corporate 
debtor and manage the operations of the corporate debtor as a going concern. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), the interim resolution professional shall have the authority—  
(a) to appoint accountants, legal or other professionals as may be necessary; 
(b) to enter into contracts on behalf of the corporate debtor or to amend or modify the contracts or 
transactions which were entered into before the commencement of corporate insolvency resolution 
process; 
(c) to raise interim finance provided that no security interest shall be created over any 
encumbered property of the corporate debtor without the prior consent of the creditors whose debt is 
secured over such encumbered property: 
Provided that no prior consent of the creditor shall be required where the value of such property is not 
less than the amount equivalent to twice the amount of the debt. 
(d) to issue instructions to personnel of the corporate debtor as may be necessary for keeping the 
corporate debtor as a going concern; and 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 14, for “sub-section” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  30 (e) to take all such actions as are necessary to keep the corporate debtor as a going concern. 
21. Committee of creditors .—(1) The interim resolution professional shall after collation of all 
claims received against the corporate debtor and determination of the financial position of the corporate 
debtor, constitute a committee of creditors. 
(2) The committee of creditors shall comprise all financial creditors of the corporate debtor: 
Provided that a 1[financial creditor or the authorised representative of the financial creditor referred to 
in sub-section ( 6) or sub-section ( 6A) or sub-section ( 5) of section 24, if it is a related party of the 
corporate debtor,] shall not have any right of representation, participation or voting in a meeting of the 
committee of creditors: 
2[Provided further that the first proviso shall not apply to a financial creditor, regulated by a financial 
sector regulator, if it is a related party of the corporate debtor solely on account of conversion or 
substitution of debt into equity shares or instruments convertible into equity shares, prior to the 
insolvency commencement date]; 
(3) 3[Subject to sub-sections ( 6) and ( 6A), where] the corporate debtor owes financial debts to two or 
more financial creditors as part of a consortium or agreement, each such financial creditor shall be part of 
the committee of creditors and their voting share shall be determined on the basis of the financial debts 
owed to them. 
(4) Where any person is a financial creditor as well as an operational creditor,— 
(a) such person shall be a financial creditor to the extent of the financial debt owed by the 
corporate debtor, and shall be included in the committee of creditors, with voting share proportionate 
to the extent of financial debts owed to such creditor; 
(b) such person shall be considered to be an operational creditor to the extent of the operational 
debt owed by the corporate debtor to such creditor. 
(5) Where an operational creditor has assigned or legally transferred any operational debt to a 
financial creditor, the assignee or transferee shall be considered as an operational creditor to the extent of 
such assignment or legal transfer. 
(6) Where the terms of the financial debt extended as part of a consortium arrangement or syndicated 
facility 4*** provide for a single trustee or agent to act for all financial creditors, each financial creditor 
may— 
(a) authorise the trustee or agent to act on his behalf in the committee of creditors to the extent of 
his voting share; 
(b) represent himself in the committee of creditors to the extent of his voting share; 
(c) appoint an insolvency professional (other than the resolution professional) at his own cost to 
represent himself in the committee of creditors to the extent of his voting share; or 
(d) exercise his right to vote to the extent of his voting share with one or more financial creditors 
jointly or severally. 
5[(6A) Where a financial debt—  
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2018, s.15, for “related party to whom a corporate debtor owes a financial debt” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  
2. The proviso ins. by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 
3. Subs. by s. 15, ibid.,  for “Where” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 
4. The words “or issued as securities” omitted by s.15,  ibid. (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  
5. Ins. by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 31 (a) is in the form of securities or deposits and the terms of the financial debt provide for 
appointment of a trustee or agent to act as authorised representative for all the financial creditors, such 
trustee or agent shall act on behalf of such financial creditors; 
(b) is owed to a class of creditors exceeding the number as may be specified, other than the 
creditors covered under clause ( a) or sub-section ( 6), the interim resolution professional shall make an 
application to the Adjudicating Authority along with the list of all financial creditors, containing the 
name of an insolvency professional, other than the interim resolution professional, to act as their 
authorised representative who shall be appointed by the Adjudicating Authority prior to the first 
meeting of the committee of creditors; 
(c) is represented by a guardian, executor or administrator, such person shall act as authorised 
representative on behalf of such financial creditors, 
and such authorised representative under clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) shall attend the meetings of 
the committee of creditors, and vote on behalf of each financial creditor to the extent of his voting share.  
(6B) The remuneration payable to the authorised representative—  
(i) under clauses ( a) and ( c) of sub-section ( 6A), if any, shall be as per the terms of the financial 
debt or the relevant documentation; and  
(ii) under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 6A) shall be as specified which shall form part of the 
insolvency resolution process costs]. 
1[(7) The Board may specify the manner of voting and the determining of the voting share in respect 
of financial debts covered under sub-sections ( 6) and ( 6A).  
(8) Save as otherwise provided in this Code, all decisions of the committee of creditors shall be taken 
by a vote of not less than fifty-one per cent. of voting share of the financial creditors:  
Provided that where a corporate debtor does not have any financial creditors, the committee of 
creditors shall be constituted and shall comprise of such persons to exercise such functions in such 
manner as may be specified.] 
 (9) The committee of creditors shall have the right to require the resolution professional to furnish 
any financial information in relation to the corporate debtor at any time during the corporate insolvency 
resolution process. 
(10) The resolution professional shall make available any financial information so required by the 
committee of creditors under sub-section ( 9) within a period of seven days of such requisition. 
22.Appointment of resolution professional. —(1) The first meeting of the committee of creditors 
shall be held within seven days of the constitution of the committee of creditors. 
(2) The committee of creditors, may, in the first meeting, by a majority vote of not less than 2[sixty-
six] per cent. of the voting share of the financial creditors, either resolve to appoint the interim resolution 
professional as a resolution professional or to replace the interim resolution professional by another 
resolution professional. 
(3) Where the committee of creditors resolves under sub-section ( 2)— 
(a) to continue the interim resolution professional as resolution professional 3[subject to a written 
consent from the interim resolution professional in the specified form] it shall communicate its 
1. Subs. by  Act 26 of 2018, s. 15, for sub-sections ( 7) and ( 8) (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 
2. Subs. by s. 16, ibid.,  for “seventy-five” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  
3. Ins. by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  32 decision to the interim resolution professional, the corporate debtor and the Adjudicating Authority; 
or 
(b) to replace the interim resolution professional, it shall file an application before the 
Adjudicating Authority for the appointment of the proposed resolution professional 1[along with a 
written consent from the proposed resolution professional in the specified form]. 
(4) The Adjudicating Authority shall forward the name of the resolution professional proposed under 
clause ( b) of sub-section ( 3) to the Board for its confirmation and shall make such appointment after 
confirmation by the Board. 
(5) Where the Board does not confirm the name of the proposed resolution professional within ten 
days of the receipt of the name of the proposed resolution professional, the Adjudicating Authority shall, 
by order, direct the interim resolution professional to continue to function as the resolution professional 
until such time as the Board confirms the appointment of the proposed resolution professional. 
23.Resolution professional to conduct corporate insolvency resolution process .—(1) Subject to 
section 27, the resolution professional shall conduct the entire corporate insolvency resolution process and 
manage the operations of the corporate debtor during the corporate insolvency resolution process period:  
2[Provided that the resolution professional shall, if the resolution plan under sub-section ( 6) of section 
30 has been submitted, continue to manage the operations of the corporate debtor after the expiry of the 
corporate insolvency resolution process period until an order is passed by the Adjudicating Authority 
under section 31.] 
(2) The resolution professional shall exercise powers and perform duties as are vested or conferred on 
the interim resolution professional under this Chapter. 
(3) In case of any appointment of a resolution professional under sub-section ( 4) of section 22, the 
interim resolution professional shall provide all the information, documents and records pertaining to the 
corporate debtor in his possession and knowledge to the resolution professional. 
24.Meeting of committee of creditors .—(1) The members of the committee of creditors may meet 
in person or by such electronic means as may be specified. 
(2) All meetings of the committee of creditors shall be conducted by the resolution professional. 
(3) The resolution professional shall give notice of each meeting of the committee of creditors to—  
(a) members of 3[committee of creditors, including the authorised representatives referred to in 
sub-sections ( 6) and ( 6A) of section 21 and sub-section ( 5)]; 
(b) members of the suspended Board of Directors or the partners of the corporate persons, as the 
case may be; 
(c) operational creditors or their representatives if the amount of their aggregate dues is not less 
than ten per cent. of the debt. 
(4) The directors, partners and one representative of operational creditors, as referred to in                  
sub-section ( 3), may attend the meetings of committee of creditors, but shall not have any right to vote in 
such meetings: 
Provided that the absence of any such director, partner or representative of operational creditors, as 
the case may be, shall not invalidate proceedings of such meeting. 
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 16 (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  
2.The proviso ins. by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).
3. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for “Committee of creditors” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  33 (5) 1[Subject to sub-sections ( 6), (6A) and ( 6B) of section 21, any creditor] who is a member of the 
committee of creditors may appoint an insolvency professional other than the resolution professional to 
represent such creditor in a meeting of the committee of creditors: 
Provided that the fees payable to such insolvency professional representing any individual creditor 
will be borne by such creditor. 
(6) Each creditor shall vote in accordance with the voting share assigned to him based on the financial 
debts owed to such creditor. 
(7) The resolution professional shall determine the voting share to be assigned to each creditor in the 
manner specified by the Board. 
(8) The meetings of the committee of creditors shall be conducted in such manner as may be 
specified. 
25. Duties of resolution professional .—(1) It shall be the duty of the resolution professional to 
preserve and protect the assets of the corporate debtor, including the continued business operations of the 
corporate debtor. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), the resolution professional shall undertake the following 
actions, namely:— 
(a) take immediate custody and control of all the assets of the corporate debtor, including the 
business records of the corporate debtor; 
(b) represent and act on behalf of the corporate debtor with third parties, exercise rights for the 
benefit of the corporate debtor in judicial, quasi-judicial or arbitration proceedings; 
(c) raise interim finances subject to the approval of the committee of creditors under section 28; 
(d) appoint accountants, legal or other professionals in the manner as specified by Board; 
(e) maintain an updated list of claims; 
(f) convene and attend all meetings of the committee of creditors; 
(g) prepare the information memorandum in accordance with section 29; 
2[(h) invite prospective resolution applicants, who fulfil such criteria as may be laid down by him 
with the approval of committee of creditors, having regard to the complexity and scale of operations of 
the business of the corporate debtor and such other conditions as may be specified by the Board, to 
submit a resolution plan or plans.]. 
(i) present all resolution plans at the meetings of the committee of creditors; 
(j) file application for avoidance of transactions in accordance with Chapter III, if any; and 
(k) such other actions as may be specified by the Board. 
3[25A. Rights and duties of authorised representative of financial creditors. —(1) The authorised 
representative under sub-section ( 6) or sub-section ( 6A) of section 21 or sub-section ( 5) of section 24 shall 
have the right to participate and vote in meetings of the committee of creditors on behalf of the financial 
creditor he represents in accordance with the prior voting instructions of such creditors obtained through 
physical or electronic means.  
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 18, for “Any creditor” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 
2. Subs. by Act 8 of 2018, s. 4, for clause ( h) (w.e.f. 23-11-2017). 
3. Ins. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 19 (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  34 (2) It shall be the duty of the authorised representative to circulate the agenda and minutes of the 
meeting of the committee of creditors to the financial creditor he represents. 
 (3) The authorised representative shall not act against the interest of the financial creditor he 
represents and shall always act in accordance with their prior instructions:  
Provided that if the authorised representative represents several financial creditors, then he shall 
cast his vote in respect of each financial creditor in accordance with instructions received from each 
financial creditor, to the extent of his voting share:  
Provided further that if any financial creditor does not give prior instructions through physical or 
electronic means, the authorised representative shall abstain from voting on behalf of such creditor. 
 (4) The authorised representative shall file with the committee of creditors any instructions 
received by way of physical or electronic means, from the financial creditor he represents, for voting 
in accordance therewith, to ensure that the appropriate voting instructions of the financial creditor he 
represents is correctly recorded by the interim resolution professional or resolution professional, as 
the case may be.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the “electronic means” shall be such as may be 
specified.] 
26.Application for avoidance of transactions not to affect proceedings.— The filing of an 
avoidance application under clause ( j) of sub-section ( 2) of section 25 by the resolution professional shall 
not affect the proceedings of the corporate insolvency resolution process. 
27. Replacement of resolution professional by committee of creditors .—(1) Where, at any time 
during the corporate insolvency resolution process, the committee of creditors is of the opinion that a 
resolution professional appointed under section 22 is required to be replaced, it may replace him with 
another resolution professional in the manner provided under this section. 
1[(2) The committee of creditors may, at a meeting, by a vote of sixty-six per cent. of voting shares, 
resolve to replace the resolution professional appointed under section 22 with another resolution 
professional, subject to a written consent from the proposed resolution professional in the specified form.] 
 (3) The committee of creditors shall forward the name of the insolvency professional proposed by 
them to the Adjudicating Authority. 
(4) The Adjudicating Authority shall forward the name of the proposed resolution professional to the 
Board for its confirmation and a resolution professional shall be appointed in the same manner as laid 
down in section 16. 
(5) where any discriplinary proceeding are pending against the proposed resolution professional under 
sub-section ( 3), the resolution professional appointed under section 22 shall continue till the appointment 
of another professional under the section. 
28. Approval of committee of creditors for certain actions.— (1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force, the resolution professional, during the corporate 
insolvency resolution process, shall not take any of the following actions without the prior approval of the 
committee of creditors namely:— 
(a) raise any interim finance in excess of the amount as may be decided by the committee of 
creditors in their meeting; 
(b) create any security interest over the assets of the corporate debtor; 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 20, for sub-section ( 2) (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  35 (c) change the capital structure of the corporate debtor, including by way of issuance of additional 
securities, creating a new class of securities or buying back or redemption of issued securities in case 
the corporate debtor is a company; 
(d) record any change in the ownership interest of the corporate debtor; 
(e) give instructions to financial institutions maintaining accounts of the corporate debtor for a 
debit transaction from any such accounts in excess of the amount as may be decided by the committee 
of creditors in their meeting; 
(f) undertake any related party transaction; 
(g) amend any constitutional documents of the corporate debtor; 
(h) delegate its authority to any other person; 
(i) dispose of or permit the disposal of shares of any shareholder of the corporate debtor or their 
nominees to third parties; 
(j) make any change in the management of the corporate debtor or its subsidiary; 
(k) transfer rights or financial debts or operational debts under material contracts otherwise than 
in the ordinary course of business; 
(l) make changes in the appointment or terms of contract of such personnel as specified by the 
committee of creditors; or 
(m) make changes in the appointment or terms of contract of statutory auditors or internal 
auditors of the corporate debtor. 
(2) The resolution professional shall convene a meeting of the committee of creditors and seek the 
vote of the creditors prior to taking any of the actions under sub-section ( 1). 
(3) No action under sub-section ( 1) shall be approved by the committee of creditors unless approved 
by a vote of 1[sixty-six] per cent. of the voting shares. 
(4) Where any action under sub-section ( 1) is taken by the resolution professional without seeking the 
approval of the committee of creditors in the manner as required in this section, such action shall be void. 
(5) The committee of creditors may report the actions of the resolution professional under                     
sub-section ( 4) to the Board for taking necessary actions against him under this Code. 
29.  Preparation of information memorandum.— (1) The resolution professional shall prepare an 
information memorandum in such form and manner containing such relevant information as may be 
specified by the Board for formulating a resolution plan. 
(2) The resolution professional shall provide to the resolution applicant access to all relevant 
information in physical and electronic form, provided such resolution applicant undertakes— 
(a) to comply with provisions of law for the time being in force relating to confidentiality and 
insider trading; 
(b) to protect any intellectual property of the corporate debtor it may have access to; and 
(c) not to share relevant information with third parties unless clauses ( a) and ( b) of this                 
sub-section are complied with. 
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, “relevant information” means the information 
required by the resolution applicant to make the resolution plan for the corporate debtor, which shall 
include the financial position of the corporate debtor, all information related to disputes by or against the 
corporate debtor and any other matter pertaining to the corporate debtor as may be specified. 
2[29A. Person not eligible to be resolution applicant. —A person shall not be eligible to submit a 
resolution plan, if such person, or any other person acting jointly or in concert with such person— 
(a) is an undischarged insolvent;  
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 21, for “seventy-five” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 
2. Ins. by Act 8 of 2018, s. 5 ( w.e.f. 23-11-2017)36 (b) is a wilful defaulter in accordance with the guidelines of the Reserve Bank of India issued under 
the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949); 
 (c) 1[at the time of submission of the resolution plan has an account,] or an account of a corporate 
debtor under the management or control of such person or of whom such person is a promoter, 
classified as non-performing asset in accordance with the guidelines of the Reserve Bank of India 
issued under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) 2[or the guidelines of a financial sector 
regulator issued under any other law for the time being in force,] and at least a period of one year has 
lapsed from the date of such classification till the date of commencement of the corporate insolvency 
resolution process of the corporate debtor: 
 Provided that the person shall be eligible to submit a resolution plan if such person makes payment of 
all overdue amounts with interest thereon and charges relating to non-performing asset accounts before 
submission of resolution plan: 
2[Provided further that nothing in this clause shall apply to a resolution applicant where such applicant 
is a financial entity and is not a related party to the corporate debtor.  
Explanation I .—For the purposes of this proviso, the expression “related party” shall not include a 
financial entity, regulated by a financial sector regulator, if it is a financial creditor of the corporate debtor 
and is a related party of the corporate debtor solely on account of conversion or substitution of debt into 
equity shares or instruments convertible into equity shares, prior to the insolvency commencement date.  
Explanation II .—For the purposes of this clause, where a resolution applicant has an account, or an 
account of a corporate debtor under the management or control of such person or of whom such person is 
a promoter, classified as non-performing asset and such account was acquired pursuant to a prior 
resolution plan approved under this Code, then, the provisions of this clause shall not apply to such 
resolution applicant for a period of three years from the date of approval of such resolution plan by the 
Adjudicating Authority under this Code;] 
3[(d) has been convicted for any offence punishable with imprisonment—  
(i) for two years or more under any Act specified under the Twelfth Schedule; or 
(ii) for seven years or more under any other law for the time being in force: 
 Provided that this clause shall not apply to a person after the expiry of a period of two years from the 
date of his release from imprisonment:  
Provided further that this clause shall not apply in relation to a connected person referred to in clause 
(iii) of Explanation  I;] 
(e) is disqualified to act as a director under the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013);  
2[Provided that this clause shall not apply in relation to a connected person referred to in clause ( iii) 
of Explanation  I;] 
(f) is prohibited by the Securities and Exchange Board of India from trading in securities or accessing 
the securities markets; 
 (g) has been a promoter or in the management or control of a corporate debtor in which a preferential 
transaction, undervalued transaction, extortionate credit transaction or fraudulent transaction has taken 
place and in respect of which an order has been made by the Adjudicating Authority under this Code:  
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 22, for “has an account,” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 
2. Ins. by s. 22, ibid., (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  
3. Subs. by s. 22, ibid.,  for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).37 1[Provided that this clause shall not apply if a preferential transaction, undervalued transaction, 
extortionate credit transaction or fraudulent transaction has taken place prior to the acquisition of the 
corporate debtor by the resolution applicant pursuant to a resolution plan approved under this Code or 
pursuant to a scheme or plan approved by a financial sector regulator or a court, and such resolution 
applicant has not otherwise contributed to the preferential transaction, undervalued transaction, 
extortionate credit transaction or fraudulent transaction;] 
(h) has executed 2[a guarantee] in favour of a creditor in respect of a corporate debtor against which an 
application for insolvency resolution made by such creditor has been admitted under this Code 3[and such 
guarantee has been invoked by the creditor and remains unpaid in full or part]; 
 (i) 4[is] subject to any disability, corresponding to clauses ( a) to ( h), under any law in a jurisdiction 
outside India; or 
 (j) has a connected person not eligible under clauses ( a) to ( i)  
5[Explanation. I ] — For the purposes of this clause, the expression “connected person” means—  
(i) any person who is the promoter or in the management or control of the resolution applicant; or 
(ii) any person who shall be the promoter or in management or control of the business of the 
corporate debtor during the implementation of the resolution plan; or  
(iii) the holding company, subsidiary company, associate company or related party of a person 
referred to in clauses ( i) and ( ii):  
6[Provided that nothing in clause ( iii) of Explanation I shall apply to a resolution applicant where 
such applicant is a financial entity and is not a related party of the corporate debtor: 
Provided further that the expression “related party” shall not include a financial entity, regulated by 
a financial sector regulator, if it is a financial creditor of the corporate debtor and is a related party of 
the corporate debtor solely on account of conversion or substitution of debt into equity shares or 
instruments convertible into equity shares, prior to the insolvency commencement date;] 
7[Explanation II .—For the purposes of this section, “financial entity” shall mean the following entities 
entities which meet such criteria or conditions as the Central Government may, in consultation with the 
financial sector regulator, notify in this behalf, namely:—  
(a) a scheduled bank;  
(b) any entity regulated by a foreign central bank or a securities market regulator or other financial 
sector regulator of a jurisdiction outside India which jurisdiction is compliant with the Financial 
Action Task Force Standards and is a signatory to the International Organisation of Securities 
Commissions Multilateral Memorandum of Understanding;  
(c) any investment vehicle, registered foreign institutional investor, registered foreign portfolio 
investor or a foreign venture capital investor, where the terms shall have the meaning assigned to them 
in regulation 2 of the Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person 
Resident Outside India) Regulations, 2017 made under the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 
(42 of 1999);  
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 22 (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 
2. Subs. by s. 22, ibid., for “an enforceable guarantee” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  
3. Ins. by s. 22, ibid.,  (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 
4. Subs. by s. 22, ibid., for “has been” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 
5. Explanation  renumbered as Explanation  I by s. 22, ibid. (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  
6. The proviso subs. by s. 22,  ibid.,  (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  
7. Explanation ins. by s. 22, ibid.,  (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).   38 (d) an asset reconstruction company registered with the Reserve Bank of India under section 3 of 
the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 
2002 (54 of 2002);  
(e) an Alternate Investment Fund registered with the Securities and Exchange Board of India;  
(f) such categories of persons as may be notified by the Central Government.].] 
30. Submission of resolution plan. —(1) A resolution applicant may submit a resolution plan 1[along 
with an affidavit stating that he is eligible under section 29A] to the resolution professional prepared on 
the basis of the information memorandum. 
(2) The resolution professional shall examine each resolution plan received by him to confirm that 
each resolution plan— 
(a) provides for the payment of insolvency resolution process costs in a manner specified by the 
Board in priority to the 2[payment] of other debts of the corporate debtor; 
(b) provides for the 2[payment] of the debts of operational creditors in such manner as may be 
specified by the Board which shall not be less than the amount to be paid to the operational creditors 
in the event of a liquidation of the corporate debtor under section 53; 
(c) provides for the management of the affairs of the Corporate debtor after approval of the 
resolution plan; 
(d) the implementation and supervision of the resolution plan; 
(e) does not contravene any of the provisions of the law for the time being in force; 
(f) conforms to such other requirements as may be specified by the Board. 
3[Explanation .—For the purposes of clause ( e), if any approval of shareholders is required under 
the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013) or any other law for the time being in force for the 
implementation of actions under the resolution plan, such approval shall be deemed to have been given 
and it shall not be a contravention of that Act or law]; 
(3) The resolution professional shall present to the committee of creditors for its approval such 
resolution plans which confirm the conditions referred to in sub-section ( 2). 
4[(4) The committee of creditors may approve a resolution plan by a vote of not less than 5[sixty-six] 
per cent. of voting share of the financial creditors, after considering its feasibility and viability, and such 
other requirements as may be specified by the Board: 
 Provided that the committee of creditors shall not approve a resolution plan, submitted before the 
commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Ordinance, 2017 (Ord. 7 of 2017), 
where the resolution applicant is ineligible under section 29A and may require the resolution professional 
to invite a fresh resolution plan where no other resolution plan is available with it: 
Provided further that where the resolution applicant referred to in the first proviso is ineligible under 
clause ( c) of section 29A, the resolution applicant shall be allowed by the committee of creditors such 
period, not exceeding thirty days, to make payment of overdue amounts in accordance with the proviso to 
clause ( c) of section 29A: 
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 23 (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 
2. Subs. by s. 23, ibid., for “repayment” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  
3. Explanation  ins. by s. 23, ibid.,  (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 
4. Subs. by Act 8 of 2018, s. 6, for sub-section ( 4)  (w.e.f. 23-11-2017). 
5. Subs. by Act 26 of 2018, s., 23, for “seventy-five” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 39 Provided also that nothing in the second proviso shall be construed as extension of period for the 
purposes of the proviso to sub-section ( 3) of section 12, and the corporate insolvency resolution process 
shall be completed within the period specified in that sub-section.] 
1[Provided also that the eligibility criteria in section 29A as amended by the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Ordinance, 2018 (Ord. 6 of 2018) shall apply to the resolution applicant 
who has not submitted resolution plan as on the date of commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Code (Amendment) Ordinance, 2018.] 
(5) The resolution applicant may attend the meeting of the committee of creditors in which the 
resolution plan of the applicant is considered: 
Provided that the resolution applicant shall not have a right to vote at the meeting of the committee of 
creditors unless such resolution applicant is also a financial creditor. 
(6) The resolution professional shall submit the resolution plan as approved by the committee of 
creditors to the Adjudicating Authority. 
31.  Approval of resolution plan.— (1) If the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that the resolution 
plan as approved by the committee of creditors under sub-section ( 4) of section 30 meets the requirements 
as referred to in sub-section ( 2) of section 30, it shall by order approve the resolution plan which shall be 
binding on the corporate debtor and its employees, members, creditors, guarantors and other stakeholders 
involved in the resolution plan: 
2[Provided that the Adjudicating Authority shall, before passing an order for approval of resolution 
plan under this sub-section, satisfy that the resolution plan has provisions for its effective 
implementation.]  
(2) Where the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that the resolution plan does not confirm to the 
requirements referred to in sub-section ( 1), it may, by an order, reject the resolution plan. 
(3) After the order of approval under sub-section ( 1),— 
(a) the moratorium order passed by the Adjudicating Authority under section 14 shall cease to 
have effect; and 
(b) the resolution professional shall forward all records relating to the conduct of the corporate 
insolvency resolution process and the resolution plan to the Board to be recorded on its database. 
2[(4) The resolution applicant shall, pursuant to the resolution plan approved under sub-section ( 1), 
obtain the necessary approval required under any law for the time being in force within a period of one 
year from the date of approval of the resolution plan by the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section ( 1) 
or within such period as provided for in such law, whichever is later: 
Provided that where the resolution plan contains a provision for combination, as referred to in section 
5 of the Competition Act, 2002 (12 of 2003), the resolution applicant shall obtain the approval of the 
Competition Commission of India under that Act prior to the approval of such resolution plan by the 
committee of creditors.] 
32. Appeal .—Any appeal from an order approving the resolution plan shall be in the manner and on 
the grounds laid down in sub-section ( 3) of section 61. 
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 23 (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 
2. Ins. by s. 24, ibid. (w.e.f. 6-6-2018). 40 CHAPTER III 
LIQUIDATION PROCESS 
33. Initiation of liquidation .—(1) Where the Adjudicating Authority,— 
(a) before the expiry of the insolvency resolution process period or the maximum period 
permitted for completion of the corporate insolvency resolution process under section 12 or the fast 
track corporate insolvency resolution process under section 56, as the case may be, does not receive a 
resolution plan under sub-section ( 6) of section 30; or 
(b) rejects the resolution plan under section 31 for the non-compliance of the requirements 
specified therein, 
it shall— 
(i) pass an order requiring the corporate debtor to be liquidated in the manner as laid down in this 
Chapter; 
(ii) issue a public announcement stating that the corporate debtor is in liquidation; and 
(iii) require such order to be sent to the authority with which the corporate debtor is registered. 
(2) Where the resolution professional, at any time during the corporate insolvency resolution process 
but before confirmation of resolution plan, intimates the Adjudicating Authority of the decision of the 
committee of creditors 1[approved by not less than sixty-six per cent. of the voting share] to liquidate the 
corporate debtor, the Adjudicating Authority shall pass a liquidation order as referred to in sub-clauses ( i), 
(ii) and ( iii) of clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1). 
(3) Where the resolution plan approved by the Adjudicating Authority is contravened by the 
concerned corporate debtor, any person other than the corporate debtor, whose interests are prejudicially 
affected by such contravention, may make an application to the Adjudicating Authority for a liquidation 
order as referred to in sub-clauses ( i), (ii) and ( iii) of clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1). 
(4) On receipt of an application under sub-section ( 3), if the Adjudicating Authority determines that 
the corporate debtor has contravened the provisions of the resolution plan, it shall pass a liquidation order 
as referred to in sub-clauses ( i), (ii) and ( iii) of clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1). 
(5) Subject to section 52, when a liquidation order has been passed, no suit or other legal proceeding 
shall be instituted by or against the corporate debtor: 
Provided that a suit or other legal proceeding may be instituted by the liquidator, on behalf of the 
corporate debtor, with the prior approval of the Adjudicating Authority. 
(6) The provisions of sub-section ( 5) shall not apply to legal proceedings in relation to such 
transactions as may be notified by the Central Government in consultation with any financial sector 
regulator. 
(7) The order for liquidation under this section shall be deemed to be a notice of discharge to the 
officers, employees and workmen of the corporate debtor, except when the business of the corporate 
debtor is continued during the liquidation process by the liquidator. 
34.Appointment of liquidator and fee to be paid .—(1) Where the Adjudicating Authority passes 
an order for liquidation of the corporate debtor under section 33, the resolution professional appointed for 
the corporate insolvency resolution process under 2[Chapter II shall, subject to submission of a written 
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 25 (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  
2. Subs. by s. 26, ibid, for “Chapter II shall” (w.e.f 6-6-2018).  41 consent by the resolution professional to the Adjudicatory Authority in specified form,] act as the 
liquidator for the purposes of liquidation unless replaced by the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section 
(4). 
(2) On the appointment of a liquidator under this section, all powers of the board of directors, key 
managerial personnel and the partners of the corporate debtor, as the case may be, shall cease to have 
effect and shall be vested in the liquidator. 
(3) The personnel of the corporate debtor shall extend all assistance and cooperation to the liquidator 
as may be required by him in managing the affairs of the corporate debtor and provisions of section 19 
shall apply in relation to voluntary liquidation process as they apply in relation to liquidation process with 
the substitution of references to the liquidator for references to the interim resolution professional. 
(4) The Adjudicating Authority shall by order replace the resolution professional, if— 
(a) the resolution plan submitted by the resolution professional under section 30 was rejected for 
failure to meet the requirements mentioned in sub-section ( 2) of section 30; or 
(b) the Board recommends the replacement of a resolution professional to the Adjudicating 
Authority for reasons to be recorded 1[in writing; or] 
2[(c) the resolution professional fails to submit written consent under sub-section ( 1).] 
(5) For the purposes of 3[clauses ( a) and ( c)] of sub-section ( 4), the Adjudicating Authority may direct 
the Board to propose the name of another insolvency professional to be appointed as a liquidator. 
(6) The Board shall propose the name of another insolvency professional 2[along with written consent 
from the insolvency professional in the specified form,] within ten days of the direction issued by the 
Adjudicating Authority under sub-section ( 5). 
(7) The Adjudicating Authority shall, on receipt of the proposal of the Board for the appointment of 
an insolvency professional as liquidator, by an order appoint such insolvency professional as the 
liquidator. 
(8) An insolvency professional proposed to be appointed as a liquidator shall charge such fee for the 
conduct of the liquidation proceedings and in such proportion to the value of the liquidation estate assets, 
as may be specified by the Board. 
(9) The fees for the conduct of the liquidation proceedings under sub-section ( 8) shall be paid to the 
liquidator from the proceeds of the liquidation estate under section 53. 
35.Powers and duties of liquidator .—(1) Subject to the directions of the Adjudicating Authority, 
the liquidator shall have the following powers and duties, namely:— 
(a) to verify claims of all the creditors; 
(b) to take into his custody or control all the assets, property, effects and actionable claims of the 
corporate debtor; 
(c) to evaluate the assets and property of the corporate debtor in the manner as may be specified 
by the Board and prepare a report; 
(d) to take such measures to protect and preserve the assets and properties of the corporate debtor 
as he considers necessary; 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 26, for “in writing” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  
2. Ins. by s. 26, ibid (w.e.f 6-6-2018).  
3. Subs. by s. 26, ibid, for “ clause ( a)” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).   42 (e) to carry on the business of the corporate debtor for its beneficial liquidation as he considers 
necessary; 
(f) subject to section 52, to sell the immovable and movable property and actionable claims of the 
corporate debtor in liquidation by public auction or private contract, with power to transfer such 
property to any person or body corporate, or to sell the same in parcels in such manner as may be 
specified: 
1[Provided that the liquidator shall not sell the immovable and movable property or actionable 
claims of the corporate debtor in liquidation to any person who is not eligible to be a resolution 
applicant]. 
(g) to draw, accept, make and endorse any negotiable instruments including bill of exchange, 
hundi or promissory note in the name and on behalf of the corporate debtor, with the same effect with 
respect to the liability as if such instruments were drawn, accepted, made or endorsed by or on behalf 
of the corporate debtor in the ordinary course of its business; 
(h) to take out, in his official name, letter of administration to any deceased contributory and to 
do in his official name any other act necessary for obtaining payment of any money due and payable 
from a contributory or his estate which cannot be ordinarily done in the name of the corporate debtor, 
and in all such cases, the money due and payable shall, for the purpose of enabling the liquidator to 
take out the letter of administration or recover the money, be deemed to be due to the liquidator 
himself; 
(i) to obtain any professional assistance from any person or appoint any professional, in discharge 
of his duties, obligations and responsibilities; 
(j) to invite and settle claims of creditors and claimants and distribute proceeds in accordance 
with the provisions of this Code; 
(k) to institute or defend any suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings, civil or criminal, in the 
name of on behalf of the corporate debtor; 
 (l) to investigate the financial affairs of the corporate debtor to determine undervalued or 
preferential transactions; 
(m) to take all such actions, steps, or to sign, execute and verify any paper, deed, receipt 
document, application, petition, affidavit, bond or instrument and for such purpose to use the common 
seal, if any, as may be necessary for liquidation, distribution of assets and in discharge of his duties 
and obligations and functions as liquidator; 
(n) to apply to the Adjudicating Authority for such orders or directions as may be necessary for 
the liquidation of the corporate debtor and to report the progress of the liquidation process in a 
manner as may be specified by the Board; and 
(o) to perform such other functions as may be specified by the Board. 
(2) The liquidator shall have the power to consult any of the stakeholders entitled to a distribution of 
proceeds under section 53: 
Provided that any such consultation shall not be binding on the liquidator: 
Provided further that the records of any such consultation shall be made available to all other 
stakeholders not so consulted, in a manner specified by the Board. 
1. The proviso ins. by Act 8 of 2018, s. 7 (w.e.f. 23-11-2017). 43 36. Liquidation estate .—(1) For the purposes of liquidation, the liquidator shall form an estate of the 
assets mentioned in sub-section ( 3), which will be called the liquidation estate in relation to the corporate 
debtor. 
(2) The liquidator shall hold the liquidation estate as a fiduciary for the benefit of all the creditors. 
(3) Subject to sub-section ( 4), the liquidation estate shall comprise all liquidation estate assets which 
shall include the following:— 
(a) any assets over which the corporate debtor has ownership rights, including all rights and 
interests therein as evidenced in the balance sheet of the corporate debtor or an information utility or 
records in the registry or any depository recording securities of the corporate debtor or by any other 
means as may be specified by the Board, including shares held in any subsidiary of the corporate 
debtor; 
(b) assets that may or may not be in possession of the corporate debtor including but not limited 
to encumbered assets; 
(c) tangible assets, whether movable or immovable; 
(d) intangible assets including but not limited to intellectual property, securities (including shares 
held in a subsidiary of the corporate debtor) and financial instruments, insurance policies, contractual 
rights;  
(e) assets subject to the determination of ownership by the court or authority; 
(f) any assets or their value recovered through proceedings for avoidance of transactions in 
accordance with this Chapter; 
(g) any asset of the corporate debtor in respect of which a secured creditor has relinquished 
security interest; 
(h) any other property belonging to or vested in the corporate debtor at the insolvency 
commencement date; and 
(i) all proceeds of liquidation as and when they are realised. 
(4) The following shall not be included in the liquidation estate assets and shall not be used for 
recovery in the liquidation:— 
(a) assets owned by a third party which are in possession of the corporate debtor, including— 
(i) assets held in trust for any third party; 
(ii) bailment contracts; 
(iii) all sums due to any workman or employee from the provident fund, the pension fund and 
the gratuity fund; 
(iv) other contractual arrangements which do not stipulate transfer of title but only use of the 
assets; and 
(v) such other assets as may be notified by the Central Government in consultation with any 
financial sector regulator; 
(b) assets in security collateral held by financial services providers and are subject to netting and 
set-off in multi-lateral trading or clearing transactions; 
(c) personal assets of any shareholder or partner of a corporate debtor as the case may be 
provided such assets are not held on account of avoidance transactions that may be avoided under this 
Chapter; 44 (d) assets of any Indian or foreign subsidiary of the corporate debtor; or 
(e) any other assets as may be specified by the Board, including assets which could be subject to 
set-off on account of mutual dealings between the corporate debtor and any creditor. 
37. Powers of liquidator to access information .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, the liquidator shall have the power to access any information 
systems for the purpose of admission and proof of claims and identification of the liquidation estate assets 
relating to the corporate debtor from the following sources, namely:— 
(a) an information utility; 
(b) credit information systems regulated under any law for the time being in force; 
(c) any agency of the Central, State or Local Government including any registration authorities; 
(d) information systems for financial and non-financial liabilities regulated under any law for the 
time being in force; 
(e) information systems for securities and assets posted as security interest regulated under any 
law for the time being in force; 
(f) any database maintained by the Board; and 
(g) any other source as may be specified by the Board. 
(2) The creditors may require the liquidator to provide them any financial information relating to the 
corporate debtor in such manner as may be specified. 
(3) The liquidator shall provide information referred to in sub-section ( 2) to such creditors who have 
requested for such information within a period of seven days from the date of such request or provide 
reasons for not providing such information. 
38. Consolidation of claims .—(1) The liquidator shall receive or collect the claims of creditors 
within a period of thirty days from the date of the commencement of the liquidation process. 
(2) A financial creditor may submit a claim to the liquidator by providing a record of such claim with 
an information utility: 
Provided that where the information relating to the claim is not recorded in the information utility, the 
financial creditor may submit the claim in the same manner as provided for the submission of claims for 
the operational creditor under sub-section ( 3). 
(3) An operational creditor may submit a claim to the liquidator in such form and in such manner and 
along with such supporting documents required to prove the claim as may be specified by the Board. 
(4) A creditor who is partly a financial creditor and partly an operational creditor shall submit claims 
to the liquidator to the extent of his financial debt in the manner as provided in sub-section ( 2) and to the 
extent of his operational debt under sub-section ( 3). 
(5) A creditor may withdraw or vary his claim under this section within fourteen days of its 
submission. 
39. Verification of claims .—(1) The liquidator shall verify the claims submitted under section 38 
within such time as specified by the Board. 
(2) The liquidator may require any creditor or the corporate debtor or any other person to produce any 
other document or evidence which he thinks necessary for the purpose of verifying the whole or any part 
of the claim. 45 40. Admission or rejection of claims .—(1) The liquidator may, after verification of claims under 
section 39, either admit or reject the claim, in whole or in part, as the case may be: 
Provided that where the liquidator rejects a claim, he shall record in writing the reasons for such 
rejection. 
(2) The liquidator shall communicate his decision of admission or rejection of claims to the creditor 
and corporate debtor within seven days of such admission or rejection of claims. 
41. Determination of valuation of claims .—The liquidator shall determine the value of claims 
admitted under section 40 in such manner as may be specified by the Board. 
42. Appeal against the decision of liquidator.— A creditor may appeal to the Adjudicating 
Authority against the decision of the liquidator 1[accepting or] rejecting the claims within fourteen days of 
the receipt of such decision. 
43.Preferential transactions and relevant time .—(1) Where the liquidator or the resolution 
professional, as the case may be, is of the opinion that the corporate debtor has at a relevant time given a 
preference in such transactions and in such manner as laid down in sub-section ( 2) to any persons as 
referred to in sub-section ( 4), he shall apply to the Adjudicating Authority for avoidance of preferential 
transactions and for, one or more of the orders referred to in section 44. 
(2) A corporate debtor shall be deemed to have given a preference, if— 
(a) there is a transfer of property or an interest thereof of the corporate debtor for the benefit of a 
creditor or a surety or a guarantor for or on account of an antecedent financial debt or operational debt 
or other liabilities owed by the corporate debtor; and 
(b) the transfer under clause ( a) has the effect of putting such creditor or a surety or a guarantor in 
a beneficial position than it would have been in the event of a distribution of assets being made in 
accordance with section 53. 
(3) For the purposes of sub-section ( 2), a preference shall not include the following transfers— 
(a) transfer made in the ordinary course of the business or financial affairs of the corporate debtor 
or the transferee; 
(b) any transfer creating a security interest in property acquired by the corporate debtor to the 
extent that— 
(i) such security interest secures new value and was given at the time of or after the signing of 
a security agreement that contains a description of such property as security interest and was used 
by corporate debtor to acquire such property; and 
(ii) such transfer was registered with an information utility on or before thirty days after the 
corporate debtor receives possession of such property: 
Provided that any transfer made in pursuance of the order of a court shall not, preclude such transfer 
to be deemed as giving of preference by the corporate debtor. 
Explanation .—For the purpose of sub-section ( 3) of this section, “new value” means money or its 
worth in goods, services, or new credit, or release by the transferee of property previously transferred to 
such transferee in a transaction that is neither void nor voidable by the liquidator or the resolution 
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 27 (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).46 professional under this Code, including proceeds of such property, but does not include a financial debt or 
operational debt substituted for existing financial debt or operational debt. 
(4) A preference shall be deemed to be given at a relevant time, if— 
(a) it is given to a related party (other than by reason only of being an employee), during the 
period of two years preceding the insolvency commencement date; or 
(b) a preference is given to a person other than a related party during the period of one year 
preceding the insolvency commencement date. 
44. Orders in case of preferential transactions .—The Adjudicating Authority, may, on an 
application made by the resolution professional or liquidator under sub-section ( 1) of section 43, by an 
order: 
(a) require any property transferred in connection with the giving of the preference to be vested in 
the corporate debtor; 
(b) require any property to be so vested if it represents the application either of the proceeds of 
sale of property so transferred or of money so transferred; 
(c) release or discharge (in whole or in part) of any security interest created by the corporate 
debtor;  
(d) require any person to pay such sums in respect of benefits received by him Adjudicating 
Authority may direct; 
(e) direct any guarantor, whose financial debts or operational debts owed to any person were 
released or discharged (in whole or in part) by the giving of the preference, to be under such new or 
revived financial debts or operational debts to that person as the Adjudicating Authority deems 
appropriate; 
(f) direct for providing security or charge on any property for the discharge of any financial debt 
or operational debt under the order, and such security or charge to have the same priority as a security 
or charge released or discharged wholly or in part by the giving of the preference; and 
(g) direct for providing the extent to which any person whose property is so vested in the 
corporate debtor, or on whom financial debts or operational debts are imposed by the order, are to be 
proved in the liquidation or the corporate insolvency resolution process for financial debts or 
operational debts which arose from, or were released or discharged wholly or in part by the giving of 
the preference: 
Provided that an order under this section shall not— 
(a) affect any interest in property which was acquired from a person other than the corporate 
debtor or any interest derived from such interest and was acquired in good faith and for value; 
(b) require a person, who received a benefit from the preferential transaction in good faith and for 
value to pay a sum to the liquidator or the resolution professional. 
Explanation  I.—For the purpose of this section, it is clarified that where a person, who has acquired 
an interest in property from another person other than the corporate debtor, or who has received a benefit 
from the preference or such another person to whom the corporate debtor gave the preference,— 
(i) had sufficient information of the initiation or commencement of insolvency resolution process 
of the corporate debtor; 
(ii) is a related party, 
it shall be presumed that the interest was acquired or the benefit was received otherwise than in good faith 
unless the contrary is shown. 47 Explanation  II.—A person shall be deemed to have sufficient information or opportunity to avail such 
information if a public announcement regarding the corporate insolvency resolution process has been 
made under section 13. 
45. Avoidance of undervalued transactions .—(1) If the liquidator or the resolution professional, as 
the case may be, on an examination of the transactions of the corporate debtor referred to in                 
sub-section ( 2) 1*** determines that certain transactions were made during the relevant period under 
section 46, which were undervalued, he shall make an application to the Adjudicating Authority to 
declare such transactions as void and reverse the effect of such transaction in accordance with this 
Chapter. 
(2) A transaction shall be considered undervalued where the corporate debtor— 
(a) makes a gift to a person; or 
(b) enters into a transaction with a person which involves the transfer of one or more assets by the 
corporate debtor for a consideration the value of which is significantly less than the value of the 
consideration provided by the corporate debtor, 
and such transaction has not taken place in the ordinary course of business of the corporate debtor. 
46. Relevant period for avoidable transactions .—(1) In an application for avoiding a transaction at 
undervalue, the liquidator or the resolution professional, as the case may be, shall demonstrate that— 
(i) such transaction was made with any person within the period of one year preceding the 
insolvency commencement date; or 
(ii) such transaction was made with a related party within the period of two years preceding the 
insolvency commencement date. 
(2) The Adjudicating Authority may require an independent expert to assess evidence relating to the 
value of the transactions mentioned in this section. 
47. Application by creditor in cases of undervalued transactions .—(1) Where an undervalued 
transaction has taken place and the liquidator or the resolution professional as the case may be, has not 
reported it to the Adjudicating Authority, a creditor, member or a partner of a corporate debtor, as the 
case may be, may make an application to the Adjudicating Authority to declare such transactions void and 
reverse their effect in accordance with this Chapter. 
(2) Where the Adjudicating Authority, after examination of the application made under                         
sub-section ( 1), is satisfied that— 
(a) undervalued transactions had occurred; and 
(b) liquidator or the resolution professional, as the case may be, after having sufficient 
information or opportunity to avail information of such transactions did not report such transaction to 
the Adjudicating Authority, 
it shall pass an order— 
(a) restoring the position as it existed before such transactions and reversing the effects thereof in 
the manner as laid down in section 45 and section 48; 
(b) requiring the Board to initiate disciplinary proceedings against the liquidator or the resolution 
professional as the case may be. 
48. Orders in cases of undervalued transactions .—The order of the Adjudicating Authority under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 45 may provide for the following:— 
1. The words and figures “of section 43” omitted by Act 26 of 2018, s. 28 (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  48 (a) require any property transferred as part of the transaction, to be vested in the corporate debtor; 
(b) release or discharge (in whole or in part) any security interest granted by the corporate debtor; 
(c) require any person to pay such sums, in respect of benefits received by such person, to the 
liquidator or the resolution professional as the case may be, as the Adjudicating Authority may direct; 
or  
(d) require the payment of such consideration for the transaction as may be determined by an 
independent expert. 
49. Transactions defrauding creditors .—Where the corporate debtor has entered into an 
undervalued transaction as referred to in sub-section ( 2) of section 45 and the Adjudicating Authority is 
satisfied that such transaction was deliberately entered into by such corporate debtor— 
(a) for keeping assets of the corporate debtor beyond the reach of any person who is entitled to 
make a claim against the corporate debtor; or 
(b) in order to adversely affect the interests of such a person in relation to the claim, 
the Adjudicating Authority shall make an order— 
(i) restoring the position as it existed before such transaction as if the transaction had not been 
entered into; and 
(ii) protecting the interests of persons who are victims of such transactions: 
Provided that an order under this section— 
(a) shall not affect any interest in property which was acquired from a person other than the 
corporate debtor and was acquired in good faith, for value and without notice of the relevant 
circumstances, or affect any interest deriving from such an interest, and 
(b) shall not require a person who received a benefit from the transaction in good faith, for value 
and without notice of the relevant circumstances to pay any sum unless he was a party to the 
transaction. 
50. Extortionate credit transactions .—(1) Where the corporate debtor has been a party to an 
extortionate credit transaction involving the receipt of financial or operational debt during the period 
within two years preceding the insolvency commencement date, the liquidator or the resolution 
professional as the case may be, may make an application for avoidance of such transaction to the 
Adjudicating Authority if the terms of such transaction required exorbitant payments to be made by the 
corporate debtor. 
(2) The Board may specify the circumstances in which a transactions which shall be covered under 
sub-section ( 1). 
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, it is clarified that any debt extended by any person 
providing financial services which is in compliance with any law for the time being in force in relation to 
such debt shall in no event be considered as an extortionate credit transaction. 
51.Orders of Adjudicating Authority in respect of extortionate credit transactions .—Where the 
Adjudicating Authority after examining the application made under sub-section ( 1) of section 50 is 
satisfied that the terms of a credit transaction required exorbitant payments to be made by the corporate 
debtor, it shall, by an order— 
(a) restore the position as it existed prior to such transaction; 
(b) set aside the whole or part of the debt created on account of the extortionate credit transaction;  
(c) modify the terms of the transaction; 49 (d) require any person who is, or was, a party to the transaction to repay any amount received by 
such person; or 
(e) require any security interest that was created as part of the extortionate credit transaction to be 
relinquished in favour of the liquidator or the resolution professional, as the case may be. 
52. Secured creditor in liquidation proceedings .—(1) A secured creditor in the liquidation 
proceedings may— 
(a) relinquish its security interest to the liquidation estate and receive proceeds from the sale of 
assets by the liquidator in the manner specified in section 53; or 
(b) realise its security interest in the manner specified in this section. 
(2) Where the secured creditor realises security interest under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1), he shall 
inform the liquidator of such security interest and identify the asset subject to such security interest to be 
realised. 
(3) Before any security interest is realised by the secured creditor under this section, the liquidator 
shall verify such security interest and permit the secured creditor to realise only such security interest, the 
existence of which may be proved either— 
(a) by the records of such security interest maintained by an information utility; or 
(b) by such other means as may be specified by the Board. 
(4) A secured creditor may enforce, realise, settle, compromise or deal with the secured assets in 
accordance with such law as applicable to the security interest being realised and to the secured creditor 
and apply the proceeds to recover the debts due to it. 
(5) If in the course of realising a secured asset, any secured creditor faces resistance from the 
corporate debtor or any person connected therewith in taking possession of, selling or otherwise disposing 
of the security, the secured creditor may make an application to the Adjudicating Authority to facilitate 
the secured creditor to realise such security interest in accordance with law for the time being in force. 
(6) The Adjudicating Authority, on the receipt of an application from a secured creditor under                 
sub-section ( 5) may pass such order as may be necessary to permit a secured creditor to realise security 
interest in accordance with law for the time being in force. 
(7) Where the enforcement of the security interest under sub-section ( 4) yields an amount by way of 
proceeds which is in excess of the debts due to the secured creditor, the secured creditor shall— 
(a) account to the liquidator for such surplus; and 
(b) tender to the liquidator any surplus funds received from the enforcement of such secured 
assets. 
(8) The amount of insolvency resolution process costs, due from secured creditors who realise their 
security interests in the manner provided in this section, shall be deducted from the proceeds of any 
realisation by such secured creditors, and they shall transfer such amounts to the liquidator to be included 
in the liquidation estate. 
(9) Where the proceeds of the realisation of the secured assets are not adequate to repay debts owed to 
the secured creditor, the unpaid debts of such secured creditor shall be paid by the liquidator in the 
manner specified in clause ( e) of sub-section ( 1) of section 53. 
53. Distribution of assets .—(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law 
enacted by the Parliament or any State Legislature for the time being in force, the proceeds from the sale 
of the liquidation assets shall be distributed in the following order of priority and within such period and 
in such manner as may be specified, namely:— 50 (a) the insolvency resolution process costs and the liquidation costs paid in full; 
(b) the following debts which shall rank equally between and among the following:— 
(i) workmen’s dues for the period of twenty-four months preceding the liquidation 
commencement date; and 
(ii) debts owed to a secured creditor in the event such secured creditor has relinquished 
security in the manner set out in section 52; 
(c) wages and any unpaid dues owed to employees other than workmen for the period of twelve 
months preceding the liquidation commencement date; 
(d) financial debts owed to unsecured creditors; 
(e) the following dues shall rank equally between and among the following:— 
(i) any amount due to the Central Government and the State Government including the 
amount to be received on account of the Consolidated Fund of India and the Consolidated Fund 
of a State, if any, in respect of the whole or any part of the period of two years preceding the 
liquidation commencement date;  
(ii) debts owed to a secured creditor for any amount unpaid following the enforcement of 
security interest; 
(f) any remaining debts and dues; 
(g) preference shareholders, if any; and 
(h) equity shareholders or partners, as the case may be. 
(2) Any contractual arrangements between recipients under sub-section ( 1) with equal ranking, if 
disrupting the order of priority under that sub-section shall be disregarded by the liquidator. 
(3) The fees payable to the liquidator shall be deducted proportionately from the proceeds payable to 
each class of recipients under sub-section ( 1), and the proceeds to the relevant recipient shall be 
distributed after such deduction. 
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section— 
(i) it is hereby clarified that at each stage of the distribution of proceeds in respect of a class of 
recipients that rank equally, each of the debts will either be paid in full, or will be paid in equal 
proportion within the same class of recipients, if the proceeds are insufficient to meet the debts in full; 
and 
(ii) the term “workmen’s dues” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 326 of the 
Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013). 
54. Dissolution of corporate debtor .—(1) Where the assets of the corporate debtor have been 
completely liquidated, the liquidator shall make an application to the Adjudicating Authority for the 
dissolution of such corporate debtor. 
(2) The Adjudicating Authority shall on application filed by the liquidator under sub-section ( 1) order 
that the corporate debtor shall be dissolved from the date of that order and the corporate debtor shall be 
dissolved accordingly. 
(3) A copy of an order under sub-section ( 2) shall within seven days from the date of such order, be 
forwarded to the authority with which the corporate debtor is registered. 51 CHAPTER IV 
FAST TRACK CORPORATE INSOLVENCY RESOLUTION PROCESS 
55.Fast track corporate insolvency resolution process.— (1) A corporate insolvency resolution 
process carried out in accordance with this Chapter shall be called as fast track corporate insolvency 
resolution process. 
(2) An application for fast track corporate insolvency resolution process may be made in respect of 
the following corporate debtors, namely:— 
(a) a corporate debtor with assets and income below a level as may be notified by the Central 
Government; or 
(b) a corporate debtor with such class of creditors or such amount of debt as may be notified by 
the Central Government; or 
(c) such other category of corporate persons as may be notified by the Central Government. 
56. Time period for completion of fast track corporate insolvency resolution process.— (1) 
Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 3), the fast track corporate insolvency resolution process shall be 
completed within a period of ninety days from the insolvency commencement date. 
(2) The resolution professional shall file an application to the Adjudicating Authority to extend the 
period of the fast track corporate insolvency resolution process beyond ninety days if instructed to               
do so by a resolution passed at a meeting of the committee of creditors and supported by a vote of  
seventy-five per cent. of the voting share. 
(3) On receipt of an application under sub-section ( 2), if the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that 
the subject matter of the case is such that fast track corporate insolvency resolution process cannot be 
completed within a period of ninety days, it may, by order, extend the duration of such process beyond 
the said period of ninety days by such further period, as it thinks fit, but not exceeding forty-five days:  
Provided that any extension of the fast track corporate insolvency resolution process under this 
section shall not be granted more than once. 
57. Manner of initiating fast track corporate insolvency resolution process .—An application for 
fast track corporate insolvency resolution process may be filed by a creditor or corporate debtor as the 
case may be, along with— 
(a) the proof of the existence of default as evidenced by records available with an information 
utility or such other means as may be specified by the Board; and 
(b) such other information as may be specified by the Board to establish that the corporate debtor 
is eligible for fast track corporate insolvency resolution process.  
58.Applicability of Chapter II to this Chapter .—The process for conducting a corporate 
insolvency resolution process under Chapter II and the provisions relating to offences and penalties under 
Chapter VII shall apply to this Chapter as the context may require. 
CHAPTER V 
VOLUNTARY LIQUIDATION OF CORPORATE PERSONS 
59. Voluntary liquidation of corporate persons .—(1) A corporate person who intends to liquidate 
itself voluntarily and has not committed any default may initiate voluntary liquidation proceedings under 
the provisions of this Chapter. 
(2) The voluntary liquidation of a corporate person under sub-section ( 1) shall meet such conditions 
and procedural requirements as may be specified by the Board. 52 (3) Without prejudice to sub-section ( 2), voluntary liquidation proceedings of a corporate person 
registered as a company shall meet the following conditions, namely:— 
(a) a declaration from majority of the directors of the company verified by an affidavit stating 
that—  
(i) they have made a full inquiry into the affairs of the company and they have formed an 
opinion that either the company has no debt or that it will be able to pay its debts in full from the 
proceeds of assets to be sold in the voluntary liquidation; and 
(ii) the company is not being liquidated to defraud any person; 
(b) the declaration under sub-clause ( a) shall be accompanied with the following documents, 
namely:— 
(i) audited financial statements and record of business operations of the company for the 
previous two years or for the period since its incorporation, whichever is later; 
(ii) a report of the valuation of the assets of the company, if any prepared by a registered 
valuer; 
(c) within four weeks of a declaration under sub-clause ( a), there shall be— 
(i) a special resolution of the members of the company in a general meeting requiring the 
company to be liquidated voluntarily and appointing an insolvency professional to act as the 
liquidator; or 
(ii) a resolution of the members of the company in a general meeting requiring the company 
to be liquidated voluntarily as a result of expiry of the period of its duration, if any, fixed by its 
articles or on the occurrence of any event in respect of which the articles provide that the 
company shall be dissolved, as the case may be and appointing an insolvency professional to act 
as the liquidator: 
Provided that the company owes any debt to any person, creditors representing two-thirds in value of 
the debt of the company shall approve the resolution passed under sub-clause ( c) within seven days of 
such resolution. 
(4) The company shall notify the Registrar of Companies and the Board about the resolution under 
sub-section ( 3) to liquidate the company within seven days of such resolution or the subsequent approval 
by the creditors, as the case may be. 
(5) Subject to approval of the creditors under sub-section ( 3), the voluntary liquidation proceedings in 
respect of a company shall be deemed to have commenced from the date of passing of the resolution 
under sub-clause ( c) of sub-section ( 3). 
(6) The provisions of sections 35 to 53 of Chapter III and Chapter VII shall apply to voluntary 
liquidation proceedings for corporate persons with such modifications as may be necessary. 
(7) Where the affairs of the corporate person have been completely wound up, and its assets 
completely liquidated, the liquidator shall make an application to the Adjudicating Authority for the 
dissolution of such corporate person. 
(8) The Adjudicating Authority shall on an application filed by the liquidator under sub-section ( 7), 
pass an order that the corporate debtor shall be dissolved from the date of that order and the corporate 
debtor shall be dissolved accordingly. 
(9) A copy of an order under sub-section (8) shall within fourteen days from the date of such order, be 
forwarded to the authority with which the corporate person is registered. 53 CHAPTER VI 
ADJUDICATING AUTHORITY FOR CORPORATE PERSONS 
60. Adjudicating authority for corporate persons .—(1) The Adjudicating Authority, in relation to 
insolvency resolution and liquidation for corporate persons including corporate debtors and personal 
guarantors thereof shall be the National Company Law Tribunal having territorial jurisdiction over the 
place where the registered office of the corporate person is located. 
(2) Without prejudice to sub-section ( 1) and notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in 
this Code, where a corporate insolvency resolution process or liquidation proceeding of a corporate debtor 
is pending before a National Company Law Tribunal, an application relating to the insolvency resolution 
or 1[liquidation or bankruptcy of a corporate guarantor or personal guarantor, as the case may be, of such 
corporate debtor] shall be filed before such National Company Law Tribunal. 
(3) An insolvency resolution process or 2[liquidation or bankruptcy proceeding of a corporate 
guarantor or personal guarantor, as the case may be, of the corporate debtor] pending in any court or 
tribunal shall stand transferred to the Adjudicating Authority dealing with insolvency resolution process 
or liquidation proceeding of such corporate debtor. 
(4) The National Company Law Tribunal shall be vested with all the powers of the Debt Recovery 
Tribunal as contemplated under Part III of this Code for the purpose of sub-section ( 2). 
(5) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the time being in force, 
the National Company Law Tribunal shall have jurisdiction to entertain or dispose of— 
(a) any application or proceeding by or against the corporate debtor or corporate person; 
(b) any claim made by or against the corporate debtor or corporate person, including claims by or 
against any of its subsidiaries situated in India; and 
(c) any question of priorities or any question of law or facts, arising out of or in relation to the 
insolvency resolution or liquidation proceedings of the corporate debtor or corporate person under 
this Code. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963) or in any other law 
for the time being in force, in computing the period of limitation specified for any suit or application by or 
against a corporate debtor for which an order of moratorium has been made under this Part, the period 
during which such moratorium is in place shall be excluded. 
61. Appeals and Appellate Authority .—(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained 
under the Companies Act 2013 (18 of 2013), any person aggrieved by the order of the Adjudicating 
Authority under this part may prefer an appeal to the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal. 
(2) Every appeal under sub-section ( 1) shall be filed within thirty days before the National Company 
Law Appellate Tribunal: 
Provided that the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal may allow an appeal to be filed after the 
expiry of the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing the 
appeal but such period shall not exceed fifteen days. 
(3) An appeal against an order approving a resolution plan under section 31 may be filed on the 
following grounds, namely:— 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 29, for “bankruptcy of a personal guarantor of such corporate debtor” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  
2. Subs. by s. 29, ibid.,  for “bankruptcy  proceeding of a personal guarantor of the corporate debtor” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).54 (i) the approved resolution plan is in contravention of the provisions of any law for the time being 
in force; 
(ii) there has been material irregularity in exercise of the powers by the resolution professional 
during the corporate insolvency resolution period; 
(iii) the debts owed to operational creditors of the corporate debtor have not been provided for in 
the resolution plan in the manner specified by the Board; 
(iv) the insolvency resolution process costs have not been provided for repayment in priority to all 
other debts; or 
(v) the resolution plan does not comply with any other criteria specified by the Board. 
(4) An appeal against a liquidation order passed under section 33 may be filed on grounds of material 
irregularity or fraud committed in relation to such a liquidation order. 
62. Appeal to Supreme Court .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the National Company 
Law Appellate Tribunal may file an appeal to the Supreme Court on a question of law arising out of such 
order under this Code within forty-five days from the date of receipt of such order. 
(2) The Supreme Court may, if it is satisfied that a person was prevented by sufficient cause from 
filing an appeal within forty-five days, allow the appeal to be filed within a further period not exceeding 
fifteen days. 
63. Civil court not to have jurisdiction .—No civil court or authority shall have jurisdiction to 
entertain any suit or proceedings in respect of any matter on which National Company Law Tribunal or 
the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal has jurisdiction under this Code. 
64. Expeditious disposal of applications .—(1) Where an application is not disposed of or an order is 
not passed within the period specified in this Code, the National Company Law Tribunal or the National 
Company Law Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, shall record the reasons for not doing so within the 
period so specified; and the President of the National Company Law Tribunal or the Chairperson of the 
National Company Law Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, may, after taking into account the 
reasons so recorded, extend the period specified in the Act but not exceeding ten days. 
(2) No injunction shall be granted by any court, tribunal or authority in respect of any action taken, or 
to be taken, in pursuance of any power conferred on the National Company Law Tribunal or the National 
Company Law Appellate Tribunal under this Code. 
65. Fraudulent or malicious initiation of proceedings .—(1) If, any person initiates the insolvency 
resolution process or liquidation proceedings fraudulently or with malicious intent for any purpose other 
than for the resolution of insolvency, or liquidation, as the case may be, the Adjudicating Authority may 
impose upon such person a penalty which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but may extend to one 
crore rupees. 
(2) If, any person initiates voluntary liquidation proceedings with the intent to defraud any person, the 
Adjudicating Authority may impose upon such person a penalty which shall not be less than one lakh 
rupees but may extend to one crore rupees. 
66. Fraudulent trading or wrongful trading .—(1) If during the corporate insolvency resolution 
process or a liquidation process, it is found that any business of the corporate debtor has been carried on 
with intent to defraud creditors of the corporate debtor or for any fraudulent purpose, the Adjudicating 
Authority may on the application of the resolution professional pass an order that any persons who were 55 knowingly parties to the carrying on of the business in such manner shall be liable to make such 
contributions to the assets of the corporate debtor as it may deem fit. 
(2) On an application made by a resolution professional during the corporate insolvency resolution 
process, the Adjudicating Authority may by an order direct that a director or partner of the corporate 
debtor, as the case may be, shall be liable to make such contribution to the assets of the corporate debtor 
as it may deem fit, if— 
(a) before the insolvency commencement date, such director or partner knew or ought to have 
known that there was no reasonable prospect of avoiding the commencement of a corporate 
insolvency resolution process in respect of such corporate debtor; and 
(b) such director or partner did not exercise due diligence in minimising the potential loss to the 
creditors of the corporate debtor. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section a director or partner of the corporate debtor, as the 
case may be, shall be deemed to have exercised due diligence if such diligence was reasonably expected 
of a person carrying out the same functions as are carried out by such director or partner, as the case may 
be, in relation to the corporate debtor. 
67. Proceedings under section 66 .—(1) Where the Adjudicating Authority has passed an order under 
sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) of section 66, as the case may be, it may give such further directions as 
it may deem appropriate for giving effect to the order, and in particular, the Adjudicating Authority 
may— 
(a) provide for the liability of any person under the order to be a charge on any debt or obligation 
due from the corporate debtor to him, or on any mortgage or charge or any interest in a mortgage or 
charge on assets of the corporate debtor held by or vested in him, or any person on his behalf, or any 
person claiming as assignee from or through the person liable or any person acting on his behalf; and 
(b) from time to time, make such further directions as may be necessary for enforcing any charge 
imposed under this section. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “assignee” includes a person to whom or in whose 
favour, by the directions of the person held liable under clause ( a) the debt, obligation, mortgage or 
charge was created, issued or transferred or the interest created, but does not include an assignee for 
valuable consideration given in good faith and without notice of any of the grounds on which the 
directions have been made. 
(2) Where the Adjudicating Authority has passed an order under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) of 
section 66, as the case may be, in relation to a person who is a creditor of the corporate debtor, it may, by 
an order, direct that the whole or any part of any debt owed by the corporate debtor to that person and any 
interest thereon shall rank in the order of priority of payment under section 53 after all other debts owed 
by the corporate debtor. 
CHAPTER VII 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
68.Punishment for concealment of property .—Where any officer of the corporate debtor has,— 
(i) within the twelve months immediately preceding the insolvency commencement date,— 
(a) wilfully concealed any property or part of such property of the corporate debtor or 
concealed any debt due to, or from, the corporate debtor, of the value of ten thousand rupees or 
more; or 
(b) fraudulently removed any part of the property of the corporate debtor of the value of ten 
thousand rupees or more; or 56 (c) wilfully concealed, destroyed, mutilated or falsified any book or paper affecting or 
relating to the property of the corporate debtor or its affairs, or 
(d) wilfully made any false entry in any book or paper affecting or relating to the property of 
the corporate debtor or its affairs; or 
(e) fraudulently parted with, altered or made any omission in any document affecting or 
relating to the property of the corporate debtor or its affairs; or 
(f) wilfully created any security interest over, transferred or disposed of any property of the 
corporate debtor which has been obtained on credit and has not been paid for unless such 
creation, transfer or disposal was in the ordinary course of the business of the corporate debtor; or 
(g) wilfully concealed the knowledge of the doing by others of any of the acts mentioned in 
clauses ( c), (d) or clause ( e); or 
(ii) at any time after the insolvency commencement date, committed any of the acts mentioned in 
sub-clause ( a) to ( f) of clause ( i) or has the knowledge of the doing by others of any of the things 
mentioned in sub-clauses ( c) to ( e) of clause ( i); or 
(iii) at any time after the insolvency commencement date, taken in pawn or pledge, or otherwise 
received the property knowing it to be so secured, transferred or disposed, 
such officer shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but 
which may extend to five years, or with fine, which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but may extend 
to one crore rupees, or with both: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall render a person liable to any punishment under this section 
if he proves that he had no intent to defraud or to conceal the state of affairs of the corporate debtor. 
69. Punishment for transactions defrauding creditors .—1[If] an officer of the corporate debtor or 
the corporate debtor— 
(a) has made or caused to be made any gift or transfer of, or charge on, or has caused or connived 
in the execution of a decree or order against, the property of the corporate debtor; 
(b) has concealed or removed any part of the property of the corporate debtor within two months 
before the date of any unsatisfied judgment, decree or order for payment of money obtained against 
the corporate debtor, 
such officer of the corporate debtor or the corporate debtor, as the case may be, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year, but which may extend to five years, or 
with fine, which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but may extend to one crore rupees, or with both:  
Provided that a person shall not be punishable under this section if the acts mentioned in clause ( a) 
were committed more than five years before the insolvency commencement date; or if he proves that, at 
the time of commission of those acts, he had no intent to defraud the creditors of the corporate debtor. 
70. Punishment for misconduct in course of corporate insolvency resolution process .—(1) On or 
after the insolvency commencement date, where an officer of the corporate debtor— 
(a) does not disclose to the resolution professional all the details of property of the corporate 
debtor, and details of transactions thereof, or any such other information as the resolution professional 
may require; or 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 30, for “ On or after the insolvency commencement date, if” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).57 (b) does not deliver to the resolution professional all or part of the property of the corporate 
debtor in his control or custody and which he is required to deliver; or 
(c) does not deliver to the resolution professional all books and papers in his control or custody 
belonging to the corporate debtor and which he is required to deliver; or 
(d) fails to inform there solution professional the information in his knowledge that a debt has 
been falsely proved by any person during the corporate insolvency resolution process; or 
(e) prevents the production of any book or paper affecting or relating to the property or affairs of 
the corporate debtor; or 
(f) accounts for any part of the property of the corporate debtor by fictitious losses or expenses, or 
if he has so attempted at any meeting of the creditors of the corporate debtor within the twelve 
months immediately preceding the insolvency commencement date, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years, but which 
may extend to five years, or with fine, which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but may extend to one 
crore rupees, or with both: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall render a person liable to any punishment under this section 
if he proves that he had no intent to do so in relation to the state of affairs of the corporate debtor. 
(2) If an insolvency professional deliberately contravenes the provisions of this Part he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which shall not be 
less than one lakh rupees, but may extend to five lakhs rupees, or with both. 
71. Punishment for falsification of books of corporate debtor .—On and after the insolvency 
commencement date, where any person destroys, mutilates, alters or falsifies any books, papers or 
securities, or makes or is in the knowledge of making of any false or fraudulent entry in any register, 
books of account or document belonging to the corporate debtor with intent to defraud or deceive any 
person, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years, but 
which may extend to five years, or with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but may extend 
to one crore rupees, or with both. 
72. Punishment for wilful and material omissions from statements relating to affairs of 
corporate debtor .—Where an officer of the corporate debtor makes any material and wilful omission in 
any statement relating to the affairs of the corporate debtor, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for 
a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to five years, or with fine which 
shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but may extend to one crore rupees, or with both. 
73. Punishment for false representations to creditors .—Where any officer of the corporate 
debtor— 
(a) on or after the insolvency commencement date, makes a false representation or commits any 
fraud for the purpose of obtaining the consent of the creditors of the corporate debtor or any of them 
to an agreement with reference to the affairs of the corporate debtor, during the corporate insolvency 
resolution process, or the liquidation process; 
(b) prior to the insolvency commencement date, has made any false representation, or committed 
any fraud, for that purpose, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years, but may 
extend to five years or with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but may extend to one crore 
rupees, or with both. 58 74. Punishment for contravention of moratorium or the resolution plan .—(1) Where the 
corporate debtor or any of its officer violates the provisions of section 14, any such officer who 
knowingly or wilfully committed or authorised or permitted such contravention shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years, but may extend to five years or with fine 
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but may extend to three lakh rupees, or with both. 
(2) Where any creditor violates the provisions of section 14, any person who knowingly and wilfully 
authorised or permitted such contravention by a creditor shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than one year, but may extend to five years, or with fine which shall not be less 
than one lakh rupees, but may extend to one crore rupees, or with both. 
(3) Where the corporate debtor, any of its officers or creditors or any person on whom the approved 
resolution plan is binding under section 31, knowingly and wilfully contravenes any of the terms of such 
resolution plan or abets such contravention, such corporate debtor, officer, creditor or person shall be 
punishable with imprisonment of not less than one year, but may extend to five years, or with fine which 
shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but may extend to one crore rupees, or with both. 
75. Punishment for false information furnished in application .—Where any person furnishes 
information in the application made under section 7, which is false in material particulars, knowing it to 
be false or omits any material fact, knowing it to be material, such person shall be punishable with fine 
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but may extend to one crore rupees. 
76. Punishment for non-disclosure of dispute or 1[payment] of debt by operational creditor .—
Where— 
(a) an operational creditor has wilfully or knowingly concealed in an application under section 9 
the fact that the corporate debtor had notified him of a dispute in respect of the unpaid operational 
debt or the full and final 1[payment] of the unpaid operational debt; or 
(b) any person who knowingly and wilfully authorised or permitted such concealment under 
clause ( a), 
such operational creditor or person, as the case may be, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than one year but may extend to five years or with fine which shall not be less than 
one lakh rupees but may extend to one crore rupees, or with both. 
77. Punishment for providing false information in application made by corporate debtor .—
Where— 
(a) a corporate debtor provides information in the application under section 10 which is false in 
material particulars, knowing it to be false and omits any material fact, knowing it to be material; or 
(b) any person who knowingly and wilfully authorised or permitted the furnishing of such 
information under sub-clause ( a),  
such corporate debtor or person, as the case may be, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than three years, but which may extend to five years or with fine which shall not 
be less than one lakh rupees, but which may extend to one crore rupees, or with both. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section and sections 75 and 76, an application shall be deemed 
to be false in material particulars in case the facts mentioned or omitted in the application, if true, or not 
omitted from the application as the case may be, would have been sufficient to determine the existence of 
a default under this Code. 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 31, for “repayment” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  59 PART III 
INSOLVENCY RESOLUTION AND BANKRUPTCY FOR INDIVIDUALS AND PARTNERSHIP FIRMS 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
78. Application .—This Part shall apply to matters relating to fresh start, insolvency and bankruptcy 
of individuals and partnership firms where the amount of the default is not less than one thousand rupees:  
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, specify the minimum amount of default 
of higher value which shall not be more than one lakh rupees. 
79. Definitions .—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(1) “Adjudicating Authority” means the Debt Recovery Tribunal constituted under                  
sub-section ( 1) of section 3 of the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions                
Act, 1993 (51 of 1993); 
(2) “associate” of the debtor means— 
(a) a person who belongs to the immediate family of the debtor; 
(b) a person who is a relative of the debtor or a relative of the spouse of the debtor; 
(c) a person who is in partnership with the debtor; 
(d) a person who is a spouse or a relative of any person with whom the debtor is in 
partnership; 
(e) a person who is employer of the debtor or employee of the debtor; 
(f) a person who is a trustee of a trust in which the beneficiaries of the trust include a debtor, 
or the terms of the trust confer a power on the trustee which may be exercised for the benefit of 
the debtor; and  
(g) a company, where the debtor or the debtor along with his associates, own more than fifty 
per cent. of the share capital of the company or control the appointment of the board of directors 
of the company.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, “relative”, with reference to any person, means 
anyone who is related to another, if— 
(i) they are members of a Hindu Undivided Family; 
(ii) one person is related to the other in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(3) “bankrupt” means— 
(a) a debtor who has been adjudged as bankrupt by a bankruptcy order under section 126; 
(b) each of the partners of a firm, where a bankruptcy order under section 126 has been made 
against a firm; or 
(c) any person adjudged as an undischarged insolvent; 
(4) “bankruptcy” means the state of being bankrupt; 
(5) “bankruptcy debt”, in relation to a bankrupt, means— 
(a) any debt owed by him as on the bankruptcy commencement date; 60 (b) any debt for which he may become liable after bankruptcy commencement date but before 
his discharge by reason of any transaction entered into before the bankruptcy commencement 
date; and 
(c) any interest which is a part of the debt under section 171; 
(6) “bankruptcy commencement date” means the date on which a bankruptcy order is passed by 
the Adjudicating Authority under section 126; 
(7) “bankruptcy order” means an order passed by an Adjudicating Authority under section 126; 
(8) “bankruptcy process” means a process against a debtor under Chapters IV and V of this Part; 
(9) “bankruptcy trustee” means the insolvency professional appointed as a trustee for the estate of 
the bankrupt under section 125; 
(10) “Chapter” means a chapter under this Part; 
(11) “committee of creditors” means a committee constituted under section 134; 
(12) “debtor” includes a judgment-debtor; 
(13) “discharge order” means an order passed by the Adjudicating Authority discharging the 
debtor under sections 92, 119 and section 138, as the case may be; 
(14) “excluded assets” for the purposes of this part includes— 
(a) unencumbered tools, books, vehicles and other equipment as are necessary to the debtor 
or bankrupt for his personal use or for the purpose of his employment, business or vocation; 
(b) unencumbered furniture, household equipment and provisions as are necessary for 
satisfying the basic domestic needs of the bankrupt and his immediate family; 
(c) any unencumbered personal ornaments of such value, as may be prescribed, of the debtor 
or his immediate family which cannot be parted with, in accordance with religious usage; 
(d) any unencumbered life insurance policy or pension plan taken in the name of debtor or his 
immediate family; and 
(e) an unencumbered single dwelling unit owned by the debtor of such value as may be 
prescribed;  
(15) “excluded debt” means— 
(a) liability to pay fine imposed by a court or tribunal; 
(b) liability to pay damages for negligence, nuisance or breach of a statutory, contractual or 
other legal obligation; 
(c) liability to pay maintenance to any person under any law for the time being in force; 
(d) liability in relation to a student loan; and 
(e) any other debt as may be prescribed; 
(16) “firm” means a body of individuals carrying on business in partnership whether or not 
registered under section 59 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (9 of 1932); 
(17) “immediate family” of the debtor means his spouse, dependent children and dependent 
parents; 
(18) “partnership debt” means a debt for which all the partners in a firm are jointly liable; 61 (19) “qualifying debt” means amount due, which includes interest or any other sum due in respect 
of the amounts owed under any contract, by the debtor for a liquidated sum either immediately or at 
certain future time and does not include— 
(a) an excluded debt; 
(b) a debt to the extent it is secured; and 
(c) any debt which has been incurred three months prior to the date of the application for 
fresh start process; 
(20) “repayment plan” means a plan prepared by the debtor in consultation with the resolution 
professional under section 105 containing a proposal to the committee of creditors for restructuring of 
his debts or affairs; 
(21) “resolution professional” means an insolvency professional appointed under this part as a 
resolution professional for conducting the fresh start process or insolvency resolution process; 
(22) “undischarged bankrupt” means a bankrupt who has not received a discharge order under 
section 138.  
CHAPTER II 
FRESH START PROCESS 
80. Eligibility for making an application .—(1) A debtor, who is unable to pay his debt and fulfils 
the conditions specified in sub-section ( 2), shall be entitled to make an application for a fresh start for 
discharge of his qualifying debt under this Chapter. 
(2) A debtor may apply, either personally or through a resolution professional, for a fresh start under 
this Chapter in respect of his qualifying debts to the Adjudicating Authority if — 
(a) the gross annual income of the debtor does not exceed sixty thousand rupees; 
(b) the aggregate value of the assets of the debtor does not exceed twenty thousand rupees; 
(c) the aggregate value of the qualifying debts does not exceed thirty-five thousand rupees; 
(d) he is not an undischarged bankrupt; 
(e) he does not own a dwelling unit, irrespective of whether it is encumbered or not; 
(f) a fresh start process, insolvency resolution process or bankruptcy process is not subsisting 
against him; and 
(g) no previous fresh start order under this Chapter has been made in relation to him in the 
preceding twelve months of the date of the application for fresh start. 
81. Application for fresh start order .—(1) When an application is filed under section 80 by a 
debtor, an interim-moratorium shall commence on the date of filing of said application in relation to all 
the debts and shall cease to have effect on the date of admission or rejection of such application, as the 
case may be. 
(2) During the interim-moratorium period,— 
(i) any legal action or legal proceeding pending in respect of any of his debts shall be deemed to 
have been stayed; and 
(ii) no creditor shall initiate any legal action or proceedings in respect of such debt. 
(3) The application under section 80 shall be in such form and manner and accompanied by such fee, 
as may be prescribed. 62 (4) The application under sub-section ( 3) shall contain the following information supported by an 
affidavit, namely:— 
(a) a list of all debts owed by the debtor as on the date of the said application along with details 
relating to the amount of each debt, interest payable thereon and the names of the creditors to whom 
each debt is owed; 
(b) the interest payable on the debts and the rate thereof stipulated in the contract; 
(c) a list of security held in respect of any of the debts; 
(d) the financial information of the debtor and his immediate family up to two years prior to the 
date of the application; 
(e) the particulars of the debtor’s personal details, as may be prescribed; 
(f) the reasons for making the application; 
(g) the particulars of any legal proceedings which, to the debtor’s knowledge has been 
commenced against him; 
(h) the confirmation that no previous fresh start order under this Chapter has been made in respect 
of the qualifying debts of the debtor in the preceding twelve months of the date of the application. 
82. Appointment of resolution professional .—(1) Where an application under section 80 is filed by 
the debtor through a resolution professional, the Adjudicating Authority shall direct the Board within 
seven days of the date of receipt of the application and shall seek confirmation from the Board that there 
are no disciplinary proceedings against the resolution professional who has submitted such application.  
(2) The Board shall communicate to the Adjudicating Authority in writing either— 
(a) confirmation of the appointment of the resolution professional who filed an application under 
sub-section ( 1); or 
(b) rejection of the appointment of the resolution professional who filed an application under   
sub-section ( 1) and nominate a resolution professional suitable for the fresh start process. 
(3) Where an application under section 80 is filed by the debtor himself and not through the resolution 
professional, the Adjudicating Authority shall direct the Board within seven days of the date of the receipt 
of an application to nominate a resolution professional for the fresh start process. 
(4) The Board shall nominate a resolution professional within ten days of receiving the direction 
issued by the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section ( 3). 
(5) The Adjudicating Authority shall by order appoint the resolution professional recommended or 
nominated by the Board under sub-section ( 2) or sub-section ( 4), as the case may be. 
(6) A resolution professional appointed by the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section ( 5) shall be 
provided a copy of the application for fresh start. 
83. Examination of application by resolution professional .—(1) The resolution professional shall 
examine the application made under section 80 within ten days of his appointment, and submit a report to 
the Adjudicating Authority, either recommending acceptance or rejection of the application. 
(2) The report referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall contain the details of the amounts mentioned in the 
application which in the opinion of the resolution professional are— 
(a) qualifying debts; and 
(b) liabilities eligible for discharge under sub-section ( 3) of section 92. 63 (3) The resolution professional may call for such further information or explanation in connection 
with the application as may be required from the debtor or any other person who, in the opinion of the 
resolution professional, may provide such information. 
(4) The debtor or any other person, as the case may be, shall furnish such information or explanation 
within seven days of receipt of the request under sub-section ( 3). 
(5) The resolution professional shall presume that the debtor is unable to pay his debts at the date of 
the application if— 
(a) in his opinion the information supplied in the application indicates that the debtor is unable to 
pay his debts and he has no reason to believe that the information supplied is incorrect or incomplete; 
and 
(b) he has reason to believe that there is no change in the financial circumstances of the debtor 
since the date of the application enabling the debtor to pay his debts. 
(6) The resolution professional shall reject the application, if in his opinion— 
(a) the debtor does not satisfy the conditions specified under section 80; or 
(b) the debts disclosed in the application by the debtor are not qualifying debts; or 
(c) the debtor has deliberately made a false representation or omission in the application or with 
respect to the documents or information submitted. 
(7) The resolution professional shall record the reasons for recommending the acceptance or rejection 
of the application in the report to the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section ( 1) and shall give a copy 
of the report to the debtor. 
84. Admission or rejection of application by Adjudicating Authority .—(1) The Adjudicating 
Authority may within fourteen days from the date of submission of the report by the resolution 
professional, pass an order either admitting or rejecting the application made under sub-section ( 1) of 
section 81. 
(2) The order passed under sub-section ( 1) accepting the application shall state the amount which has 
been accepted as qualifying debts by the resolution professional and other amounts eligible for discharge 
under section 92 for the purposes of the fresh start order. 
(3) A copy of the order passed by the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section ( 1) along with a copy 
of the application shall be provided to the creditors mentioned in the application within seven days of the 
passing of the order. 
85. Effect of admission of application .—(1) On the date of admission of the application, the 
moratorium period shall commence in respect of all the debts. 
(2) During the moratorium period— 
(a) any pending legal action or legal proceeding in respect of any debt shall be deemed to have 
been stayed; and 
(b) subject to the provisions of section 86, the creditors shall not initiate any legal action or 
proceedings in respect of any debt. 
(3) During the moratorium period, the debtor shall— 
(a) not act as a director of any company, or directly or indirectly take part in or be concerned in 
the promotion, formation or management of a company; 64 (b) not dispose of or alienate any of his assets; 
(c) inform his business partners that he is undergoing a fresh start process; 
(d) be required to inform prior to entering into any financial or commercial transaction of such 
value as may be notified by the Central Government, either individually or jointly, that he is 
undergoing a fresh start process; 
(e) disclose the name under which he enters into business transactions, if it is different from the 
name in the application admitted under section 84; 
(f) not travel outside India except with the permission of the Adjudicating Authority. 
(4) The moratorium ceases to have effect at the end of the period of one hundred and eighty days 
beginning with the date of admission unless the order admitting the application is revoked under           
sub-section ( 2) of section 91. 
86. Objections by creditor and their examination by resolution professional .—(1) Any creditor 
mentioned in the order of the Adjudicating Authority under section 84 to whom a qualifying debt is owed 
may, within a period of ten days from the date of receipt of the order under section 84, object only on the 
following grounds, namely:— 
(a) inclusion of a debt as a qualifying debt; or 
(b) incorrectness of the details of the qualifying debt specified in the order under section 84. 
(2) A creditor may file an objection under sub-section ( 1) by way of an application to the resolution 
professional. 
(3) The application under sub-section ( 2) shall be supported by such information and documents as 
may be prescribed. 
(4) The resolution professional shall consider every objection made under this section. 
(5) The resolution professional shall examine the objections under sub-section ( 2) and either accept or 
reject the objections, within ten days of the date of the application. 
(6) The resolution professional may examine any matter that appears to him to be relevant to the 
making of a final list of qualifying debts for the purposes of section 92. 
(7) On the basis of the examination under sub-section ( 5) or sub-section ( 6), the resolution 
professional shall— 
(a) prepare an amended list of qualifying debts for the purpose of the discharge order; 
(b) make an application to the Adjudicating Authority for directions under section 90; or 
(c) take such other steps as he considers necessary in relation to the debtor. 
87. Application against decision of resolution professional .—(1) The debtor or the creditor who is 
aggrieved by the action taken by the resolution professional under section 86 may, within ten days of such 
decision, make an application to the Adjudicating Authority challenging such action on any of the 
following grounds, namely:— 
(a) that the resolution professional has not given an opportunity to the debtor or the creditor to 
make a representation; or 
(b) that the resolution professional colluded with the other party in arriving at the decision; or 
(c) that the resolution professional has not complied with the requirements of section 86. 65 (2) The Adjudicating Authority shall decide the application referred to in sub-section ( 1) within 
fourteen days of such application, and make an order as it deems fit. 
(3) Where the application under sub-section ( 1) has been allowed by the Adjudicating Authority, it 
shall forward its order to the Board and the Board may take such action as may be required under Chapter 
VI of Part IV against the resolution professional. 
88. General duties of debtor .—The debtor shall— 
(a) make available to the resolution professional all information relating to his affairs, attend 
meetings and comply with the requests of the resolution professional in relation to the fresh start 
process; 
(b) inform the resolution professional as soon as reasonably possible of— 
(i) any material error or omission in relation to the information or document supplied to the 
resolution professional; or 
(ii) any change in financial circumstances after the date of application, where such change has 
an impact on the fresh start process. 
89. Replacement of resolution professional .—(1) Where the debtor or the creditor is of the opinion 
that the resolution professional appointed under section 82 is required to be replaced, he may apply to the 
Adjudicating Authority for the replacement of such resolution professional. 
(2) The Adjudicating Authority shall within seven days of the receipt of the application under        
sub-section ( 1) make a reference to the Board for replacement of the resolution professional. 
(3) The Board shall, within ten days of the receipt of a reference from the Adjudicating Authority 
under sub-section ( 2), recommend the name of an insolvency professional to the Adjudicating Authority 
against whom no disciplinary proceedings are pending. 
(4) The Adjudicating Authority shall appoint another resolution professional for the purposes of the 
fresh start process on the basis of the recommendation by the Board. 
(5) The Adjudicating Authority may give directions to the resolution professional replaced under    
sub-section ( 4)— 
(a) to share all information with the new resolution professional in respect of the fresh start 
process; and 
(b) to co-operate with the new resolution professional as may be required. 
90. Directions for compliances of restrictions, etc .—(1) The resolution professional may apply to 
the Adjudicating Authority for any of the following directions, namely:— 
(a) compliance of any restrictions referred to in sub-section ( 3) of section 85, in case of            
non-compliance by the debtor; or 
(b) compliance of the duties of the debtor referred to in section 88, in case of non-compliance by 
the debtor. 
(2) The resolution professional may apply to the Adjudicating Authority for directions in relation to 
any other matter under this Chapter for which no specific provisions have been made. 
91. Revocation of order admitting application .—(1) The resolution professional may submit an 
application to the Adjudicating Authority seeking revocation of its order made under section 84 on the 
following grounds, namely :— 66 (a) if due to any change in the financial circumstances of the debtor, the debtor is ineligible for a 
fresh start process; or 
(b) non-compliance by the debtor of the restrictions imposed under sub-section ( 3) of section 85; 
or  
(c) if the debtor has acted in a mala fide  manner and has wilfully failed to comply with the 
provisions of this Chapter. 
(2) The Adjudicating Authority shall, within fourteen days of the receipt of the application under sub-
section ( 1), may by order admit or reject the application. 
(3) On passing of the order admitting the application referred to in sub-section ( 1), the moratorium 
and the fresh start process shall cease to have effect. 
(4) A copy of the order passed by the Adjudicating Authority under this section shall be provided to 
the Board for the purpose of recording an entry in the register referred to in section 196. 
92. Discharge order .—(1) The resolution professional shall prepare a final list of qualifying debts 
and submit such list to the Adjudicating Authority at least seven days before the moratorium period 
comes to an end. 
(2) The Adjudicating Authority shall pass a discharge order at the end of the moratorium period for 
discharge of the debtor from the qualifying debts mentioned in the list under sub-section ( 1). 
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 2), the Adjudicating Authority shall discharge 
the debtor from the following liabilities, namely:— 
(a) penalties in respect of the qualifying debts from the date of application till the date of the 
discharge order; 
(b) interest including penal interest in respect of the qualifying debts from the date of application 
till the date of the discharge order; and 
(c) any other sums owed under any contract in respect of the qualifying debts from the date of 
application till the date of the discharge order. 
(4) The discharge order shall not discharge the debtor from any debt not included in sub-section ( 2) 
and from any liability not included under sub-section ( 3). 
(5) The discharge order shall be forwarded to the Board for the purpose of recording an entry in the 
register referred to in section 196. 
(6) A discharge order under sub-section ( 2) shall not discharge any other person from any liability in 
respect of the qualifying debts. 
93. Standard of conduct .—The resolution professional shall perform his functions and duties in 
compliance with the code of conduct provided under section 208. 
CHAPTER III 
INSOLVENCY RESOLUTION PROCESS 
94. Application by debtor to initiate insolvency resolution process .—(1) A debtor who commits a 
default may apply, either personally or through a resolution professional, to the Adjudicating Authority 
for initiating the insolvency resolution process, by submitting an application. 
(2) Where the debtor is a partner of a firm, such debtor shall not apply under this Chapter to the 
Adjudicating Authority in respect of the firm unless all or a majority of the partners of the firm file the 
application jointly. 67 (3) An application under sub-section ( 1) shall be submitted only in respect of debts which are not 
excluded debts. 
(4) A debtor shall not be entitled to make an application under sub-section ( 1) if he is— 
(a) an undischarged bankrupt; 
(b) undergoing a fresh start process; 
(c) undergoing an insolvency resolution process; or 
(d) undergoing a bankruptcy process. 
(5) A debtor shall not be eligible to apply under sub-section ( 1) if an application under this Chapter 
has been admitted in respect of the debtor during the period of twelve months preceding the date of 
submission of the application under this section. 
(6) The application referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be in such form and manner and accompanied 
with such fee as may be prescribed. 
95. Application by creditor to initiate insolvency resolution process .—(1) A creditor may apply 
either by himself, or jointly with other creditors, or through a resolution professional to the Adjudicating 
Authority for initiating an insolvency resolution process under this section by submitting an application.  
(2) A creditor may apply under sub-section ( 1) in relation to any partnership debt owed to him for 
initiating an insolvency resolution process against— 
(a) any one or more partners of the firm; or 
(b) the firm. 
(3) Where an application has been made against one partner in a firm, any other application against 
another partner in the same firm shall be presented in or transferred to the Adjudicating Authority in 
which the first mentioned application is pending for adjudication and such Adjudicating Authority may 
give such directions for consolidating the proceedings under the applications as it thinks just. 
(4) An application under sub-section ( 1) shall be accompanied with details and documents relating 
to— 
(a) the debts owed by the debtor to the creditor or creditors submitting the application for 
insolvency resolution process as on the date of application; 
(b) the failure by the debtor to pay the debt within a period of fourteen days of the service of the 
notice of demand; and 
(c) relevant evidence of such default or non-repayment of debt. 
(5) The creditor shall also provide a copy of the application made under sub-section ( 1) to the debtor.  
(6) The application referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be in such form and manner and accompanied 
by such fee as may be prescribed. 
(7) The details and documents required to be submitted under sub-section ( 4) shall be such as may be 
specified. 
96. Interim moratorium .—(1) When an application is filed under section 94 or section 95— 
(a) an interim-moratorium shall commence on the date of the application in relation to all the 
debts and shall cease to have effect on the date of admission of such application; and 68 (b) during the interim-moratorium period— 
(i) any legal action or proceeding pending in respect of any debt shall be deemed to have been 
stayed; and 
(ii) the creditors of the debtor shall not initiate any legal action or proceedings in respect of 
any debt.  
(2) Where the application has been made in relation to a firm, the interim-moratorium under                   
sub-section ( 1) shall operate against all the partners of the firm as on the date of the application. 
(3) The provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall not apply to such transactions as may be notified by the 
Central Government in consultation with any financial sector regulator. 
97. Appointment of resolution professional .—(1) If the application under section 94 or 95 is filed 
through a resolution professional, the Adjudicating Authority shall direct the Board within seven days of 
the date of the application to confirm that there are no disciplinary proceedings pending against resolution 
professional. 
(2) The Board shall within seven days of receipt of directions under sub-section ( 1) communicate to 
the Adjudicating Authority in writing either— 
(a) confirming the appointment of the resolution professional; or 
(b) rejecting the appointment of the resolution professional and nominating another resolution 
professional for the insolvency resolution process. 
(3) Where an application under section 94 or 95 is filed by the debtor or the creditor himself, as the 
case may be, and not through the resolution professional, the Adjudicating Authority shall direct the 
Board, within seven days of the filing of such application, to nominate a resolution professional for the 
insolvency resolution process. 
(4) The Board shall nominate a resolution professional within ten days of receiving the direction 
issued by the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section ( 3). 
(5) The Adjudicating Authority shall by order appoint the resolution professional recommended under 
sub-section ( 2) or as nominated by the Board under sub-section ( 4). 
(6) A resolution professional appointed by the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section ( 5) shall be 
provided a copy of the application for insolvency resolution process. 
98. Replacement of resolution professional .—(1) Where the debtor or the creditor is of the opinion 
that the resolution professional appointed under section 97 is required to be replaced, he may apply to the 
Adjudicating Authority for the replacement of such resolution professional. 
(2) The Adjudicating Authority shall within seven days of the receipt of the application under        
sub-section ( 1) make a reference to the Board for replacement of the resolution professional. 
(3) The Board shall, within ten days of the receipt of a reference from the Adjudicating Authority 
under sub-section ( 2), recommend the name of the resolution professional to the Adjudicating Authority 
against whom no disciplinary proceedings are pending. 
(4) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section ( 1), the creditors may apply to the 
Adjudicating Authority for replacement of the resolution professional where it has been decided in the 
meeting of the creditors, to replace the resolution professional with a new resolution professional for 
implementation of the repayment plan. 69 (5) Where the Adjudicating Authority admits an application made under sub-section ( 1) or            
sub-section ( 4), it shall direct the Board to confirm that there are no disciplinary proceedings pending 
against the proposed resolution professional. 
(6) The Board shall send a communication within ten days of receipt of the direction under            
sub-section ( 5) either— 
(a) confirming appointment of the nominated resolution professional; or 
(b) rejecting appointment of the nominated resolution professional and recommend a new 
resolution professional. 
(7) On the basis of the communication of the Board under sub-section ( 3) or sub-section ( 6), the 
Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order appointing a new resolution professional. 
(8) The Adjudicating Authority may give directions to the resolution professional replaced under            
sub-section ( 7)— 
(a) to share all information with the new resolution professional in respect of the insolvency 
resolution process; and 
(b) to co-operate with the new resolution professional in such matters as may be required. 
99. Submission of report by resolution professional .—(1) The resolution professional shall 
examine the application referred to in section 94 or section 95, as the case may be, within ten days of his 
appointment, and submit a report to the Adjudicating Authority recommending for approval or rejection 
of the application. 
(2) Where the application has been filed under section 95, the resolution professional may require the 
debtor to prove repayment of the debt claimed as unpaid by the creditor by furnishing— 
(a) evidence of electronic transfer of the unpaid amount from the bank account of the debtor; 
(b) evidence of encashment of a cheque issued by the debtor; or 
(c) a signed acknowledgment by the creditor accepting receipt of dues. 
(3) Where the debt for which an application has been filed by a creditor is registered with the 
information utility, the debtor shall not be entitled to dispute the validity of such debt. 
(4) For the purposes of examining an application, the resolution professional may seek such further 
information or explanation in connection with the application as may be required from the debtor or the 
creditor or any other person who, in the opinion of the resolution professional, may provide such 
information. 
(5) The person from whom information or explanation is sought under sub-section ( 4) shall furnish 
such information or explanation within seven days of receipt of the request. 
(6) The resolution professional shall examine the application and ascertain that— 
(a) the application satisfies the requirements set out in section 94 or 95; 
(b) the applicant has provided information and given explanation sought by the resolution 
professional under sub-section ( 4). 
(7) After examination of the application under sub-section ( 6), he may recommend acceptance or 
rejection of the application in his report. 70 (8) Where the resolution professional finds that the debtor is eligible for a fresh start under Chapter II, 
the resolution professional shall submit a report recommending that the application by the debtor under 
section 94 be treated as an application under section 81 by the Adjudicating Authority. 
(9) The resolution professional shall record the reasons for recommending the acceptance or rejection 
of the application in the report under sub-section ( 7). 
(10) The resolution professional shall give a copy of the report under sub-section ( 7) to the debtor or 
the creditor, as the case may be. 
100. Admission or rejection of application .—(1) The Adjudicating Authority shall, within fourteen 
days from the date of submission of the report under section 99 pass an order either admitting or rejecting 
the application referred to in section 94 or 95, as the case may be. 
(2) Where the Adjudicating Authority admits an application under sub-section ( 1), it may, on the 
request of the resolution professional, issue instructions for the purpose of conducting negotiations 
between the debtor and creditors and for arriving at a repayment plan. 
(3) The Adjudicating Authority shall provide a copy of the order passed under sub-section ( 1) along 
with the report of the resolution professional and the application referred to in section 94 or 95, as the 
case may be, to the creditors within seven days from the date of the said order. 
(4) If the application referred to in section 94 or 95, as the case may be, is rejected by the 
Adjudicating Authority on the basis of report submitted by the resolution professional that the application 
was made with the intention to defraud his creditors or the resolution professional, the order under                 
sub-section ( 1) shall record that the creditor is entitled to file for a bankruptcy order under Chapter IV. 
101. Moratorium .—(1) When the application is admitted under section 100, a moratorium shall 
commence in relation to all the debts and shall cease to have effect at the end of the period of one hundred 
and eighty days beginning with the date of admission of the application or on the date the Adjudicating 
Authority passes an order on the repayment plan under section 114, whichever is earlier. 
(2) During the moratorium period— 
(a) any pending legal action or proceeding in respect of any debt shall be deemed to have been 
stayed;  
(b) the creditors shall not initiate any legal action or legal proceedings in respect of any debt; and 
(c) the debtor shall not transfer, alienate, encumber or dispose of any of his assets or his legal 
rights or beneficial interest therein. 
(3) Where an order admitting the application under section 96 has been made in relation to a firm, the 
moratorium under sub-section ( 1) shall operate against all the partners of the firm. 
(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply to such transactions as may be notified by the 
Central Government in consultation with any financial sector regulator. 
102. Public notice and claims from creditors .—(1) The Adjudicating Authority shall issue a public 
notice within seven days of passing the order under section 100 inviting claims from all creditors within 
twenty-one days of such issue. 
(2) The notice under sub-section ( 1) shall include— 
(a) details of the order admitting the application; 
(b) particulars of the resolution professional with whom the claims are to be registered; and 
(c) the last date for submission of claims. 71 (3) The notice shall be— 
(a) published in at least one English and one vernacular newspaper which is in circulation in the 
state where the debtor resides; 
(b) affixed in the premises of the Adjudicating Authority; and 
(c) placed on the website of the Adjudicating Authority. 
103. Registering of claims by creditors .—(1) The creditors shall register claims with the resolution 
professional by sending details of the claims by way of electronic communications or through courier, 
speed post or registered letter. 
(2) In addition to the claims referred to in sub-section ( 1), the creditor shall provide to the resolution 
professional, personal information and such particulars as may be prescribed. 
104. Preparation of list of creditors .—(1) The resolution professional shall prepare a list of 
creditors on the basis of— 
(a) the information disclosed in the application filed by the debtor under section 94 or 95, as the 
case may be; 
(b) claims received by the resolution professional under section 102. 
(2) The resolution professional shall prepare the list mentioned in sub-section ( 1) within thirty days 
from the date of the notice. 
105. Repayment plan. —(1) The debtor shall prepare, in consultation with the resolution 
professional, a repayment plan containing a proposal to the creditors for restructuring of his debts or 
affairs. 
(2) The repayment plan may authorise or require the resolution professional to— 
(a) carry on the debtor’s business or trade on his behalf or in his name; or 
(b) realise the assets of the debtor; or 
(c) administer or dispose of any funds of the debtor. 
(3) The repayment plan shall include the following, namely:— 
(a) justification for preparation of such repayment plan and reasons on the basis of which the 
creditors may agree upon the plan; 
(b) provision for payment of fee to the resolution professional; 
(c) such other matters as may be specified. 
106. Report of resolution professional on repayment plan .—(1) The resolution professional shall 
submit the repayment plan under section 105 along with his report on such plan to the Adjudicating 
Authority within a period of twenty-one days from the last date of submission of claims under                 
section 102. 
(2) The report referred in sub-section ( 1) shall include that— 
(a) the repayment plan is in compliance with the provisions of any law for the time being in force; 
(b) the repayment plan has a reasonable prospect of being approved and implemented; and 72 (c) there is a necessity of summoning a meeting of the creditors, if required, to consider the 
repayment plan: 
Provided that where the resolution professional recommends that a meeting of the creditors is not 
required to be summoned, reasons for the same shall be provided. 
(3) The report referred to in sub-section ( 2) shall also specify the date on which, and the time and 
place at which, the meeting should be held if he is of the opinion that a meeting of the creditors should be 
summoned. 
(4) For the purposes of sub-section ( 3)— 
(a) the date on which the meeting is to be held shall be not less than fourteen days and not more 
than twenty eight days from the date of submission of report under sub-section ( 1); 
(b) the resolution professional shall consider the convenience of creditors in fixing the date and 
venue of the meeting of the creditors. 
107. Summoning of meeting of creditors .—(1) The resolution professional shall issue a notice 
calling the meeting of the creditors at least fourteen days before the date fixed for such meeting. 
(2) The resolution professional shall send the notice of the meeting to the list of creditors prepared 
under section 104. 
(3) The notice sent under sub-section ( 1) shall state the address of the Adjudicating Authority to 
which the repayment plan and report of the resolution professional on the repayment plan has been 
submitted and shall be accompanied by— 
(a) a copy of the repayment plan; 
(b) a copy of the statement of affairs of the debtor; 
(c) a copy of the said report of the resolution professional; and 
(d) forms for proxy voting. 
(4) The proxy voting, including electronic proxy voting shall take place in such manner and form as 
may be specified. 
108. Conduct of meeting of creditors .—(1) The meeting of the creditors shall be conducted in 
accordance with the provisions of this section and sections 109,110 and 111. 
(2) In the meeting of the creditors, the creditors may decide to approve, modify or reject the 
repayment plan. 
(3) The resolution professional shall ensure that if modifications are suggested by the creditors, 
consent of the debtor shall be obtained for each modification. 
(4) The resolution professional may for a sufficient cause adjourn the meeting of the creditors for a 
period of not more than seven days at a time. 
109. Voting rights in meeting of creditors .—(1) A creditor shall be entitled to vote at every meeting 
of the creditors in respect of the repayment plan in accordance with the voting share assigned to him. 
(2) The resolution professional shall determine the voting share to be assigned to each creditor in the 
manner specified by the Board. 
(3) A creditor shall not be entitled to vote in respect of a debt for an unliquidated amount. 
(4) A creditor shall not be entitled to vote in a meeting of the creditors if he— 73 (a) is not a creditor mentioned in the list of creditors under section 104; or 
(b) is an associate of the debtor. 
110. Rights of secured creditors in relation to repayment plan .—(1) Secured creditors shall be 
entitled to participate and vote in the meetings of the creditors. 
(2) A secured creditor participating in the meetings of the creditors and voting in relation to the 
repayment plan shall forfeit his right to enforce the security during the period of the repayment plan in 
accordance with the terms of the repayment plan. 
(3) Where a secured creditor does not forfeit his right to enforce security, he shall submit an affidavit 
to the resolution professional at the meeting of the creditors stating— 
(a) that the right to vote exercised by the secured creditor is only in respect of the unsecured part 
of the debt; and 
(b) the estimated value of the unsecured part of the debt. 
(4) In case a secured creditor participates in the voting on the repayment plan by submitting an 
affidavit under sub-section ( 3), the secured and unsecured parts of the debt shall be treated as separate 
debts. 
(5) The concurrence of the secured creditor shall be obtained if he does not participate in the voting 
on repayment plan but provision of the repayment plan affects his right to enforce security.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “period of the repayment plan” means the period from 
the date of the order passed under section 114 till the date on which the notice is given by the resolution 
professional under section 117 or report submitted by the resolution professional under section 118, as the 
case may be. 
111. Approval of repayment plan by creditors .—The repayment plan or any modification to the 
repayment plan shall be approved by a majority of more than three-fourth in value of the creditors present 
in person or by proxy and voting on the resolution in a meeting of the creditors. 
112. Report of meeting of creditors on repayment plan .—(1) The resolution professional shall 
prepare a report of the meeting of the creditors on repayment plan. 
(2) The report under sub-section ( 1) shall contain— 
(a) whether the repayment plan was approved or rejected and if approved, the list the 
modifications, if any; 
(b) the resolutions which were proposed at the meeting and the decision on such resolutions; 
(c) list of the creditors who were present or represented at the meeting, and the voting records of 
each creditor for all meetings of the creditors; and 
(d) such other information as the resolution professional thinks appropriate to make known to the 
Adjudicating Authority. 
113. Notice of decisions taken at meeting of creditors .—The resolution professional shall provide a 
copy of the report of the meeting of creditors prepared under section 99 to— 
(a) the debtor; 
(b) the creditors, including those who were not present at the meeting; and 
(c) the Adjudicating Authority. 74 114. Order of Adjudicating Authority on repayment plan .—(1) The Adjudicating Authority shall 
by an order approve or reject the repayment plan on the basis of the report of the meeting of the creditors 
submitted by the resolution professional under section 112: 
Provided that where a meeting of creditors is not summoned, the Adjudicating Authority shall pass an 
order on the basis of the report prepared by the resolution professional under section 106. 
(2) The order of the Adjudicating Authority approving the repayment plan may also provide for 
directions for implementing the repayment plan. 
(3) Where the Adjudicating Authority is of the opinion that the repayment plan requires modification, 
it may direct the resolution professional to re-convene a meeting of the creditors for reconsidering the 
repayment plan. 
115. Effect of order of Adjudicating Authority on repayment plan .—(1) Where the Adjudicating 
Authority has approved the repayment plan under section 114, such repayment plan shall— 
(a) take effect as if proposed by the debtor in the meeting; and 
(b) be binding on creditors mentioned in the repayment plan and the debtor. 
(2) Where the Adjudicating Authority rejects the repayment plan under section 114, the debtor and 
the creditors shall be entitled to file an application for bankruptcy under Chapter IV. 
(3) A copy of the order passed by the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section ( 2) shall be provided 
to the Board, for the purpose of recording an entry in the register referred to in section 196. 
116. Implementation and supervision of repayment plan .—(1) The resolution professional 
appointed under section 97 or under section 98 shall supervise the implementation of the repayment plan. 
(2) The resolution professional may apply to the Adjudicating Authority for directions, if necessary, 
in relation to any particular matter arising under the repayment plan. 
(3) The Adjudicating Authority may issue directions to the resolution professional on the basis of an 
application under sub-section ( 2). 
117. Completion of repayment plan .—(1) The resolution professional shall within fourteen days of 
the completion of the repayment plan, forward to the persons who are bound by the repayment plan under 
section 115 and the Adjudicating Authority, the following documents, namely:— 
(a) a notice that the repayment plan has been fully implemented; and 
(b) a copy of a report by the resolution professional summarising all receipts and payments made 
in pursuance of the repayment plan and extent of the implementation of such plan as compared with 
the repayment plan approved by the meeting of the creditors. 
(2) The resolution professional may apply to the Adjudicating Authority to extend the time mentioned 
in sub-section ( 1) for such further period not exceeding seven days. 
118. Repayment plan coming to end prematurely .—(1) A repayment plan shall be deemed to have 
come to an end prematurely if it has not been fully implemented in respect of all persons bound by it 
within the period as mentioned in the repayment plan.  
(2) Where a repayment plan comes to an end prematurely under this section, the resolution 
professional shall submit a report to the Adjudicating Authority which shall state— 
(a) the receipts and payments made in pursuance of the repayment plan; 
(b) the reasons for premature end of the repayment plan; and 
(c) the details of the creditors whose claims have not been fully satisfied. 75 (3) The Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order on the basis of the report submitted under          
sub-section (2) by the resolution professional that the repayment plan has not been completely 
implemented.  
(4) The debtor or the creditor, whose claims under repayment plan have not been fully satisfied, shall 
be entitled to apply for a bankruptcy order under Chapter IV. 
(5) The Adjudicating Authority shall forward to the persons bound by the repayment plan under 
section 115, a copy of the— 
(a) report submitted by the resolution professional to the Adjudicating Authority under              
sub-section ( 2); and 
(b) order passed by the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section ( 3). 
(6) The Adjudicating Authority shall forward a copy of the order passed under sub-section ( 4) to the 
Board, for the purpose of recording entries in the register referred to in section 196. 
119. Discharge order .—(1) On the basis of the repayment plan, the resolution professional shall 
apply to the Adjudicating Authority for a discharge order in relation to the debts mentioned in the 
repayment plan and the Adjudicating Authority may pass such discharge order. 
(2) The repayment plan may provide for— 
(a) early discharge; or 
(b) discharge on complete implementation of the repayment plan. 
(3) The discharge order shall be forwarded to the Board, for the purpose of recording entries in the 
register referred to in section 196. 
(4) The discharge order under sub-section ( 3) shall not discharge any other person from any liability 
in respect of his debt. 
120. Standard of conduct .—The resolution professional shall perform his functions and duties in 
compliance with the code of conduct provided under section 208. 
CHAPTER IV 
BANKRUPTCY ORDER FOR INDIVIDUALS AND PARTNERSHIP FIRMS 
121. Application for bankruptcy .—(1) An application for bankruptcy of a debtor may be made, by 
a creditor individually or jointly with other creditors or by a debtor, to the Adjudicating Authority in the 
following circumstances, namely;— 
(a) where an order has been passed by an Adjudicating Authority under sub-section 4 of            
section 100; or 
(b) where an order has been passed by an Adjudicating Authority under sub-section 2 of          
section 115; or 
(c) where an order has been passed by an Adjudicating Authority under sub-section 3 of            
section 118.  
(2) An application for bankruptcy shall be filed within a period of three months of the date of the 
order passed by the Adjudicating Authority under the sections referred to in sub-section ( 1). 
(3) Where the debtor is a firm, the application under sub-section ( 1) may be filed by any of its 
partners. 
122. Application by debtor .—(1) The application for bankruptcy by the debtor shall be accompanied 
by— 76 (a) the records of insolvency resolution process undertaken under Chapter III of Part III; 
(b) the statement of affairs of the debtor in such form and manner as may be prescribed, on the 
date of the application for bankruptcy; and 
(c) a copy of the order passed by the Adjudicating Authority under Chapter III of Part III 
permitting the debtor to apply for bankruptcy. 
(2) The debtor may propose an insolvency professional as the bankruptcy trustee in the application for 
bankruptcy. 
(3) The application referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be in such form and manner and accompanied 
by such fee as may be prescribed. 
(4) An application for bankruptcy by the debtor shall not be withdrawn without the leave of the 
Adjudicating Authority. 
123. Application by creditor .—(1) The application for bankruptcy by the creditor shall be 
accompanied by— 
(a) the records of insolvency resolution process undertaken under Chapter III; 
(b) a copy of the order passed by the Adjudicating Authority under Chapter III permitting the 
creditor to apply for bankruptcy; 
(c) details of the debts owed by the debtor to the creditor as on the date of the application for 
bankruptcy; and 
(d) such other information as may be prescribed. 
(2) An application under sub-section ( 1) made in respect of a debt which is secured, shall be 
accompanied with— 
(a) a statement by the creditor having the right to enforce the security that he shall, in the event  
of a bankruptcy order being made, give up his security for the benefit of all the creditors of the 
bankrupt; or  
(b) a statement by the creditor stating— 
(i) that the application for bankruptcy is only in respect of the unsecured part of the debt; and 
(ii) an estimated value of the unsecured part of the debt. 
(3) If a secured creditor makes an application for bankruptcy and submits a statement under clause ( b) 
of sub-section ( 2), the secured and unsecured parts of the debt shall be treated as separate debts. 
(4) The creditor may propose an insolvency professional as the bankruptcy trustee in the application 
for bankruptcy. 
(5) An application for bankruptcy under sub-section ( 1), in case of a deceased debtor, may be filed 
against his legal representatives. 
(6) The application for bankruptcy shall be in such form and manner and accompanied by such fee as 
may be prescribed. 
(7) An application for bankruptcy by the creditor shall not be withdrawn without the permission of 
the Adjudicating Authority. 
124. Effect of application .—(1) When an application is filed under section 122 or section 123,— 
(a) an interim-moratorium shall commence on the date of the making of the application on all 
actions against the properties of the debtor in respect of his debts and such moratorium shall cease to 
have effect on the bankruptcy commencement date; and 77 (b) during the interim-moratorium period— 
(i) any pending legal action or legal proceeding against any property of the debtor in respect 
of any of his debts shall be deemed to have been stayed; 
(ii) the creditors of the debtor shall not be entitled to initiate any legal action or legal 
proceedings against any property of the debtor in respect of any of his debts.  
(2) Where the application has been made in relation to a firm, the interim-moratorium under          
sub-section ( 1) shall operate against all the partners of the firm as on the date of the making of the 
application.  
(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply to such transactions as may be notified by the 
Central Government in consultation with any financial sector regulator. 
125. Appointment of insolvency professional as bankruptcy trustee .—(1) If an insolvency 
professional is proposed as the bankruptcy trustee in the application for bankruptcy under section 122 or 
section 123, the Adjudicating Authority shall direct the Board within seven days of receiving the 
application for bankruptcy to confirm that there are no disciplinary proceedings pending against such 
professional. 
(2) The Board shall within ten days of the receipt of the direction under sub-section ( 1) in writing 
either— 
(a) confirm the appointment of the proposed insolvency professional as the bankruptcy trustee for 
the bankruptcy process; or 
(b) reject the appointment of the proposed insolvency professional as the bankruptcy trustee and 
nominate another bankruptcy trustee for the bankruptcy process. 
(3) Where a bankruptcy trustee is not proposed by the debtor or creditor under section 122 or 123, the 
Adjudicating Authority shall direct the Board within seven days of receiving the application to nominate a 
bankruptcy trustee for the bankruptcy process. 
(4) The Board shall nominate a bankruptcy trustee within ten days of receiving the direction of the 
Adjudicating Authority under sub-section ( 3). 
(5) The bankruptcy trustee confirmed or nominated under this section shall be appointed as the 
bankruptcy trustee by the Adjudicating Authority in the bankruptcy order under section 126. 
126. Bankruptcy order .—(1) The Adjudicating Authority shall pass a bankruptcy order within 
fourteen days of receiving the confirmation or nomination of the bankruptcy trustee under section 125. 
(2) The Adjudicating Authority shall provide the following documents to bankrupt, creditors and the 
bankruptcy trustee within seven days of the passing of the bankruptcy order, namely:— 
(a) a copy of the application for bankruptcy; and 
(b) a copy of the bankruptcy order. 
127. Validity of bankruptcy order .—The bankruptcy order passed by the Adjudicating Authority 
under section 126 shall continue to have effect till the debtor is discharged under section 138. 
128. Effect of bankruptcy order .—(1) On the passing of the bankruptcy order under section 126,— 
(a) the estate of the bankrupt shall vest in the bankruptcy trustee as provided in section 154; 
(b) the estate of the bankrupt shall be divided among his creditors; 
(c) subject to provisions of sub-section ( 2), a creditor of the bankrupt indebted in respect of any 
debt claimed as a bankruptcy debt shall not— 78 (i) initiate any action against the property of the bankrupt in respect of such debt; or 
(ii) commence any suit or other legal proceedings except with the leave of the Adjudicating 
Authority and on such terms as the Adjudicating Authority may impose. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 123, the bankruptcy order shall not affect the right of any 
secured creditor to realise or otherwise deal with his security interest in the same manner as he would 
have been entitled if the bankruptcy order had not been passed: 
Provided that no secured creditor shall be entitled to any interest in respect of his debt after the 
bankruptcy commencement date if he does not take any action to realise his security within thirty days 
from the said date. 
(3) Where a bankruptcy order under section 126 has been passed against a firm, the order shall 
operate as if it were a bankruptcy order made against each of the individuals who, on the date of the order, 
is a partner in the firm. 
(4) The provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall not apply to such transactions as may be notified by the 
Central Government in consultation with any financial sector regulator. 
129. Statement of financial position .—(1) Where a bankruptcy order is passed on the application for 
bankruptcy by a creditor under section 123, the bankrupt shall submit his statement of financial position 
to the bankruptcy trustee within seven days from the bankruptcy commencement date. 
(2) The statement of financial position shall be submitted in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed. 
(3) Where the bankrupt is a firm, its partners on the date of the order shall submit a joint statement of 
financial position of the firm, and each partner of the firm shall submit a statement of his financial 
position. 
(4) The bankruptcy trustee may require the bankrupt or any other person to submit in writing further 
information explaining or modifying any matter contained in the statement of financial position. 
130. Public notice inviting claims from creditors .—(1) The Adjudicating Authority shall— 
(a) send notices within ten days of the bankruptcy commencement date, to the creditors 
mentioned in— 
(i) the statement of affairs submitted by the bankrupt under section 129; or 
(ii) the application for bankruptcy submitted by the bankrupt under section 122. 
(b) issue a public notice inviting claims from creditors. 
(2) The public notice under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) shall include the last date up to which the 
claims shall be submitted and such other matters and details as may be prescribed and shall be— 
(a) published in leading newspapers, one in English and another in vernacular having sufficient 
circulation where the bankrupt resides; 
(b) affixed on the premises of the Adjudicating Authority; and 
(c) placed on the website of the Adjudicating Authority. 
(3) The notice to the creditors referred to under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) shall include such 
matters and details as may be prescribed. 79 131. Registration of claims .—(1) The creditors shall register claims with the bankruptcy trustee 
within seven days of the publication of the public notice, by sending details of the claims to the 
bankruptcy trustee in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) The creditor, in addition to the details of his claims, shall provide such other information and in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 
132. Preparation of list of creditors .—The bankruptcy trustee shall, within fourteen days from the 
bankruptcy commencement date, prepare a list of creditors of the bankrupt on the basis of— 
(a) the information disclosed by the bankrupt in the application for bankruptcy filed by the 
bankrupt under section 118 and the statement of affairs filed under section 125; and 
(b) claims received by the bankruptcy trustee under sub-section ( 2) of section 130. 
133. Summoning of meeting of creditors .—(1) The bankruptcy trustee shall, within twenty-one 
days from the bankruptcy commencement date, issue a notice for calling a meeting of the creditors, to 
every creditor of the bankrupt as mentioned in the list prepared under section 132. 
(2) The notices issued under sub-section ( 1) shall— 
(a) state the date of the meeting of the creditors, which shall not be later than twenty-one days 
from the bankruptcy commencement date; 
(b) be accompanied with forms of proxy voting; 
(c) specify the form and manner in which the proxy voting may take place. 
(3) The proxy voting, including electronic proxy voting shall take place in such manner and form as 
may be specified. 
134. Conduct of meeting of creditors .—(1) The bankruptcy trustee shall be the convener of the 
meeting of the creditors summoned under section 133. 
(2) The bankruptcy trustee shall decide the quorum for the meeting of the creditors, and conduct the 
meeting only if the quorum is present. 
(3) The following business shall be conducted in the meeting of the creditors in which regard a 
resolution may be passed, namely:— 
(a) the establishment of a committee of creditors; 
(b) any other business that the bankruptcy trustee thinks fit to be transacted. 
(4) The bankruptcy trustee shall cause the minutes of the meeting of the creditors to be recorded, 
signed and retained as a part of the records of the bankruptcy process. 
(5) The bankruptcy trustee shall not adjourn the meeting of the creditors for any purpose for more 
than seven days at a time. 
135. Voting rights of creditors .—(1) Every creditor mentioned in the list under section 132 or his 
proxy shall be entitled to vote in respect of the resolutions in the meeting of the creditors in accordance 
with the voting share assigned to him. 
(2) The resolution professional shall determine the voting share to be assigned to each creditor in the 
manner specified by the Board. 
(3) A creditor shall not be entitled to vote in respect of a debt for an unliquidated amount. 
(4) The following creditors shall not be entitled to vote under this section, namely:— 80 (a) creditors who are not mentioned in the list of creditors under section 132 and those who have 
not been given a notice by the bankruptcy trustee; 
(b) creditors who are associates of the bankrupt. 
136. Administration and distribution of estate of bankrupt. —The bankruptcy trustee shall 
conduct the administration and distribution of the estate of the bankrupt in accordance with the provisions 
of Chapter V. 
137. Completion of administration .—(1) The bankruptcy trustee shall convene a meeting of the 
committee of creditors on completion of the administration and distribution of the estate of the bankrupt 
in accordance with the provisions of Chapter V. 
(2) The bankruptcy trustee shall provide the committee of creditors with a report of the administration 
of the estate of the bankrupt in the meeting of the said committee. 
(3) The committee of creditors shall approve the report submitted by the bankruptcy trustee under 
sub-section ( 2) within seven days of the receipt of the report and determine whether the bankruptcy 
trustee should be released under section 148. 
(4) The bankruptcy trustee shall retain sufficient sums from the estate of the bankrupt to meet the 
expenses of convening and conducting the meeting required under this section during the administration 
of the estate. 
138. Discharge order .—(1) The bankruptcy trustee shall apply to the Adjudicating Authority for a 
discharge order— 
(a) on the expiry of one year from the bankruptcy commencement date; or 
(b) within seven days of the approval of the committee of creditors of the completion of 
administration of the estates of the bankrupt under section 137, where such approval is obtained prior 
to the period mentioned in clause ( a). 
(2) The Adjudicating Authority shall pass a discharge order on an application by the bankruptcy 
trustee under sub-section ( 1). 
(3) A copy of the discharge order shall be provided to the Board for the purpose of recording an entry 
in the register referred to in section 196. 
139. Effect of discharge .—The discharge order under sub-section ( 2) of section 138 shall release the 
bankrupt from all the bankruptcy debt: 
Provided that discharge shall not— 
(a) affect the functions of the bankruptcy trustee; or 
(b) affect the operation of the provisions of Chapters IV and V of Part III; or 
(c) release the bankrupt from any debt incurred by means of fraud or breach of trust to which he 
was a party; or 
(d) discharge the bankrupt from any excluded debt. 
140. Disqualification of bankrupt .—(1) The bankrupt shall, from the bankruptcy commencement 
date, be subject to the disqualifications mentioned in this section. 
(2) In addition to any disqualification under any other law for the time being in force, a bankrupt shall 
be disqualified from— 
(a) being appointed or acting as a trustee or representative in respect of any trust, estate or 
settlement; 81 (b) being appointed or acting as a public servant; 
(c) being elected to any public office where the appointment to such office is by election; and 
(d) being elected or sitting or voting as a member of any local authority. 
(3) Any disqualification to which a bankrupt may be subject under this section shall cease to have 
effect, if— 
(a) the bankruptcy order against him is modified or recalled under section 142; or 
(b) he is discharged under section 138. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the term “public servant” shall have the same 
meaning as assigned to it in section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
141. Restrictions on bankrupt .—(1) A bankrupt, from the bankruptcy commencement date, shall— 
(a) not act as a director of any company, or directly or indirectly take part in or be concerned in 
the promotion, formation or management of a company; 
(b) without the previous sanction of the bankruptcy trustee, be prohibited from creating any 
charge on his estate or taking any further debt; 
(c) be required to inform his business partners that he is undergoing a bankruptcy process; 
(d) prior to entering into any financial or commercial transaction of such value as may be 
prescribed, either individually or jointly, inform all the parties involved in such transaction that he is 
undergoing a bankruptcy process; 
(e) without the previous sanction of the Adjudicating Authority, be incompetent to maintain any 
legal action or proceedings in relation to the bankruptcy debts; and 
(f) not be permitted to travel overseas without the permission of the Adjudicating Authority. 
(2) Any restriction to which a bankrupt may be subject under this section shall cease to have effect, 
if— 
(a) the bankruptcy order against him is modified or recalled under section 142; or 
(b) he is discharged under section 138. 
142. Modification or recall of bankruptcy order .—(1) The Adjudicating Authority may, on an 
application or suo motu , modify or recall a bankruptcy order, whether or not the bankrupt is discharged, if 
it appears to the Adjudicating Authority that— 
(a) there exists an error apparent on the face of such order; or 
(b) both the bankruptcy debts and the expenses of the bankruptcy have, after the making of the 
bankruptcy order, either been paid for or secured to the satisfaction of the Adjudicating Authority. 
(2) Where the Adjudicating Authority modifies or recalls the bankruptcy order under this section, any 
sale or other disposition of property, payment made or other things duly done by the bankruptcy trustee 
shall be valid except that the property of the bankrupt shall vest in such person as the Adjudicating 
Authority may appoint or, in default of any such appointment, revert to the bankrupt on such terms as the 
Adjudicating Authority may direct. 
(3) A copy of the order passed by the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section ( 1) shall be provided 
to the Board, for the purpose of recording an entry in the register referred to in section 191. 82 (4) The modification or recall of the order by the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section ( 1) shall 
be binding on all creditors so far as it relates to any debts due to them which form a part of the 
bankruptcy. 
143. Standard of conduct .—The bankruptcy trustee shall perform his functions and duties in 
compliance with the code of conduct provided under section 208. 
144. Fees of bankruptcy trustee .—(1) A bankruptcy trustee appointed for conducting the 
bankruptcy process shall charge such fees as may be specified in proportion to the value of the estate of 
the bankrupt. 
(2) The fees for the conduct of the bankruptcy process shall be paid to the bankruptcy trustee from the 
distribution of the estate of the bankrupt in the manner provided in section 178. 
145. Replacement of bankruptcy trustee .—(1) Where Committee of creditors is of the opinion that 
at any time during the bankruptcy process, a bankruptcy trustee appointed under section 125 is required to 
be replaced, it may replace him with another bankruptcy trustee in the manner provided under this 
section. 
(2) The Committee of creditors may, at a meeting, by a vote of seventy-five per cent. of voting share, 
propose to replace the bankruptcy trustee appointed under section 125 with another bankruptcy trustee.  
(3) The Committee of creditors may apply to the Adjudicating Authority for the replacement of the 
bankruptcy trustee. 
(4) The Adjudicating Authority shall within seven days of the receipt of the application under sub-
section ( 3) direct the Board to recommend for replacement of bankruptcy trustee. 
(5) The Board shall, within ten days of the direction of the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section 
(4), recommend a bankruptcy trustee for replacement against whom no disciplinary proceedings are 
pending. 
(6) The Adjudicating Authority shall, by an order, appoint the bankruptcy trustee as recommended by 
the Board under sub-section ( 5) within fourteen days of receiving such recommendation. 
(7) The earlier bankruptcy trustee shall deliver possession of the estate of the bankrupt to the 
bankruptcy trustee appointed under sub-section ( 6), on the date of his appointment. 
(8) The Adjudicating Authority may give directions to the earlier bankruptcy trustee— 
(a) to share all information with the new bankruptcy trustee in respect of the bankruptcy process; 
and  
(b) to co-operate with the new bankruptcy trustee in such matters as may be required. 
(9) The earlier bankruptcy trustee replaced under this section shall be released in accordance with the 
provisions of section 148. 
(10) The bankruptcy trustee appointed under this section shall give a notice of his appointment to the 
bankrupt within seven days of his appointment. 
146. Resignation by bankruptcy trustee .—(1) A bankruptcy trustee may resign if— 
(a) he intends to cease practising as an insolvency professional; or 
(b) there is conflict of interest or change of personal circumstances which preclude the further 
discharge of his duties as a bankruptcy trustee. 
(2) The Adjudicating Authority shall, within seven days of the acceptance of the resignation of the 
bankruptcy trustee, direct the Board for his replacement. 83 (3) The Board shall, within ten days of the direction of the Adjudicating Authority under               
sub-section ( 2) recommend another bankruptcy trustee as a replacement. 
(4) The Adjudicating Authority shall appoint the bankruptcy trustee recommended by the Board 
under sub-section ( 3) within fourteen days of receiving the recommendation. 
(5) The replaced bankruptcy trustee shall deliver possession of the estate of the bankrupt to the 
bankruptcy trustee appointed under sub-section ( 4), on the date of his appointment. 
(6) The Adjudicating Authority may give directions to the bankruptcy trustee who has resigned— 
(a) to share all information with the new bankruptcy trustee in respect of the bankruptcy process; 
and  
(b) to co-operate with the new bankruptcy trustee in such matters as may be required. 
(7) The bankruptcy trustee appointed under this section shall give a notice of his appointment to the 
committee of creditors and the bankrupt within seven days of his appointment. 
(8) The bankruptcy trustee replaced under this section shall be released in accordance with the 
provisions of section 148. 
147. Vacancy in office of bankruptcy trustee .—(1) If a vacancy occurs in the office of the 
bankruptcy trustee for any reason other than his replacement or resignation, the vacancy shall be filled in 
accordance with the provisions of this section.  
(2) In the event of the occurrence of vacancy referred to in sub-section ( 1), the Adjudicating 
Authority shall direct the Board for replacement of a bankruptcy trustee. 
(3) The Board shall, within ten days of the direction of the Adjudicating Authority under               
sub-section ( 2), recommend a bankruptcy trustee as a replacement. 
(4) The Adjudicating Authority shall appoint the bankruptcy trustee recommended by the Board 
under sub-section ( 3) within fourteen days of receiving the recommendation. 
(5) The earlier bankruptcy trustee shall deliver possession of the estate of the bankrupt to the 
bankruptcy trustee appointed under sub-section ( 4), on the date of his appointment. 
(6) The Adjudicating Authority may give directions to the bankruptcy trustee who has vacated the 
office— 
(a) to share all information with the new bankruptcy trustee in respect of the bankruptcy; 
(b) to co-operate with the new bankruptcy trustee in such matters as may be required. 
(7) The bankruptcy trustee appointed under sub-section ( 4) shall give a notice of his appointment to 
the committee of creditors and the bankrupt within seven days of his appointment. 
(8) The earlier bankruptcy trustee replaced under this section shall be released in accordance with the 
provisions of section 148: 
Provided that this section shall not apply if the vacancy has occurred due to temporary illness or 
temporary leave of the bankruptcy trustee. 
148. Release of bankruptcy trustee .—(1) A bankruptcy trustee shall be released from his office with 
effect from the date on which the Adjudicating Authority passes an order appointing a new bankruptcy 
trustee in the event of replacement, resignation or occurrence of vacancy under sections 145, 146 or 
section 147, as the case may be. 84 (2) Notwithstanding the release under sub-section ( 1), the bankruptcy trustee who has been so 
released, shall share all information with the new bankruptcy trustee in respect of the bankruptcy process 
and co-operate with the new bankruptcy trustee in such matters as may be required. 
(3) A bankruptcy trustee who has completed the administration of the bankruptcy process shall be 
released of his duties with effect from the date on which the committee of creditors approves the report of 
the bankruptcy trustee under section 137. 
CHAPTER V 
ADMINISTRATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF THE ESTATE OF THE BANKRUPT 
149. Functions of bankruptcy trustee .—The bankruptcy trustee shall perform the following 
functions in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter— 
(a) investigate the affairs of the bankrupt; 
(b) realise the estate of the bankrupt; and 
(c) distribute the estate of the bankrupt. 
150. Duties of bankrupt towards bankruptcy trustee .—(1) The bankrupt shall assist the 
bankruptcy trustee in carrying out his functions under this Chapter by— 
(a) giving to the bankruptcy trustee the information of his affairs; 
(b) attending on the bankruptcy trustee at such times as may be required; 
(c) giving notice to the bankruptcy trustee of any of the following events which have occurred 
after the bankruptcy commencement date,— 
(i) acquisition of any property by the bankrupt; 
(ii) devolution of any property upon the bankrupt; 
(iii) increase in the income of the bankrupt; 
(d) doing all other things as may be prescribed. 
(2) The bankrupt shall give notice of the increase in income or acquisition or devolution of property 
under clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) within seven days of such increase, acquisition or devolution. 
(3) The bankrupt shall continue to discharge the duties under sub-section ( 1) other than the duties 
under clause ( c) even after the discharge under section 138. 
151. Rights of bankruptcy trustee. —For the purpose of performing his functions under this 
Chapter, the bankruptcy trustee may, by his official name— 
(a) hold property of every description; 
(b) make contracts; 
(c) sue and be sued; 
(d) enter into engagements in respect of the estate of the bankrupt; 
(e) employ persons to assist him; 
(f) execute any power of attorney, deed or other instrument; and 
(g) do any other act which is necessary or expedient for the purposes of or in connection with the 
exercise of his rights. 
152. General powers of bankruptcy truste e.—The bankruptcy trustee may while discharging his 
functions under this Chapter,— 85 (a) sell any part of the estate of the bankrupt; 
(b) give receipts for any money received by him; 
(c) prove, rank, claim and draw a dividend in respect of such debts due to the bankrupt as are 
comprised in his estate; 
(d) where any property comprised in the estate of the bankrupt is held by any person by way of 
pledge or hypothecation, exercise the right of redemption in respect of any such property subject to 
the relevant contract by giving notice to the said person; 
(e) where any part of the estate of the bankrupt consists of securities in a company or any other 
property which is transferable in the books of a person, exercise the right to transfer the property to 
the same extent as the bankrupt might have exercised it if he had not become bankrupt; and 
(f) deal with any property comprised in the estate of the bankrupt to which the bankrupt is 
beneficially entitled in the same manner as he might have dealt with it. 
153. Approval of creditors for certain acts .—The bankruptcy trustee for the purposes of this 
Chapter may after procuring the approval of the committee of creditors,— 
(a) carry on any business of the bankrupt as far as may be necessary for winding it up 
beneficially; 
(b) bring, institute or defend any legal action or proceedings relating to the property comprised in 
the estate of the bankrupt; 
(c) accept as consideration for the sale of any property a sum of money due at a future time 
subject to certain stipulations such as security; 
(d) mortgage or pledge any property for the purpose of raising money for the payment of the 
debts of the bankrupt; 
(e) where any right, option or other power forms part of the estate of the bankrupt, make 
payments or incur liabilities with a view to obtaining, for the benefit of the creditors, any property 
which is the subject of such right, option or power; 
(f) refer to arbitration or compromise on such terms as may be agreed, any debts subsisting or 
supposed to subsist between the bankrupt and any person who may have incurred any liability to the 
bankrupt; 
(g) make compromise or other arrangement as may be considered expedient, with the creditors; 
(h) make compromise or other arrangement as he may deem expedient with respect to any claim 
arising out of or incidental to the bankrupt’s estate; 
(i) appoint the bankrupt to— 
(A) supervise the management of the estate of the bankrupt or any part of it; 
(B) carry on his business for the benefit of his creditors; 
(C) assist the bankruptcy trustee in administering the estate of the bankrupt. 
154. Vesting of estate of bankrupt in bankruptcy trustee .—(1) The estate of the bankrupt shall 
vest in the bankruptcy trustee immediately from the date of his appointment. 
(2) The vesting under sub-section ( 1) shall take effect without any conveyance, assignment or 
transfer. 
155. Estate of bankrupt .—(1) The estate of the bankrupt shall include,— 
(a) all property belonging to or vested in the bankrupt at the bankruptcy commencement date; 86 (b) the capacity to exercise and to initiate proceedings for exercising all such powers in or over or 
in respect of property as might have been exercised by the bankrupt for his own benefit at the 
bankruptcy commencement date or before the date of the discharge order passed under section 138; 
and 
(c) all property which by virtue of any of the provisions of this Chapter is comprised in the estate. 
(2) The estate of the bankrupt shall not include— 
(a) excluded assets; 
(b) property held by the bankrupt on trust for any other person; 
(c) all sums due to any workman or employee from the provident fund, the pension fund and the 
gratuity fund; and 
(d) such assets as may be notified by the Central Government in consultation with any financial 
sector regulator. 
156. Delivery of property and documents to bankruptcy trustee .—The bankrupt, his banker or 
agent or any other person having possession of any property, books, papers or other records which 
bankruptcy trustee is required to take possession for the purposes of the bankruptcy process shall deliver 
the said property and documents to the bankruptcy trustee. 
157. Acquisition of control by bankruptcy trustee .—(1) The bankruptcy trustee shall take 
possession and control of all property, books, papers and other records relating to the estate of the 
bankrupt or affairs of the bankrupt which belong to him or are in his possession or under his control. 
(2) Where any part of the estate of the bankrupt consists of things in actionable claims, they shall be 
deemed to have been assigned to the bankruptcy trustee without any notice of the assignment. 
158. Restrictions on disposition of property .—(1) Any disposition of property made by the debtor, 
during the period between the date of filing of the application for bankruptcy and the bankruptcy 
commencement date shall be void. 
(2) Any disposition of property made under sub-section ( 1) shall not give rise to any right against any 
person, in respect of such property, even if he has received such property before the bankruptcy 
commencement date in— 
(a) good faith; 
(b) for value; and 
(c) without notice of the filing of the application for bankruptcy. 
(3) For the purposes of this section, the term “property” means all the property of the debtor, whether 
or not it is comprised in the estate of the bankrupt, but shall not include property held by the debtor in 
trust for any other person. 
159. After-acquired property of bankrupt .—(1) The bankruptcy trustee shall be entitled to claim 
for the estate of the bankrupt, any after-acquired property by giving a notice to the bankrupt. 
(2) A notice under sub-section ( 1) shall not be served in respect of— 
(a) excluded assets; or 
(b) any property which is acquired by or devolves upon the bankrupt after a discharge order is 
passed under section 138. 
(3) The notice under sub-section ( 2) shall be given within fifteen days from the day on which the 
acquisition or devolution of the after-acquired property comes to the knowledge of the bankruptcy trustee.  87 (4) For the purposes of sub-section ( 3)— 
(a) anything which comes to the knowledge of the bankruptcy trustee shall be deemed to have 
come to the knowledge of the successor of the bankruptcy trustee at the same time; and 
(b) anything which comes to the knowledge of a person before he is appointed as a bankruptcy 
trustee shall be deemed to have come to his knowledge on the date of his appointment as bankruptcy 
trustee. 
 (5) The bankruptcy trustee shall not be entitled, by virtue of this section, to claim from any person 
who has acquired any right over after-acquired property, in good faith, for value and without notice of the 
bankruptcy. 
(6) A notice may be served after the expiry of the period under sub-section ( 3) only with the approval 
of the Adjudicating Authority. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the term “after-acquired property” means any 
property which has been acquired by or has devolved upon the bankrupt after the bankruptcy 
commencement date. 
160. Onerous property of bankrupt .—(1) The bankruptcy trustee may, by giving notice to the 
bankrupt or any person interested in the onerous property, disclaim any onerous property which forms a 
part of the estate of the bankrupt. 
(2) The bankruptcy trustee may give the notice under sub-section ( 1) notwithstanding that he has 
taken possession of the onerous property, endeavoured to sell it or has exercised rights of ownership in 
relation to it. 
(3) A notice of disclaimer under sub-section ( 1) shall— 
(a) determine, as from the date of such notice, the rights, interests and liabilities of the bankrupt 
in respect of the onerous property disclaimed; 
(b) discharge the bankruptcy trustee from all personal liability in respect of the onerous property 
as from the date of appointment of the bankruptcy trustee. 
(4) A notice of disclaimer under sub-section ( 1) shall not be given in respect of the property which 
has been claimed for the estate of the bankrupt under section 155 without the permission of the committee 
of creditors. 
(5) A notice of disclaimer under sub-section ( 1) shall not affect the rights or liabilities of any other 
person, and any person who sustains a loss or damage in consequence of the operation of a disclaimer 
under this section shall be deemed to be a creditor of the bankrupt to the extent of the loss or damage.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the term “onerous property” means— 
(i) any unprofitable contract; and 
(ii) any other property comprised in the estate of the bankrupt which is unsaleable or not readily 
saleable, or is such that it may give rise to a claim. 
161. Notice to disclaim onerous property .—(1) No notice of disclaimer under section 160 shall be 
necessary if— 
(a) a person interested in the onerous property has applied in writing to the bankruptcy trustee or 
his predecessor requiring him to decide whether the onerous property should be disclaimed or not; 
and 
(b) a decision under clause ( a) has not been taken by the bankruptcy trustee within seven days of 
receipt of the notice. 88 (2) Any onerous property which cannot be disclaimed under sub-section ( 1) shall be deemed to be 
part of the estate of the bankrupt. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, an onerous property is said to be disclaimed where 
notice in relation to that property has been given by the bankruptcy trustee under section 160. 
162. Disclaimer of leaseholds .—(1) The bankruptcy trustee shall not be entitled to disclaim any 
leasehold interest, unless a notice of disclaimer has been served on every interested person and—  
(a) no application objecting to the disclaimer by the interested person, has been filed with respect 
to the leasehold interest, within fourteen days of the date on which notice was served; and 
(b) where the application objecting to the disclaimer has been filed by the interested person, the 
Adjudicating Authority has directed under section 163 that the disclaimer shall take effect. 
(2) Where the Adjudicating Authority gives a direction under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1), it may also 
make order with respect to fixtures, improvements by tenant and other matters arising out of the lease as it 
may think fit. 
163. Challenge against disclaimed property .— ( 1) An application challenging the disclaimer may 
be made by the following persons under this section to the Adjudicating Authority— 
(a) any person who claims an interest in the disclaimed property; or 
(b) any person who is under any liability in respect of the disclaimed property; or 
(c) where the disclaimed property is a dwelling house, any person who on the date of application 
for bankruptcy was in occupation of or entitled to occupy that dwelling house. 
(2) The Adjudicating Authority may on an application under sub-section ( 1) make an order              
for the vesting of the disclaimed property in, or for its delivery to any of the persons mentioned in       
sub-section ( 1). 
(3) The Adjudicating Authority shall not make an order in favour of a person who has made an 
application under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) except where it appears to the Adjudicating Authority that 
it would be just to do so for the purpose of compensating the person. 
(4) The effect of an order under this section shall be taken into account while assessing loss or 
damage sustained by any person in consequence of the disclaimer under sub-section ( 5) of section 160.  
(5) An order under sub-section ( 2) vesting property in any person need not be completed by any 
consequence, assignment or transfer. 
164. Undervalued transactions .—(1) The bankruptcy trustee may apply to the Adjudicating 
Authority for an order under this section in respect of an undervalued transaction between a bankrupt and 
any person. 
(2) The undervalued transaction referred to in sub-section ( 1) should have— 
(a) been entered into during the period of two years ending on the filing of the application for 
bankruptcy; and 
(b) caused bankruptcy process to be triggered. 
(3) A transaction between a bankrupt and his associate entered into during the period of two years 
preceding the date of making of the application for bankruptcy shall be deemed to be an undervalued 
transaction under this section. 
(4) On the application of the bankruptcy trustee under sub-section ( 1), the Adjudicating Authority 
may— 89 (a) pass an order declaring an undervalued transaction void; 
(b) pass an order requiring any property transferred as a part of an undervalued transaction to be 
vested with the bankruptcy trustee as a part of the estate of the bankrupt; and 
(c) pass any other order it thinks fit for restoring the position to what it would have been if the 
bankrupt had not entered into the undervalued transaction. 
(5) The order under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 4) shall not be passed if it is proved by the bankrupt 
that the transaction was undertaken in the ordinary course of business of the bankrupt: 
Provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall not be applicable to undervalued transaction 
entered into between a bankrupt and his associate under sub-section ( 3) of this section. 
(6) For the purposes of this section, a bankrupt enters into an undervalued transaction with any person 
if— 
(a) he makes a gift to that person; 
(b) no consideration has been received by that person from the bankrupt; 
(c) it is in consideration of marriage; or 
(d) it is for a consideration, the value of which in money or money’s worth is significantly less 
than the value in money or money’s worth of the consideration provided by the bankrupt. 
165. Preference transactions .—(1) The bankruptcy trustee may apply to the Adjudicating Authority 
for an order under this section if a bankrupt has given a preference to any person. 
(2) The transaction giving preference to an associate of the bankrupt under sub-section ( 1) should 
have been entered into by the bankrupt with the associate during the period of two years ending on the 
date of the application for bankruptcy. 
(3) Any transaction giving preference not covered under sub-section ( 2) should have been entered 
into by the bankrupt during the period of six months ending on the date of the application for bankruptcy.  
(4) The transaction giving preference under sub-section ( 2) or under sub-section ( 3) should have 
caused the bankruptcy process to be triggered. 
(5) On the application of the bankruptcy trustee under sub-section ( 1), the Adjudicating Authority 
may— 
(a) pass an order declaring a transaction giving preference void; 
(b) pass an order requiring any property transferred in respect of a transaction giving preference 
to be vested with the bankruptcy trustee as a part of the estate of the bankrupt; and 
(c) pass any other order it thinks fit for restoring the position to what it would have been if the 
bankrupt had not entered into the transaction giving preference. 
(6) The Adjudicating Authority shall not pass an order under sub-section ( 5) unless the bankrupt was 
influenced in his decision of giving preference to a person by a desire to produce in relation to that person 
an effect under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 8). 
(7) For the purpose of sub-section ( 6), if the person is an associate of the bankrupt, (otherwise than by 
reason only of being his employee), at the time when the preference was given, it shall be presumed that 
the bankrupt was influenced in his decision under that sub-section. 
(8) For the purposes of this section, a bankrupt shall be deemed to have entered into a transaction 
giving preference to any person if— 
(a) the person is the creditor or surety or guarantor for any debt of the bankrupt; and 90 (b) the bankrupt does anything or suffers anything to be done which has the effect of putting that 
person into a position which, in the event of the debtor becoming a bankrupt, will be better than the 
position he would have been in, if that thing had not been done. 
166. Effect of order .—(1) Subject to the provision of sub-section ( 2), an order passed by the 
Adjudicating Authority under section 164 or section 165 shall not,— 
(a) give rise to a right against a person interested in the property which was acquired in an 
undervalued transaction or a transaction giving preference, whether or not he is the person with whom 
the bankrupt entered into such transaction; and 
(b) require any person to pay a sum to the bankruptcy trustee in respect of the benefit received 
from the undervalued transaction or a transaction giving preference, whether or not he is the person 
with whom the bankrupt entered into such transaction. 
(2) The provision of sub-section ( 1) shall apply only if the interest was acquired or the benefit was 
received— 
(a) in good faith; 
(b) for value; 
(c) without notice that the bankrupt entered into the transaction at an undervalue or for giving 
preference; 
(d) without notice that the bankrupt has filed an application for bankruptcy or a bankruptcy order 
has been passed; and 
(e) by any person who at the time of acquiring the interest or receiving the benefit was not an 
associate of the bankrupt. 
(3) Any sum required to be paid to the bankruptcy trustee under sub-section ( 1) shall be included in 
the estate of the bankrupt. 
167. Extortionate credit transactions .—(1) Subject to sub-section ( 6), on an application by the 
bankruptcy trustee, the Adjudicating Authority may make an order under this section in respect of 
extortionate credit transactions to which the bankrupt is or has been a party. 
(2) The transactions under sub-section ( 1) should have been entered into by the bankrupt during the 
period of two years ending on the bankruptcy commencement date. 
(3) An order of the Adjudicating Authority may— 
(a) set aside the whole or part of any debt created by the transaction; 
(b) vary the terms of the transaction or vary the terms on which any security for the purposes of 
the transaction is held; 
(c) require any person who has been paid by the bankrupt under any transaction, to pay a sum to 
the bankruptcy trustee; 
(d) require any person to surrender to the bankruptcy trustee any property of the bankrupt held as 
security for the purposes of the transaction. 
(4) Any sum paid or any property surrendered to the bankruptcy trustee shall be included in the estate 
of the bankrupt. 
(5) For the purposes of this section, an extortionate credit transaction is a transaction for or involving 
the provision of credit to the bankrupt by any person— 91 (a) on terms requiring the bankrupt to make exorbitant payments in respect of the credit provided; 
or  
(b) which is unconscionable under the principles of law relating to contracts. 
(6) Any debt extended by a person regulated for the provision of financial services in compliance 
with the law in force in relation to such debt, shall not be considered as an extortionate credit transaction 
under this section. 
168. Obligations under contracts .—(1) This section shall apply where a contract has been entered 
into by the bankrupt with a person before the bankruptcy commencement date. 
(2) Any party to a contract, other than the bankrupt under sub-section ( 1), may apply to the 
Adjudicating Authority for— 
(a) an order discharging the obligations of the applicant or the bankrupt under the contract; and 
(b) payment of damages by the party or the bankrupt, for non-performance of the contract or 
otherwise. 
(3) Any damages payable by the bankrupt by virtue of an order under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 2) 
shall be provable as bankruptcy debt. 
(4) When a bankrupt is a party to the contract under this section jointly with another person, that 
person may sue or be sued in respect of the contract without joinder of the bankrupt. 
169. Continuance of proceedings on death of bankrupt .—If a bankrupt dies, the bankruptcy 
proceedings shall, continue as if he were alive. 
170. Administration of estate of deceased bankrupt .—(1) All the provisions of Chapter V relating 
to the administration and distribution of the estate of the bankrupt shall, so far as the same are applicable, 
apply to the administration of the estate of a deceased bankrupt. 
(2) While administering the estate of a deceased bankrupt, the bankruptcy trustee shall have regard to 
the claims by the legal representatives of the deceased bankrupt to payment of the proper funeral and 
testamentary expenses incurred by them. 
(3) The claims under sub-section ( 2) shall rank equally to the secured creditors in the priority 
provided under section 178. 
(4) If, on the administration of the estate of a deceased bankrupt, any surplus remains in the hands of 
the bankruptcy trustee after payment in full of all the debts due from the deceased bankrupt, together with 
the costs of the administration and interest as provided under section 178, such surplus shall be paid to the 
legal representatives of the estate of the deceased bankrupt or dealt with in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 
171. Proof of debt .—(1) The bankruptcy trustee shall give notice to each of the creditors to submit 
proof of debt within fourteen days of preparing the list of creditors under section 132. 
(2) The proof of debt shall— 
(a) require the creditor to give full particulars of debt, including the date on which the debt was 
contracted and the value at which that person assesses it; 
(b) require the creditor to give full particulars of the security, including the date on which the 
security was given and the value at which that person assesses it; 
(c) be in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) In case the creditor is a decree holder against the bankrupt, a copy of the decree shall be a valid 
proof of debt. 92 (4) Where a debt bears interest, that interest shall be provable as part of the debt except in so far as it 
is owed in respect of any period after the bankruptcy commencement date. 
(5) The bankruptcy trustee shall estimate the value of any bankruptcy debt which does not have a 
specific value. 
(6) The value assigned by the bankruptcy trustee under sub-section ( 5) shall be the amount provable 
by the concerned creditor. 
(7) A creditor may prove for a debt where payment would have become due at a date later than the 
bankruptcy commencement date as if it were owed presently and may receive dividends in a manner as 
may be prescribed. 
(8) Where the bankruptcy trustee serves a notice under sub-section ( 1) and the person on whom the 
notice is served does not file a proof of security within thirty days after the date of service of the notice, 
the bankruptcy trustee may, with leave of the Adjudicating Authority, sell or dispose of any property that 
was subject to the security, free of that security. 
172. Proof of debt by secured creditors .—(1) Where a secured creditor realises his security, he may 
produce proof of the balance due to him. 
(2) Where a secured creditor surrenders his security to the bankruptcy trustee for the general benefit 
of the creditors, he may produce proof of his whole claim. 
173. Mutual credit and set-off .—(1) Where before the bankruptcy commencement date, there have 
been mutual dealings between the bankrupt and any creditor, the bankruptcy trustee shall— 
(a) take an account of what is due from each party to the other in respect of the mutual dealings 
and the sums due from one party shall be set-off against the sums due from the other; and 
(b) only the balance shall be provable as a bankruptcy debt or as the amount payable to the 
bankruptcy trustee as part of the estate of the bankrupt. 
(2) Sums due from the bankrupt to another party shall not be included in the account taken by the 
bankruptcy trustee under sub-section ( 1), if that other party had notice at the time they became due that an 
application for bankruptcy relating to the bankrupt was pending. 
174. Distribution of interim dividend .—(1) Whenever the bankruptcy trustee has sufficient funds in 
his hand, he may declare and distribute interim dividend among the creditors in respect of the bankruptcy 
debts which they have respectively proved. 
(2) Where the bankruptcy trustee has declared any interim dividend, he shall give notice of such 
dividend and the manner in which it is proposed to be distributed. 
(3) In the calculation and distribution of the interim dividend, the bankruptcy trustee shall make 
provision for— 
(a) any bankruptcy debts which appear to him to be due to persons who, by reason of the distance 
of their place of residence, may not have had sufficient time to tender and establish their debts; and 
(b) any bankruptcy debts which are subject of claims which have not yet been determined; 
(c) disputed proofs and claims; and 
(d) expenses necessary for the administration of the estate of the bankrupt. 
175. Distribution of property .—(1) The bankruptcy trustee may, with the approval of the committee 
of creditors, divide in its existing form amongst the creditors, according to its estimated value, any 
property in its existing form which from its peculiar nature or other special circumstances cannot be 
readily or advantageously sold. 93 (2) An approval under sub-section ( 1) shall be sought by the bankruptcy trustee for each transaction, 
and a person dealing with the bankruptcy trustee in good faith and for value shall not be required to 
enquire whether any approval required under sub-section ( 1) has been given. 
(3) Where the bankruptcy trustee has done anything without the approval of the committee of 
creditors, the committee may, for the purpose of enabling him to meet his expenses out of the estate of the 
bankrupt, ratify the act of the bankruptcy trustee. 
(4) The committee of the creditors shall not ratify the act of the bankruptcy trustee under               
sub-section ( 3) unless it is satisfied that the bankruptcy trustee acted in a case of urgency and has sought 
its ratification without undue delay. 
176. Final dividend .—(1) Where the bankruptcy trustee has realised the entire estate of the bankrupt 
or so much of it as could be realised in the opinion of the bankruptcy trustee, he shall give notice— 
(a) of his intention to declare a final dividend; or 
(b) that no dividend or further dividend shall be declared. 
(2) The notice under sub-section ( 1) shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed and shall 
require all claims against the estate of the bankrupt to be established by a final date specified in the notice.  
(3) The Adjudicating Authority may, on the application of any person interested in the administration 
of the estate of the bankrupt, postpone the final date referred to in sub-section ( 2). 
(4) After the final date referred to in sub-section ( 2), the bankruptcy trustee shall— 
(a) defray any outstanding expenses of the bankruptcy out of the estate of the bankrupt; and 
(b) if he intends to declare a final dividend, declare and distribute that dividend among the 
creditors who have proved their debts, without regard to the claims of any other persons. 
(5) If a surplus remains after payment in full with interest to all the creditors of the bankrupt and the 
payment of the expenses of the bankruptcy, the bankrupt shall be entitled to the surplus. 
(6) Where a bankruptcy order has been passed in respect of one partner in a firm, a creditor to whom 
the bankrupt is indebted jointly with the other partners in the firm or any of them shall not receive any 
dividend out of the separate property of the bankrupt until all the separate creditors have received the full 
amount of their respective debts. 
177. Claims of creditors .—(1) A creditor who has not proved his debt before the declaration of any 
dividend is not entitled to disturb, by reason that he has not participated in it, the distribution of that 
dividend or any other dividend declared before his debt was proved, but— 
(a) when he has proved the debt, he shall be entitled to be paid any dividend or dividends which 
he has failed to receive, out of any money for the time being available for the payment of any further 
dividend; and 
(b) any dividend or dividends payable to him shall be paid before that money is applied to the 
payment of any such further dividend. 
(2) No action shall lie against the bankruptcy trustee for a dividend, but if the bankruptcy trustee 
refuses to pay a dividend payable under sub-section ( 1), the Adjudicating Authority may order him to—  
(a) pay the dividend; and 
(b) pay, out of his own money— 
(i) interest on the dividend; and 
(ii) the costs of the proceedings in which the order to pay has been made. 94 178. Priority of payment of debts .—(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any 
law enacted by the Parliament or the State Legislature for the time being in force, in the distribution of the 
final dividend, the following debts shall be paid in priority to all other debts— 
(a) firstly, the costs and expenses incurred by the bankruptcy trustee for the bankruptcy process in 
full; 
(b) secondly,— 
(i) the workmen’s dues for the period of twenty-four months preceding the bankruptcy 
commencement date; and 
(ii) debts owed to secured creditors; 
(c) thirdly, wages and any unpaid dues owed to employees, other than workmen, of the bankrupt 
for the period of twelve months preceding the bankruptcy commencement date; 
(d) fourthly, any amount due to the Central Government and the State Government including the 
amount to be received on account of Consolidated Fund of India and the Consolidated Fund of a 
State, if any, in respect of the whole or any part of the period of two years preceding the bankruptcy 
commencement date; 
(e) lastly, all other debts and dues owed by the bankrupt including unsecured debts. 
(2) The debts in each class specified in sub-section ( 1) shall rank in the order mentioned in that               
sub-section but debts of the same class shall rank equally amongst themselves, and shall be paid in full, 
unless the estate of the bankrupt is insufficient to meet them, in which case they shall abate in equal 
proportions between themselves. 
(3) Where any creditor has given any indemnity or has made any payment of moneys by virtue of 
which any asset of the bankrupt has been recovered, protected or preserved, the Adjudicating Authority 
may make such order as it thinks just with respect to the distribution of such asset with a view to giving 
that creditor an advantage over other creditors in consideration of the risks taken by him in so doing. 
(4) Unsecured creditors shall rank equally amongst themselves unless contractually agreed to the 
contrary by such creditors. 
(5) Any surplus remaining after the payment of the debts under sub-section ( 1) shall be applied in 
paying interest on those debts in respect of the periods during which they have been outstanding since the 
bankruptcy commencement date. 
(6) Interest payments under sub-section ( 5) shall rank equally irrespective of the nature of the debt.  
(7) In the case of partners, the partnership property shall be applicable in the first instance in payment 
of the partnership debts and the separate property of each partner shall be applicable in the first instance 
in payment of his separate debts. 
(8) Where there is a surplus of the separate property of the partners, it shall be dealt with as part of the 
partnership property; and where there is a surplus of the partnership property, it shall be dealt with as part 
of the respective separate property in proportion to the rights and interests of each partner in the 
partnership property. 
CHAPTER VI 
ADJUDICATING AUTHORITY FOR INDIVIDUALS AND PARTNERSHIP FIRMS 
179. Adjudicating authority for individuals and partnership firms .—(1) Subject to the provisions 
of section 60, the Adjudicating Authority, in relation to insolvency matters of individuals and firms shall 
be the Debt Recovery Tribunal having territorial jurisdiction over the place where the individual debtor 95 actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain and can entertain an 
application under this Code regarding such person. 
(2) The Debt Recovery Tribunal shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, have jurisdiction to entertain or dispose of— 
(a) any suit or proceeding by or against the individual debtor; 
(b) any claim made by or against the individual debtor; 
(c) any question of priorities or any other question whether of law or facts, arising out of or in 
relation to insolvency and bankruptcy of the individual debtor or firm under this Code. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Limitation Act, 1963 (14 of 1963) or in any other law 
for the time being in force, in computing the period of limitation specified for any suit or application in 
the name and on behalf of a debtor for which an order of moratorium has been made under this Part, the 
period during which such moratorium is in place shall be excluded. 
180. Civil court not to have jurisdiction .—(1) No civil court or authority shall have jurisdiction to 
entertain any suit or proceedings in respect of any matter on which the Debt Recovery Tribunal or the 
Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunal has jurisdiction under this Code. 
(2) No injunction shall be granted by any court, tribunal or authority in respect of any action taken, or 
to be taken, in pursuance of any power conferred on the Debt Recovery Tribunal or the Debt Recovery 
Appellate Tribunal by or under this Code. 
181. Appeal to Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunal .—(1) An appeal from an order of the Debt 
Recovery Tribunal under this Code shall be filed within thirty days before the Debt Recovery Appellate 
Tribunal. 
(2) The Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunal may, if it is satisfied that a person was prevented by 
sufficient cause from filing an appeal within thirty days, allow the appeal to be filed within a further 
period not exceeding fifteen days. 
182. Appeal to Supreme Court .—(1) An appeal from an order of the Debt Recovery Appellate 
Tribunal on a question of law under this Code shall be filed within forty-five days before the Supreme 
Court. 
(2) The Supreme Court may, if it is satisfied that a person was prevented by sufficient cause from 
filing an appeal within forty-five days, allow the appeal to be filed within a further period not exceeding 
fifteen days. 
183. Expeditious disposal of applications .—Where an application is not disposed of or order is not 
passed within the period specified in this Code, the Debt Recovery Tribunal or the Debt Recovery 
Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, shall record the reasons for not doing so within the period so 
specified; and the Chairperson of the Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunal, after taking into account the 
reasons so recorded, extend the period specified in this Code, but not exceeding ten days. 
CHAPTER VII 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
184. Punishment for false information, etc., by creditor in insolvency resolution process .—(1) If 
a debtor or creditor provides information which is false in any material particulars to the resolution 
professional, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with 
fine which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both. 
(2) If a creditor promises to vote in favour of the repayment plan dishonestly by accepting any 
money, property or security from the debtor, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 96 may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to three times the amount or its equivalent of 
such money, property or security accepted by such creditor, as the case may be, or with both: 
Provided that where such amount is not quantifiable, the total amount of fine shall not exceed five 
lakh rupees. 
185. Punishment for contravention of provisions .—If an insolvency professional deliberately 
contravenes the provisions of this Part, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months, or with fine, which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but may extend to five 
lakhs rupees, or with both. 
186. Punishment for false information, concealment, etc., by bankrupt. —If the bankrupt— 
(a) knowingly makes a false representation or wilfully omits or conceals any material information 
while making an application for bankruptcy under section 122 or while providing any information 
during the bankruptcy process, he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both; 
Explanation .—For the purposes of clause ( a), a false representation or omission includes non-
disclosure of the details of disposal of any property, which but for the disposal, would be comprised 
in the estate of the bankrupt, other than dispositions made in the ordinary course of business carried 
on by the bankrupt; 
(b) fraudulently has failed to provide or deliberately withheld the production of, destroyed, 
falsified or altered, his books of account, financial information and other records under his custody or 
control, he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year, or with fine, which 
may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both; 
(c) has contravened the restrictions under section 140 or the provisions of section 141, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, which may 
extend to five lakh rupees, or with both; 
(d) has failed to deliver the possession of any property comprised in the estate of the bankrupt 
under his possession or control, which he is required to deliver under section 156, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, which may 
extend to five lakh rupees, or with both; 
(e) has failed to account, without any reasonable cause or satisfactory explanation, for any loss 
incurred of any substantial part of his property comprised in the estate of the bankrupt from the date 
which is twelve months before the filing of the bankruptcy application, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, which may extend to three 
times of the value of the loss, or with both: 
Provided that that where such loss is not quantifiable, the total amount of fine imposed shall not 
exceed five lakh rupees; 
(f) has absconded or attempts to absconds after the bankruptcy commencement date, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, which may 
extend to five lakh rupees, or with both; 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, a bankrupt shall be deemed to have absconded if 
he leaves, or attempts to leave the country without delivering the possession of any property which he 
is required to deliver to the bankruptcy trustee under section 156. 
187. Punishment for certain actions .—If a bankruptcy trustee,— 97 (a) has fraudulently misapplied, retained or accounted for any money or property comprised in 
the estate of the bankrupt; or 
(b) has wilfully acted in a manner that the estate of the bankrupt has suffered any loss in 
consequence of breach of any duty of the bankruptcy trustee in carrying out his functions under 
section 149, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, which 
shall not be less than three times the amount of the loss caused, or likely to have been caused, to persons 
concerned on account of such contravention, or with both: 
Provided that where such loss or unlawful gain is not quantifiable, the total amount of fine imposed 
shall not exceed five lakh rupees: 
Provided further that the bankruptcy trustee shall not be liable under this section if he seizes or 
disposes of any property which is not comprised in the estate of the bankrupt and at that time had 
reasonable grounds to believe that he is entitled to seize or dispose that property. 
PART IV 
REGULATION OF INSOLVENCY PROFESSIONALS, AGENCIES AND INFORMATION UTILITIES 
CHAPTER I 
THE INSOLVENCY AND BANKRUPTCY BOARD OF INDIA 
188. Establishment and incorporation of Board .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification, appoint, there shall be established, for the purposes of this Code, a 
Board by the name of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India. 
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Code, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, 
both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. 
(3) The head office of the Board shall be at such place in the National Capital Region, as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression “National Capital Region” shall have 
the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( f) of section 2 of the National Capital Region Planning 
Board Act, 1985 (2 of 1985). 
(4) The Board may establish offices at other places in India. 
189. Constitution of Board .—(1) The Board shall consist of the following members who shall be 
appointed by the Central Government, namely:—  
(a) a Chairperson; 
(b) three members from amongst the officers of the Central Government not below the rank of 
Joint Secretary or equivalent, one each to represent the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs and Ministry of Law, ex officio ; 
(c) one member to be nominated by the Reserve Bank of India, ex officio ; 
(d) five other members to be nominated by the Central Government, of whom at least three shall 
be the whole-time members. 
(2) The Chairperson and the other members shall be persons of ability, integrity and standing, who 
have shown capacity in dealing with problems relating to insolvency or bankruptcy and have special 
knowledge and experience in the field of law, finance, economics, accountancy or administration. 98 (3) The appointment of the Chairperson and the members of the Board other than the appointment of 
an ex officio  member under this section shall be made after obtaining the recommendation of a selection 
committee consisting of— 
(a) Cabinet Secretary—Chairperson; 
(b) Secretary to the Government of India to be nominated by the Central Government—Member; 
(c) Chairperson of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (in case of selection of 
members of the Board)—Member; 
(d) three experts of repute from the field of finance, law, management, insolvency and related 
subjects, to be nominated by the Central Government—Members. 
(4) The term of office of the Chairperson and members (other than ex officio  members) shall be five 
years or till they attain the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier, and they shall be eligible for 
reappointment. 
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the 
Chairperson and members (other than the ex officio members) shall be such as may be prescribed. 
190. Removal of member from office .—The Central Government may remove a member from 
office if he— 
(a) is an undischarged bankrupt as defined under Part III; 
(b) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a member; 
(c) has been convicted of an offence, which in the opinion of the Central Government involves 
moral turpitude; 
(d) has, so abused his position as to render his continuation in office detrimental to the public 
interest: 
Provided that no member shall be removed under clause ( d) unless he has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
191. Powers of Chairperson .—Save as otherwise determined by regulations, the Chairperson shall 
have powers of general superintendence and direction of the affairs of the Board and may also exercise 
such other powers as may be delegated to him by the Board. 
192. Meetings of Board .—(1) The Board shall meet at such times and places, and observe such rules 
of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including quorum at such meetings) 
as may be determined by regulations. 
(2) The Chairperson, or if, for any reason, the Chairperson is unable to attend any meeting of the 
Board, any other member chosen by the members present at the meeting shall preside at the meeting. 
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board shall be decided by a majority 
votes of the members present and voting, and, in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson, or in 
his absence, the person presiding, shall have a second or casting vote. 
193. Member not to participate in meetings in certain cases .—Any member, who is a director of a 
company and who as such director has any direct or indirect pecuniary interest in any matter coming up 
for consideration at a meeting of the Board, shall, as soon as possible after relevant circumstances have 
come to his knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting and such disclosure shall be 
recorded in the proceedings of the Board, and the member shall not take any part in any deliberation or 
decision of the Board with respect to that matter. 99 194. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Board, Officers and employees of       
Board .—(1) No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalid merely by reason of— 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board; or 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Board; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits of the case. 
(2) The Board may appoint such other officers and employees as it considers necessary for the 
efficient discharge of its functions in such manner as may be specified. 
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, officers and 
employees of the Board appointed under sub-section ( 2) shall be such as may be specified by regulations. 
195. Power to designate financial sector regulator .—Until the Board is established, the Central 
Government may by notification, designate any financial sector regulator to exercise the powers and 
functions of the Board under this Code. 
CHAPTER II 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE BOARD 
196. Powers and functions of Board .—(1) The Board shall, subject to the general direction of the 
Central Government, perform all or any of the following functions namely:— 
(a) register insolvency professional agencies, insolvency professionals and information utilities 
and renew, withdraw, suspend or cancel such registrations; 
1[(aa) promote the development of, and regulate, the working and practices of, insolvency 
professionals, insolvency professional agencies and information utilities and other institutions, in 
furtherance of the purposes of this Code;] 
(b) specify the minimum eligibility requirements for registration of insolvency professional 
agencies, insolvency professionals and information utilities; 
(c) levy fee or other charges 2[for carrying out the purposes of this Code, including fee for 
registration and renewal] of insolvency professional agencies, insolvency professionals and 
information utilities; 
(d) specify by regulations standards for the functioning of insolvency professional agencies, 
insolvency professionals and information utilities; 
(e) lay down by regulations the minimum curriculum for the examination of the insolvency 
professionals for their enrolment as members of the insolvency professional agencies; 
(f) carry out inspections and investigations on insolvency professional agencies, insolvency 
professionals and information utilities and pass such orders as may be required for compliance of the 
provisions of this Code and the regulations issued hereunder; 
(g) monitor the performance of insolvency professional agencies, insolvency professionals and 
information utilities and pass any directions as may be required for compliance of the provisions of 
this Code and the regulations issued hereunder; 
(h) call for any information and records from the insolvency professional agencies, insolvency 
professionals and information utilities; 
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 2018, s 32 (w.e.f. 6-6-2018)    
2. Subs by s 32, ibid, for “ for the registration” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018)100 (i) publish such information, data, research studies and other information as may be specified by 
regulations; 
(j) specify by regulations the manner of collecting and storing data by the information utilities 
and for providing access to such data; 
(k) collect and maintain records relating to insolvency and bankruptcy cases and disseminate 
information relating to such cases; 
(l) constitute such committees as may be required including in particular the committees laid 
down in section 197; 
(m) promote transparency and best practices in its governance; 
(n) maintain websites and such other universally accessible repositories of electronic information 
as may be necessary; 
(o) enter into memorandum of understanding with any other statutory authorities; 
(p) issue necessary guidelines to the insolvency professional agencies, insolvency professionals 
and information utilities; 
(q) specify mechanism for redressal of grievances against insolvency professionals, insolvency 
professional agencies and information utilities and pass orders relating to complaints filed against the 
aforesaid for compliance of the provisions of this Code and the regulations issued hereunder; 
(r) conduct periodic study, research and audit the functioning and performance of to the 
insolvency professional agencies, insolvency professionals and information utilities at such intervals 
as may be specified by the Board; 
(s) specify mechanisms for issuing regulations, including the conduct of public consultation 
processes before notification of any regulations; 
(t) make regulations and guidelines on matters relating to insolvency and bankruptcy as may be 
required under this Code, including mechanism for time bound disposal of the assets of the corporate 
debtor or debtor; and 
(u) perform such other functions as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Board may make model bye-laws to be to adopted by insolvency professional agencies which 
may provide for— 
(a) the minimum standards of professional competence of the members of insolvency 
professional agencies; 
(b) the standards for professional and ethical conduct of the members of insolvency professional 
agencies; 
(c) requirements for enrolment of persons as members of insolvency professional agencies which 
shall be non-discriminatory; 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, the term “non-discriminatory” means lack of 
discrimination on the grounds of religion, caste, gender or place of birth and such other grounds as 
may be specified; 
(d) the manner of granting membership; 
(e) setting up of a governing board for internal governance and management of insolvency 
professional agency in accordance with the regulations specified by the Board; 101 (f) the information required to be submitted by members including the form and the time for 
submitting such information; 
(g) the specific classes of persons to whom services shall be provided at concessional rates or for 
no remuneration by members; 
(h) the grounds on which penalties may be levied upon the members of insolvency professional 
agencies and the manner thereof; 
(i) a fair and transparent mechanism for redressal of grievances against the members of 
insolvency professional agencies; 
(j) the grounds under which the insolvency professionals may be expelled from the membership 
of insolvency professional agencies; 
(k) the quantum of fee and the manner of collecting fee for inducting persons as its members; 
(l) the procedure for enrolment of persons as members of insolvency professional agency; 
(m) the manner of conducting examination for enrolment of insolvency professionals; 
(n) the manner of monitoring and reviewing the working of insolvency professional who are 
members; 
(o) the duties and other activities to be performed by members; 
(p) the manner of conducting disciplinary proceedings against its members and imposing 
penalties;  
(q) the manner of utilising the amount received as penalty imposed against any insolvency 
professional. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, while exercising 
the powers under this Code, the Board shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, 
namely:— 
(i) the discovery and production of books of account and other documents, at such place and such 
time as may be specified by the Board; 
(ii) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining them on oath; 
(iii) inspection of any books, registers and other documents of any person at any place; 
(iv) issuing of commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents. 
197. Constitution of advisory committee, executive committee or other committee. —The Board 
may, for the efficient discharge of its functions, may constitute advisory and executive committees or 
such other committees, as it may deem fit, consisting of a Chairperson and such other members as may be 
specified by regulations. 
198. Condonation of delay .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, where the Board 
does not perform any act within the period specified under this Code, the relevant Adjudicating Authority 
may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, condone the delay. 
CHAPTER III 
INSOLVENCY  PROFESSIONAL  AGENCIES
199. No person to function as insolvency professional agency without valid certificate of 
registration .—Save as otherwise provided in this Code, no person shall carry on its business as 102 insolvency professional agencies under this Code and enrol insolvency professionals as its members 
except under and in accordance with a certificate of registration issued in this behalf by the Board. 
200. Principles governing registration of insolvency professional agency .—The Board shall have 
regard to the following principles while registering the insolvency professional agencies under this Code, 
namely:— 
(a) to promote the professional development of and regulation of insolvency professionals; 
(b) to promote the services of competent insolvency professionals to cater to the needs of debtors, 
creditors and such other persons as may be specified; 
(c) to promote good professional and ethical conduct amongst insolvency professionals; 
(d) to protect the interests of debtors, creditors and such other persons as may be specified; 
(e) to promote the growth of insolvency professional agencies for the effective resolution of 
insolvency and bankruptcy processes under this Code. 
201. Registration of insolvency professional agency .—(1) Every application for registration shall 
be made to the Board in such form and manner, containing such particulars, and accompanied by such 
fee, as may be specified by regulations: 
Provided that every application received by the Board shall be acknowledged within seven days of its 
receipt. 
(2) On receipt of the application under sub-section ( 1), the Board may, on being satisfied that the 
application conforms with all requirements specified under sub-section ( 1), grant a certificate of 
registration to the applicant or else, reject, by order, such application: 
Provided that no order rejecting the application shall be made without giving an opportunity of being 
heard to the applicant: 
Provided further that every order so made shall be communicated to the applicant within a period of 
fifteen days. 
(3) The Board may issue a certificate of registration to the applicant in such form and manner and 
subject to such terms and conditions as may be specified. 
(4) The Board may renew the certificate of registration from time to time in such manner and on 
payment of such fee as may be specified. 
(5) The Board may, by order, suspend or cancel the certificate of registration granted to an insolvency 
professional agency on any of the following grounds, namely:— 
(a) that it has obtained registration by making a false statement or misrepresentation or by any 
other unlawful means; 
(b) that it has failed to comply with the requirements of the regulations made by the Board or  
bye-laws made by the insolvency professional agency; 
(c) that it has contravened any of the provisions of the Act or the rules or the regulations made 
thereunder; 
(d) on any other ground as may be specified by regulations: 
Provided that no order shall be made under this sub-section unless the insolvency professional agency 
concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard: 
Provided further that no such order shall be passed by any member except whole-time members of the 
Board. 103 202. Appeal to National Company Law Appellate Tribunal .—Any insolvency professional agency 
which is aggrieved by the order of the Board made under section 201 may prefer an appeal to the National 
Company Law Appellate Tribunal in such form, within such period, and in such manner, as may be 
specified by regulations.  
203. Governing Board of insolvency professional agency. —The Board may, for the purposes of 
ensuring that every insolvency professional agency takes into account the objectives sought to be 
achieved under this Code, make regulations to specify— 
(a) the setting up of a governing board of an insolvency professional agency; 
(b) the minimum number of independent members to be on the governing board of the insolvency 
professional agency; and 
(c) the number of the insolvency professionals being its members who shall be on the governing 
board of the insolvency professional agency. 
204. Functions of insolvency professional agencies .—An insolvency professional agency shall 
perform the following functions, namely:— 
(a) grant membership to persons who fulfil all requirements set out in its bye-laws on payment of 
membership fee; 
(b) lay down standards of professional conduct for its members; 
(c) monitor the performance of its members; 
(d) safeguard the rights, privileges and interests of insolvency professionals who are its members; 
(e) suspend or cancel the membership of insolvency professionals who are its members on the 
grounds set out in its bye-laws; 
(f) redress the grievances of consumers against insolvency professionals who are its members; 
and 
(g) publish information about its functions, list of its members, performance of its members and 
such other information as may be specified by regulations. 
205. Insolvency professional agencies to make bye-laws .—Subject to the provisions of this Code 
and any rules or regulations made thereunder and after obtaining the approval of the Board, every 
insolvency professional agency shall make bye-laws consistent with the model bye-laws specified by the 
Board under sub-section ( 2) of section 196. 
CHAPTER IV 
INSOLVENCY PROFESSIONALS
206. Enrolled and registered persons to act as insolvency professionals .—No person shall render 
his services as insolvency professional under this Code without being enrolled as a member of an 
insolvency professional agency and registered with the Board. 
207. Registration of insolvency professionals .—(1) Every insolvency professional shall, after 
obtaining the membership of any insolvency professional agency, register himself with the Board within 
such time, in such manner and on payment of such fee, as may be specified by regulations. 
(2) The Board may specify the categories of professionals or persons possessing such qualifications 
and experience in the field of finance, law, management, insolvency or such other field, as it deems fit.  
208. Functions and obligations of insolvency professionals .—(1) Where any insolvency resolution, 
fresh start, liquidation or bankruptcy process has been initiated, it shall be the function of an insolvency 
professional to take such actions as may be necessary, in the following matters, namely:— 104 (a) a fresh start order process under Chapter II of Part III; 
(b) individual insolvency resolution process under Chapter III of Part III; 
(c) corporate insolvency resolution process under Chapter II of Part II; 
(d) individual bankruptcy process under Chapter IV of Part III; and 
(e) liquidation of a corporate debtor firm under Chapter III of Part II. 
(2) Every insolvency professional shall abide by the following code of conduct:— 
(a) to take reasonable care and diligence while performing his duties; 
(b) to comply with all requirements and terms and conditions specified in the bye-laws of the 
insolvency professional agency of which he is a member; 
(c) to allow the insolvency professional agency to inspect his records; 
(d) to submit a copy of the records of every proceeding before the Adjudicating Authority to the 
Board as well as to the insolvency professional agency of which he is a member; and 
(e) to perform his functions in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be specified.  
CHAPTER V 
INFORMATION UTILITIES 
209. No person to function as information utility without certificate of registration .—Save as 
otherwise provided in this Code, no person shall carry on its business as information utility under this 
Code without a certificate of registration issued in that behalf by the Board. 
210. Registration of information utility .—(1) Every application for registration shall be made to the 
Board in such form and manner, containing such particulars, and accompanied by such fee, as may be 
specified by regulations: 
Provided that every application received by the Board shall be acknowledged within seven days of its 
receipt. 
(2) On receipt of the application under sub-section ( 1), the Board may, on being satisfied that the 
application conforms to all requirements specified under sub-section ( 1), grant a certificate of registration 
to the applicant or else, reject, by order, such application. 
(3) The Board may issue a certificate of registration to the applicant in such form and manner and 
subject to such terms and conditions as may be specified. 
(4) The Board may renew the certificate of registration from time to time in such manner and on 
payment of such fee as may be specified by regulations. 
(5) The Board may, by order, suspend or cancel the certificate of registration granted to an 
information utility on any of the following grounds, namely:— 
(a) that it has obtained registration by making a false statement or misrepresentation or any other 
unlawful means; 
(b) that it has failed to comply with the requirements of the regulations made by the Board; 
(c) that it has contravened any of the provisions of the Act or the rules or the regulations made 
thereunder; 
(d) on any other ground as may be specified by regulations: 105 Provided that no order shall be made under this sub-section unless the information utility concerned 
has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard: 
Provided further that no such order shall be passed by any member except whole-time members of the 
Board. 
211. Appeal to National Company Law Appellate Tribunal .—Any information utility which is 
aggrieved by the order of the Board made under section 210 may prefer an appeal to the National 
Company Law Appellate Tribunal in such form, within such period, and in such manner, as may be 
specified by regulations. 
212. Governing Board of information utility .—The Board may, for ensuring that an information 
utility takes into account the objectives sought to be achieved under this Code, require every information 
utility to set up a governing board, with such number of independent members, as may be specified by 
regulations. 
213. Core services, etc., of information utilities .—An information utility shall provide such services 
as may be specified including core services to any person if such person complies with the terms and 
conditions as may be specified by regulations. 
214. Obligation of information utility .—For the purposes of providing core services to any person, 
every information utility shall— 
(a) create and store financial information in a universally accessible format; 
(b) accept electronic submissions of financial information from persons who are under obligations 
to submit financial information under sub-section ( 1) of section 215, in such form and manner as may 
be specified by regulations; 
(c) accept, in specified form and manner, electronic submissions of financial information from 
persons who intend to submit such information; 
(d) meet such minimum service quality standards as may be specified by regulations; 
(e) get the information received from various persons authenticated by all concerned parties 
before storing such information; 
(f) provide access to the financial information stored by it to any person who intends to access 
such information in such manner as may be specified by regulations; 
(g) publish such statistical information as may be specified by regulations; 
(h) have inter-operatability with other information utilities. 
215. Procedure for submission, etc., of financial information .—(1) Any person who intends to 
submit financial information to the information utility or access the information from the information 
utility shall pay such fee and submit information in such form and manner as may be specified by 
regulations. 
(2) A financial creditor shall submit financial information and information relating to assets in 
relation to which any security interest has been created, in such form and manner as may be specified by 
regulations. 
(3) An operational creditor may submit financial information to the information utility in such form 
and manner as may be specified. 
216. Rights and obligations of persons submitting financial information .—(1) A person who 
intends to update or modify or rectify errors in the financial information submitted under section 215, he 106 may make an application to the information utility for such purpose stating reasons therefor, in such 
manner and within such time, as may be specified. 
(2) A person who submits financial information to an information utility shall not provide such 
information to any other person, except to such extent, under such circumstances, and in such manner, as 
may be specified. 
CHAPTER VI 
INSPECTION AND INVESTIGATION 
217. Complaints against insolvency professional agency or its member or information utility .— 
Any person aggrieved by the functioning of an insolvency professional agency or insolvency professional 
or an information utility may file a complaint to the Board in such form, within such time and in such 
manner as may be specified. 
218. Investigation of insolvency professional agency or its member or information                    
utility .—(1) Where the Board, on receipt of a complaint under section 217 or has reasonable grounds to 
believe that any insolvency professional agency or insolvency professional or an information utility has 
contravened any of the provisions of the Code or the rules or regulations made or directions issued by the 
Board thereunder, it may, at any time by an order in writing, direct any person or persons to act as an 
investigating authority to conduct an inspection or investigation of the insolvency professional agency or 
insolvency professional or an information utility. 
(2) The inspection or investigation carried out under sub-section ( 1) of this section shall be conducted 
within such time and in such manner as may be specified by regulations. 
(3) The Investigating Authority may, in the course of such inspection or investigation, require any 
other person who is likely to have any relevant document, record or information to furnish the same, and 
such person shall be bound to furnish such document, record or information: 
Provided that the Investigating Authority shall provide detailed reasons to such person before 
requiring him to furnish such document, record or information. 
(4) The Investigating Authority may, in the course of its inspection or investigation, enter any 
building or place where they may have reasons to believe that any such document, record or information 
relating to the subject-matter of the inquiry may be found and may seize any such document, record or 
information or take extracts or copies therefrom, subject to the provisions of section 100 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), insofar as they may be applicable. 
(5) The Investigating Authority shall keep in its custody the books, registers, other documents and 
records seized under this section for such period not later than the conclusion of the investigation as it 
considers necessary and thereafter shall return the same to the concerned person from whose custody or 
power they were seized: 
Provided that the Investigating Authority may, before returning such books, registers, other 
documents and record as aforesaid, place identification marks on them or any part thereof. 
(6) A detailed report of inspection or investigation shall be submitted to the Board by the 
Investigating Authority. 
219. Show cause notice to insolvency professional agency or its member or information 
utility.—  The Board may, upon completion of an inspection or investigation under section 218, issue a 
show cause notice to such insolvency professional agency or insolvency professional or information 
utility, and carry out inspection of such insolvency professional agency or insolvency professional or 
information utility in such manner, giving such time for giving reply, as may be specified by regulations. 107 220. Appointment of disciplinary committee .—(1) The Board shall constitute a disciplinary 
committee to consider the reports of the investigating Authority submitted under sub-section ( 6) of 
section 218: 
Provided that the members of the disciplinary committee shall consist of whole-time members of the 
Board only. 
(2) On the examination of the report of the Investigating Authority, if the disciplinary committee is 
satisfied that sufficient cause exists, it may impose penalty as specified in sub-section ( 3) or suspend or 
cancel the registration of the insolvency professional or, suspend or cancel the registration of insolvency 
professional agency or information utility as the case may be. 
(3) Where any insolvency professional agency or insolvency professional or an information utility has 
contravened any provision of this Code or rules or regulations made thereunder, the disciplinary 
committee may impose penalty which shall be— 
(i) three times the amount of the loss caused, or likely to have been caused, to persons concerned 
on account of such contravention; or 
(ii) three times the amount of the unlawful gain made on account of such contravention,  
whichever is higher: 
Provided that where such loss or unlawful gain is not quantifiable, the total amount of the penalty 
imposed shall not exceed more than one crore rupees. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 3), the Board may direct any person who has 
made unlawful gain or averted loss by indulging in any activity in contravention of this Code, or the rules 
or regulations made thereunder, to disgorge an amount equivalent to such unlawful gain or aversion of 
loss. 
(5) The Board may take such action as may be required to provide restitution to the person who 
suffered loss on account of any contravention from the amount so disgorged, if the person who suffered 
such loss is identifiable and the loss so suffered is directly attributable to such person. 
(6) The Board may make regulations to specify— 
(a) the procedure for claiming restitution under sub-section ( 5); 
(b) the period within which such restitution may be claimed; and 
(c) the manner in which restitution of amount may be made. 
CHAPTER VII 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
221. Grants by Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Board grants of such sums of money as that Government 
may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Code. 
222. Board’s Fund .—(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Fund of the Insolvency 
and Bankruptcy Board and there shall be credited thereto— 
(a) all grants, fees and charges received by the Board under this Code; 108 (b) all sums received by the Board from such other sources as may be decided upon by the 
Central Government; 
(c) such other funds as may be specified by the Board or prescribed by the Central Government. 
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting— 
(a) the salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the members, officers and other employees 
of the Board; 
(b) the expenses of the Board in the discharge of its functions under section 196; 
(c) the expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by this Code; 
(d) such other purposes as may be prescribed. 
223. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at 
such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other person appointed by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Board shall have the same rights and privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in 
connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand 
the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect 
any of the offices of the Board. 
(4) The accounts of the Board as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
PART V 
MISCELLENEAOUS 
224. Insolvency and Bankruptcy Fund .—(1) There shall be formed a Fund to be called the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Fund (hereafter in this section referred to as the “Fund”) for the purposes of 
insolvency resolution, liquidation and bankruptcy of persons under the Code. 
(2) There shall be credited to the Fund the following amounts, namely— 
(a) the grants made by the Central Government for the purposes of the Fund; 
(b) the amount deposited by persons as contribution to the Fund; 
(c) the amount received in the Fund from any other source; and 
(d) the interest or other income received out of the investment made from the Fund. 
(3) A person who has contributed any amount to the Fund may, in the event of proceedings initiated 
in respect of such person under this Code before an Adjudicating Authority, make an application to such 
Adjudicating Authority for withdrawal of funds not exceeding the amount contributed by it, for making 
payments to workmen, protecting the assets of such persons, meeting the incidental costs during the 
proceedings or such other purposes as may be prescribed. 109 (4) The Central Government shall, by notification, appoint an administrator to administer the fund in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 
225. Power of Central Government to issue directions .—(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing 
provisions of this Code, the Board shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions 
under this Code, be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give 
in writing to it from time to time: 
Provided that the Board shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views 
before any direction is given under this sub-section. 
(2) The decision of the Central Government as to whether a question is one of policy or not shall be 
final. 
226. Power of Central Government to supersede Board .—(1) If at any time the Central 
Government is of opinion— 
(a) that on account of grave emergency, the Board is unable to discharge the functions and duties 
imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Code; or 
(b) that the Board has persistently not complied with any direction issued by the Central 
Government under this Code or in the discharge of the functions and duties imposed on it by or under 
the provisions of this Code and as a result of such noncompliance the financial position of the Board 
or the administration of the Board has deteriorated; or 
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest so to do, 
the Central Government may, by notification, supersede the Board for such period, not exceeding six 
months, as may be specified in the notification. 
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section ( 1) superseding the Board,— 
(a) all the members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such; 
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Code, be 
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Board, shall until the Board is reconstituted under            
sub-section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by such person or persons as the Central Government 
may direct; and 
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Board shall, until the Board is reconstituted under                  
sub-section ( 3), vest in the Central Government. 
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under                     
sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may reconstitute the Board by a fresh appointment and in such 
case any person or persons who vacated their offices under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2), shall not be 
deemed disqualified for appointment: 
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time, before the expiration of the period of 
supersession, take action under this sub-section. 
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub-section ( 1) and a full report of 
any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid before each 
House of Parliament at the earliest. 
227. Power of Central Government to notify financial service providers, etc .—Notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary examined in this Code or any other law for the time being in force, the Central 
Government may, if it considers necessary, in consultation with the appropriate financial sector 
regulators, notify financial service providers or categories of financial service providers for the purpose of 110 their insolvency and liquidation proceedings, which may be conducted under this Code, in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 
228. Budget .—The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year as may 
be prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the 
Board and forward the same to the Central Government. 
229. Annual report .—(1) The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial 
year as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous 
financial year, and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government. 
(2) A copy of the report received under sub-section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
received, before each House of Parliament. 
230. Delegation .—The Board may, by general or special order in writing delegate to any member or 
officer of the Board subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers 
and functions under this Code (except the powers under section 240, as it may deem necessary. 
231. Bar of jurisdiction .—No civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter in which the 
1[Adjudicating Authority or the Board] is empowered by, or under, this Code to pass any order and no 
injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in 
pursuance of any order passed by such 1[Adjudicating Authority or the Board] under this Code. 
232. Members, officers and employees of Board to the public servants .—The Chairperson, 
Members, officers and other employees of the Board shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in 
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Code, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
233. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Government or any officer of the Government, or the Chairperson, Member, officer or 
other employee of the Board or an insolvency professional or liquidator for anything which is in done or 
intended to be done in good faith under this Code or the rules or regulations made thereunder. 
234. Agreements with foreign countries .—(1) The Central Government may enter into an 
agreement with the Government of any country outside India for enforcing the provisions of this Code.  
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that the application of 
provisions of this Code in relation to assets or property of corporate debtor or debtor, including a personal 
guarantor of a corporate debtor, as the case may be, situated at any place in a country outside India with 
which reciprocal arrangements have been made, shall be subject to such conditions as may be specified.  
235. Letter of request to a country outside India in certain cases .—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Code or any law for the time being in force if, in the course of insolvency resolution 
process, or liquidation or bankruptcy proceedings, as the case may be, under this Code, the resolution 
professional, liquidator or bankruptcy trustee, as the case may be, is of the opinion that assets of the 
corporate debtor or debtor, including a personal guarantor of a corporate debtor, are situated in a country 
outside India with which reciprocal arrangements have been made under section 234, he may make an 
application to the Adjudicating Authority that evidence or action relating to such assets is required in 
connection with such process or proceeding. 
(2) The Adjudicating Authority on receipt of an application under sub-section ( 1) and, on being 
satisfied that evidence or action relating to assets under sub-section ( 1) is required in connection with 
insolvency resolution process or liquidation or bankruptcy proceeding, may issue a letter of request to a 
court or an authority of such country competent to deal with such request. 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 33, for “Adjudicating Authority” (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  111 1[235A . Punishment where no specific penalty or punishment is provided. —If any person 
contravenes any of the provisions of this Code or the rules or regulations made thereunder for which no 
penalty or punishment is provided in this Code, such person shall be punishable with fine which shall not 
be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to two crore rupees.] 
236. Trial of offences by Special Court .—(1) Notwithstanding anything in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), offences under this Code shall be tried by the Special Court established 
under Chapter XXVIII of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013). 
(2) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act, save on a complaint 
made by the Board or the Central Government or any person authorised by the Central Government in 
this behalf. 
(3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall apply to the 
proceedings before a Special Court and for the purposes of the said provisions, the Special Court shall be 
deemed to be a Court of Session and the person conducting a prosecution before a Special Court shall be 
deemed to be a Public Prosecutor. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), in case 
of a complaint under sub-section ( 2), the presence of the person authorised by the Central Government or 
the Board before the Court trying the offences shall not be necessary unless the Court requires his 
personal attendance at the trial. 
237. Appeal and revision .—The High Court may exercise, so far as may be applicable, all the 
powers conferred by Chapters XXIX and XXX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) on a 
High Court, as if a Special Court within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court were a Court 
of Session trying cases within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court. 
238. Provisions of this Code to override other laws .—The provisions of this Code shall have effect, 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or 
any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law. 
2[238A . Limitation. —The provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963) shall, as far as may 
be, apply to the proceedings or appeals before the Adjudicating Authority, the National Company Law 
Appellate Tribunal, the Debt Recovery Tribunal or the Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunal, as the case 
may be.] 
239. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Code. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the Central Government 
may make rules for any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) any other instrument which shall be a financial product under clause ( 15) of section 3; 
(b) other accounting standards which shall be a financial debt under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 8) 
of section 5; 
(c) the form, the manner and the fee for making application before the Adjudicating Authority for 
initiating corporate insolvency resolution process by financial creditor under sub-section ( 2) of 
section 7;  
(d) the form and manner in which demand notice may be made and the manner of delivery 
thereof to the corporate debtor under sub-section ( 1) of section 8; 
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 2018, s. 8 (w.e.f. 23-11-2017). 
2. Ins. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 34 (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).   112 (e) the form, the manner and the fee for making application before the Adjudicating Authority for 
initiating corporate insolvency resolution process by operational creditor under sub-section ( 2) of 
section 9; 
1[(ea) other proof confirming that there is no payment of an unpaid operational debt by the 
corporate debtor or such other information under clause ( e) of sub-section ( 3) of section 9;] 
(f) the form, the manner and the fee for making application before the Adjudicating Authority for 
initiating corporate insolvency resolution process by corporate applicant under sub-section ( 2) of 
section 10; 
(g) the persons who shall be relative under clause ( ii) of the Explanation  to sub-section ( 1) of 
section 79; 
(h) the value of unencumbered single dwelling unit owned by the debtor under clause ( e) of     
sub-section ( 13) of section 79; 
(i) the value under clause ( c), and any other debt under clause ( f), of sub-section ( 14) of      
section 79; 
(j) the form, the manner and the fee for making application for fresh start order under              
sub-section ( 3) of section 81; 
(k) the particulars of the debtor’s personal details under clause ( e) of sub-section ( 3) of section 81; 
(l) the information and documents to support application under sub-section ( 3) of section 86; 
(m) the form, the manner and the fee for making application for initiating the insolvency 
resolution process by the debtor under sub-section ( 6) of section 94; 
(n) the form, the manner and the fee for making application for initiating the insolvency 
resolution process by the creditor under sub-section ( 6) of section 95;  
(o) the particulars to be provided by the creditor to the resolution professional under                
sub-section ( 2) of section 103; 
(p) the form and the manner for making application for bankruptcy by the debtor under clause ( b) 
of sub-section ( 1) of section 122; 
(q) the form and the manner of the statement of affairs of the debtor under sub-section ( 3) of 
section 122; 
(r) the other information under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) of section 123; 
(s) the form, the manner and the fee for making application for bankruptcy under sub-section ( 6) 
of section 123; 
(t) the form and the manner in which statement of financial position shall be submitted under  
sub-section ( 2) of section 129; 
(u) the matters and the details which shall be included in the public notice under sub-section ( 2) 
of section 130; 
(v) the matters and the details which shall be included in the notice to the creditors under            
sub-section ( 3) of section 130; 
(w) the manner of sending details of the claims to the bankruptcy trustee and other information 
under sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 131; 
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 35 (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  113 (x) the value of financial or commercial transaction under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) of             
section 141;  
(y) the other things to be done by a bankrupt to assist bankruptcy trustee in carrying out his 
functions under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) of section 150; 
(z) the manner of dealing with the surplus under sub-section ( 4) of section 170; 
(za) the form and the manner of proof of debt under clause ( c) of sub-section ( 2) of section 171; 
(zb) the manner of receiving dividends under sub-section ( 7) of section 171; 
(zc) the particulars which the notice shall contain under sub-section ( 2) of section 176; 
(zd) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the 
Chairperson and members of the Board under sub-section ( 5) of section 189; 
(ze) the other functions of the Board under clause ( u) of sub-section ( 1) of section 196; 
(zf) the other funds under clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of section 222; 
(zg) the other purposes for which the fund shall be applied under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 2) of 
section 222; 
(zh) the form in which annual statement of accounts shall be prepared under sub-section ( 1) of 
section 223; 
(zi) the purpose for which application for withdrawal of funds may be made under sub-section ( 3) 
of section 224; 
(zj) the manner of administering the fund under sub-section ( 4) of section 224; 
(zk) the manner of conducting insolvency and liquidation proceedings under section 227; 
(zl) the form and the time for preparing budget by the Board under section 228; 
(zm) the form and the time for preparing annual report under sub-section ( 1) of section 229; 
(zn) the time up to which a person appointed to any office shall continue to hold such office under 
clause ( vi) of sub-section ( 2) of section 243. 
240. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Board may, by notification, make regulations consistent 
with this Code and the rules made thereunder, to carry out the provisions of this Code. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the form and the manner of accepting electronic submission of financial information under 
sub-clause ( a) of clause ( 9) of section 3; 
(b) the persons to whom access to information stored with the information utility may be 
provided under sub-clause ( d) of clause ( 9) of section 3; 
(c) the other information under sub-clause ( f) of clause ( 13) of section 3; 
(d) the other costs under clause ( e) of sub-section ( 13) of section 5; 
(e) the cost incurred by the liquidator during the period of liquidation which shall be liquidation 
cost under sub-section ( 16) of section 5; 
(f) the other record or evidence of default under clause ( a), and any other information under 
clause ( c), of sub-section ( 3) of section 7; 114 1*                  *                        *                          *                          * 
(h) the period under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 3) of section 10; 
(i) the supply of essential goods or services to the corporate debtor under sub-section ( 2) of 
section 14; 
(j) the manner of making public announcement under sub-section ( 2) of section 15; 
2[(ja) the last date for submission of claims under clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of section 15;] 
(k) the manner of taking action and the restrictions thereof under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 2) of 
section 17; 
(l) the other persons under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 2) of section 17; 
(m) the other matters under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 2) of section 17; 
(n) the other matters under sub-clause ( iv) of clause ( a), and the other duties to be performed by 
the interim resolution professional under clause ( g), of section 18; 
2[(na) the number of creditors within a class of creditors under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 6A) of 
section 21; 
(nb) the remuneration payable to authorised representative under clause ( ii) of the proviso to           
sub-section ( 6B) of section 21; 
(nc) the manner of voting and determining the voting share in respect of financial debts under 
sub-section ( 7) of section 21;] 
(o) the persons who shall comprise the committee of creditors, the functions to be exercised such 
committee and the manner in which functions shall be exercised under the proviso to sub-section ( 8) 
of section 21; 
(p) the other electronic means by which the members of the committee of creditors may meet 
under sub-section ( 1) of section 24; 
(q) the manner of assigning voting share to each creditor under sub-section ( 7) of section 24; 
(r) the manner of conducting the meetings of the committee of creditors under sub-section ( 8) of 
section 24; 
(s) the manner of appointing accountants, lawyers and other advisors under clause ( d) of             
sub-section ( 2) of section 25; 
3[(sa) other conditions under clause ( h) of sub-section ( 2) of section 25;] 
(t) the other actions under clause ( k) of sub-section ( 2) of section 25; 
(u) the form and the manner in which an information memorandum shall be prepared by the 
resolution professional sub-section ( 1) of section 29; 
(v) the other matter pertaining to the corporate debtor under the Explanation  to sub-section ( 2) of 
section 29; 
(w) the manner of making payment of insolvency resolution process costs under clause ( a), the 
manner of repayment of debts of operational creditors under clause ( b), and the other requirements to 
which a resolution plan shall conform to under clause ( d), of sub-section ( 2) of section 30; 
1. Clause ( g) omitted by Act 26 of 2018, s. 36 (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  
2. Ins. by s. 36, ibid. (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  
3. Ins. by Act 8 of 2018, s. 9 (w.e.f 23-11-2017). 115 1[(wa) other requirements under sub-section ( 4) of section 30;]. 
(x) the fee for the conduct of the liquidation proceedings and proportion to the value of the 
liquidation estate assets under sub-section ( 8) of section 34; 
(y) the manner of evaluating the assets and property of the corporate debtor under clause ( c), the 
manner of selling property in parcels under clause ( f), the manner of reporting progress of the 
liquidation process under clause ( n), and the other functions to be performed under clause ( o), of            
sub-section ( 1) of section 35; 
(z) the manner of making the records available to other stakeholders under sub-section ( 2) of 
section 35; 
(za) the other means under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 3) of section 36; 
(zb) the other assets under clause ( e) of sub-section ( 4) of section 36; 
(zc) the other source under clause ( g) of sub-section ( 1) of section 37; 
(zd) the manner of providing financial information relating to the corporate debtor under            
sub-section ( 2) of section 37; 
(ze) the form, the manner and the supporting documents to be submitted by operational creditor to 
prove the claim under sub-section ( 3) of section 38; 
(zf) the time within which the liquidator shall verify the claims under sub-section ( 1) of              
section 39; 
(zg) the manner of determining the value of claims under section 41; 
(zh) the manner of relinquishing security interest to the liquidation estate and receiving proceeds 
from the sale of assets by the liquidator under clause ( a), and the manner of realising security interest 
under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 52; 
(zi) the other means under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 3) of section 52; 
(zj) the manner in which secured creditor shall be paid by the liquidator under sub-section ( 9) of 
section 52; 
(zk) the period and the manner of distribution of proceeds of sale under sub-section ( 1) of            
section 53; 
(zl) the other means under clause ( a) and the other information under clause ( b) of section 57;  
(zm) the conditions and procedural requirements under sub-section ( 2) of section 59; 
(zn) the details and the documents required to be submitted under sub-section ( 7) of section 95;  
(zo) the other matters under clause ( c) of sub-section ( 3) of section 105; 
(zp) the manner and form of proxy voting under sub-section ( 4) of section 107; 
(zq) the manner of assigning voting share to creditor under sub-section ( 2) of section 109; 
(zr) the manner and form of proxy voting under sub-section ( 3) of section 133; 
(zs) the fee to be charged under sub-section ( 1) of section 144; 
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 2018, s. 9 (w.e.f. 23-11-2017). 116  (zt) the appointment of other officers and employees under sub-section ( 2), and the salaries and 
allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, such officers and employees of 
the Board under sub-section ( 3), of section 194; 
(zu) the other information under clause ( i) of sub-section ( 1) of section 196; 
(zv) the intervals in which the periodic study, research and audit of the functioning and 
performance of the insolvency professional agencies, insolvency professionals and information 
utilities under clause ( r), and mechanism for disposal of assets under clause ( t), of sub-section ( 1) of 
section 196; 
(zw) the place and the time for discovery and production of books of account and other 
documents under clause ( i) of sub-section ( 3) of section 196; 
(zx) the other committees to be constituted by the Board and the other members of such 
committees under section 197; 
(zy) the other persons under clause ( b) and clause ( d) of section 200; 
(zz) the form and the manner of application for registration, the particulars to be contained therein 
and the fee it shall accompany under sub-section ( 1) of section 201; 
(zza) the form and manner of issuing a certificate of registration and the terms and conditions 
thereof, under sub-section ( 3) of section 201; 
(zzb) the manner of renewal of the certificate of registration and the fee therefor, under            
sub-section ( 4) of section 201; 
(zzc) the other ground under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 5) of section 201; 
(zzd) the form of appeal to the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal, the period within 
which it shall be filed under section 202; 
(zze) the other information under clause ( g) of section 204; 
(zzf) the other grounds under Explanation to section 196; 
(zzg) the setting up of a governing board for its internal governance and management under 
clause ( e), the curriculum under clause ( l), the manner of conducting examination under clause ( m) , 
of section 196; 
(zzh) the time within which, the manner in which, and the fee for registration of insolvency 
professional under sub-section ( 1) of section 207; 
(zzi) the categories of professionals or persons, the qualifications and experience and the fields 
under sub-section ( 2) of section 207; 
(zzj) the manner and the conditions subject to which the insolvency professional shall perform his 
function under clause ( f) of sub-section ( 2) of section 208; 
(zzk) the form and manner in which, and the fee for registration of information utility under           
sub-section ( 1) of section 210; 
(zzl) the form and manner for issuing certificate of registration and the terms and conditions 
thereof, under sub-section ( 3) of section 210; 
(zzm) the manner of renewal of the certificate of registration and the fee therefor, under           
sub-section ( 4) of section 210; 
(zzn) the other ground under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 5) of section 210; 117 (zzo) the form, the period and the manner of filing appeal to the National Company Law 
Appellate Tribunal under section 211; 
(zzp) the number of independent members under section 212; 
(zzq) the services to be provided by information utility and the terms and conditions under         
section 213; 
(zzr) the form and manner of accepting electronic submissions of financial information under 
clause ( b) and clause ( c) of section 214; 
(zzs) the minimum service quality standards under clause ( d) of section 214; 
(zzt) the information to be accessed and the manner of accessing such information under clause ( f) 
of section 214; 
(zzu) the statistical information to be published under clause ( g) of section 214; 
(zzv) the form, the fee and the manner for submitting or accessing information under sub-section 
(1) of section 215; 
(zzw) the form and manner for submitting financial information and information relating to assets 
under sub-section ( 2) of section 215; 
(zzx) the manner and the time within which financial information may be updated or modified or 
rectified under section 216; 
(zzy) the form, manner and time of filing complaint under section 217; 
(zzz) the time and manner of carrying out inspection or investigation under sub-section ( 2) of 
section 218; 
(zzza) the manner of carrying out inspection of insolvency professional agency or insolvency 
professional or information utility and the time for giving reply under section 219; 
(zzzb) the procedure for claiming restitution under sub-section ( 6), the period within which such 
restitution may be claimed and the manner in which restitution of amount may be made under              
sub-section ( 7) of section 220; 
(zzzc) the other funds of clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of section 222. 
1[240A. Application of this Code to micro, small and medium enterprises.— (1) Notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in this Code, the provisions of clauses ( c) and ( h) of section 29A shall 
not apply to the resolution applicant in respect of corporate insolvency resolution process of any micro, 
small and medium enterprises. 
(2) Subject to sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may, in the public interest, by notification, 
direct that any of the provisions of this Code shall— 
(a) not apply to micro, small and medium enterprises; or 
(b) apply to micro, small and medium enterprises, with such modifications as may be specified in 
the notification. 
 (3) A draft of every notification proposed to be issued under sub-section ( 2), shall be laid before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions. 
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 37 (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).  118 (4) If both Houses agree in disapproving the issue of notification or both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the notification, the notification shall not be issued or shall be issued only in such 
modified form as may be agreed upon by both the Houses, as the case may be.  
(5) The period of thirty days referred to in sub-section ( 3) shall not include any period during which 
the House referred to in sub-section ( 4) is prorogued or adjourned for more than four consecutive days. 
(6) Every notification issued under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued, 
before each House of Parliament. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression “micro, small and medium enterprises” 
means any class or classes of enterprises classified as such under sub-section ( 1) of section 7 of the 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 (27 of 2006).] 
241. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Code shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation. 
242. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Code, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code as may appear to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty: 
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of five years from the 
commencement of this Code. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament. 
243. Repeal of certain enactments and savings .—(1) The Presidency Towns Insolvency
Act, 1909 (3 of 1909) and the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920 (5 of 1920) are hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal under sub-section ( 1),— 
(i) all proceedings pending under and relating to the Presidency Towns Insolvency                         
Act, 1909 (3 of 1909), and the Provincial Insolvency Act 1920 (5 of 1920) immediately before the 
commencement of this Code shall continue to be governed under the aforementioned Acts and be 
heard and disposed of by the concerned courts or tribunals, as if the aforementioned Acts have not 
been repealed; 
(ii) any order, rule, notification, regulation, appointment, conveyance, mortgage, deed, document 
or agreement made, fee directed, resolution passed, direction given, proceeding taken, instrument 
executed or issued, or thing done under or in pursuance of any repealed enactment shall, if in force at 
the commencement of this Code, continue to be in force, and shall have effect as if the 
aforementioned Acts have not been repealed; 
(iii) anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or taken, including any 
rule, notification, inspection, order or notice made or issued or any appointment or declaration made 
or any operation undertaken or any direction given or any proceeding taken or any penalty, 
punishment, forfeiture or fine imposed under the repealed enactments shall be deemed valid; 119 (iv) any principle or rule of law, or established jurisdiction, form or course of pleading, practice 
or procedure or existing usage, custom, privilege, restriction or exemption shall not be affected, 
notwithstanding that the same respectively may have been in any manner affirmed or recognised or 
derived by, in, or from, the repealed enactments; 
(v) any prosecution instituted under the repealed enactments and pending immediately before the 
commencement of this Code before any court or tribunal shall, subject to the provisions of this Code, 
continue to be heard and disposed of by the concerned court or tribunal; 
(vi) any person appointed to any office under or by virtue of any repealed enactment shall 
continue to hold such office until such time as may be prescribed; and 
(vii) any jurisdiction, custom, liability, right, title, privilege, restriction, exemption, usage, 
practice, procedure or other matter or thing not in existence or in force shall not be revised or 
restored. 
(3) The mention of particular matters in sub-section ( 2) shall not be held to prejudice the general 
application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) with regard to the effect of repeal 
of the repealed enactments or provisions of the enactments mentioned in the Schedule. 
244. Transitional provisions .—(1) Until the Board is constituted or a financial sector regulator is 
designated under section 195, as the case may be, the powers and functions of the Board or such 
designated financial sector regulator, including its power to make regulations, shall be exercised by the 
Central Government. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the power under sub-section ( 1), the Central Government 
may by regulations provide for the following matters:— 
(a) recognition of persons, categories of professionals and persons having such qualifications and 
experience in the field of finance, law, management or insolvency as it deems necessary, as 
insolvency professionals and insolvency professional agencies under this Code; 
(b) recognition of persons with technological, statistical, and data protection capability as it 
deems necessary, as information utilities under this Code; and 
(c) conduct of the corporate insolvency resolution process, insolvency resolution process, 
liquidation process, fresh start process and bankruptcy process under this Code. 
245. Amendments of Act 9 of 1932 .—The Indian Partnership Act, 1932 shall be amended in the 
manner specified in the First Schedule. 
246. Amendments of Act 1 of 1944 .—The Central Excise Act, 1944 shall be amended in the manner 
specified in the Second Schedule. 
247. Amendments of Act 43 of 1961 .—The Income- tax Act, 1961 shall be amended in the manner 
specified in the Third Schedule.  
248. Amendments of Act 52 of 1962 .—The Customs Act, 1962 shall be amended in the manner 
specified in the Fourth Schedule. 
249. Amendments of Act 51 of 1993 .—The Recovery of Debts due to Banks and Financial 
Institutions Act, 1993 shall be amended in the manner specified in the Fifth Schedule. 
250. Amendments of Act 32 of 1994 .—The Finance Act, 1994 shall be amended in the manner 
specified in the Sixth Schedule. 
251. Amendments of Act 54 of 2002 .—The Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets 
and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 shall be amended in the manner specified in the Seventh 
Schedule. 120 252. Amendments of Act 1 of 2004 .—The Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Repeal 
Act, 2003 shall be amended in the manner specified in the Eighth Schedule. 
253. Amendments of Act 51 of 2007 .—The Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 shall be 
amended in the manner specified in the Ninth Schedule. 
254. Amendments of Act 6 of 2009 .—The Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 shall be amended 
in the manner specified in the Tenth Schedule. 
255. Amendments of Act 18 of 2013 .—The Companies Act, 2013 shall be amended in the manner 
specified in the Eleventh Schedule.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 245) 
AMENDMENT TO THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932 
( 9 OF 1932) 
1. In section 41, clause ( a) shall be omitted. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 246) 
AMENDMENT TO THE CENTRAL EXCISE ACT, 1944 
(1 OF 1944) 
1. In section 11E, for the words, figures and brackets “and the Securitisation and Reconstruction of 
Financial Assets and the Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (54 of 2002)”, the words, figures and 
brackets “the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and the Enforcement of Security 
Interest Act, 2002 (54 of 2002) and the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016” shall be substituted.  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
(See section 247) 
AMENDMENT TO THE INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 
(43 OF 1961) 
In sub-section ( 6) of section 178, after the words “for the time being in force”, the words and figures 
“except the provisions of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016” shall be inserted. 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 248) 
AMENDMENT TO THE CUSTOMS ACT, 1962 
(52 OF 1962) 
In section 142A, for the words, figures and brackets “and the Securitisation and Reconstruction of 
Financial Assets and the Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (54 of 2002)”, the words, and figures 
and brackets “ the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and the Enforcement of Security 
Interest Act, 2002 and the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016” shall be substituted. 121 THE FIFTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 249) 
AMENDMENTS TO THE RECOVERY OF DEBTS DUE TO BANKS AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS ACT, 1993
(51 OF 1993) 
1. In the long title, after the words “financial institutions”, the words “, insolvency resolution and 
bankruptcy of individuals and partnership firms” shall be inserted, namely:—. 
2. In section 1,— 
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words “Due to Banks and Financial Institutions” the words “and 
Bankruptcy” shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section ( 4), for the words “The provision of this Code”, the words “Save as otherwise 
provided, the provisions of this Code”, shall be substituted. 
3. In section 3, after sub-section ( 1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(1A) The Central Government shall by notification establish such number of Debts Recovery 
Tribunals and its benches as it may consider necessary, to exercise the jurisdiction, powers and 
authority of the Adjudicating Authority conferred on such Tribunal by or under the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code, 2016.”. 
4. In section 8, after sub-section ( 1), the following section shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(1A) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish such number of Debt Recovery 
Appellate Tribunals to exercise jurisdiction, powers and authority to entertain appeal against the order 
made by the Adjudicating Authority under Part III of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.”. 
5. In section 17,— 
(i) after sub-section ( 1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(1A) Without prejudice to sub-section ( 1),— 
(a) the Tribunal shall exercise, on and from the date to be appointed by the Central 
Government, the jurisdiction, powers and authority to entertain and decide applications under 
Part III of Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016. 
(b) the Tribunal shall have circuit sittings in all district headquarters.”. 
(ii) after sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(2A) Without prejudice to sub-section ( 2), the Appellate Tribunal shall exercise, on and from 
the date to be appointed by the Central Government, the jurisdiction, powers and authority to 
entertain appeals against the order made by the Adjudicating Authority under Part III of the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.”. 
6. After section 19, the following section shall be inserted, namely:— 
“19A. The application made to Tribunal for exercising the powers of the Adjudicating Authority 
under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 shall be dealt with in the manner as provided under 
that Code.”. 122 7. In section 20, in sub-section ( 4) , after the word, brackets and figure “sub-section ( 1)”, the words, 
brackets and figures “or under sub-section ( 1) of section 181 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 
2016” shall be inserted. 
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 250) 
AMENDMENT TO THE FINANCE ACT, 1994 
(32 OF 1994) 
In section 88, for the words, figures and brackets “and the Securitisation and Reconstruction of 
Financial Assets and the Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (54 of 2002)”, the words and figures 
“the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and the Enforcement of Security Interest  
Act, 2002 and the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016” shall be substituted. 
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 251) 
AMENDMENT TO THE SECURITISATION AND RECONSTRUCTION OF FINANCIAL ASSETS AND 
ENFORCEMENT OF SECURITY INTEREST ACT, 2002 
(54 OF 2002) 
In section 13, in sub-section ( 9), for the words “In the case of”, the words and figures “Subject to the 
provisions of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, in the case of” shall be substituted. 
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 252) 
AMENDMENT TO THE SICK INDUSTRIAL COMPANIES ( SPECIAL PROVISIONS) REPEAL ACT, 2003 
(1 OF 2004) 
In section 4, for sub-clause ( b), the following sub-clause shall be substituted, namely— 
“(b) On such date as may be notified by the Central Government in this behalf, any appeal 
preferred to the Appellate Authority or any reference made or inquiry pending to or before the Board 
or any proceeding of whatever nature pending before the Appellate Authority or the Board under the 
Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 (1 of 1986) shall stand abated: 
Provided that a company in respect of which such appeal or reference or inquiry stands abated 
under this clause may make reference to the National Company Law Tribunal under the Insolvency 
and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 within one hundred and eighty days from the commencement of the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 in accordance with the provisions of the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code, 2016: 
Provided further that no fees shall be payable for making such reference under Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code, 2016 by a company whose appeal or reference or inquiry stands abated under this 
clause. 
1[Provided also that any scheme sanctioned under sub-section ( 4) or any scheme under 
implementation under sub-section ( 12) of section 18 of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special 
Provisions) Act, 1985 (1 of 1986) shall be deemed to be an approved resolution plan under sub-
section ( 1) of section 31 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (1 of 2018) and the same shall 
be dealt with, in accordance with the provisions of Part II of the said Code:  
1. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 1683(E) dated 24th May 2017.  123 Provided also that in case, the statutory period within which an appeal was allowed under the 
Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 against an order of the Board had not 
expired as on the date of notification of this Act, an appeal against any such deemed approved 
resolution plan may be preferred by any person before National Company Law Appellate Tribunal 
within ninety days from the date of publication of this order.]” 
THE NINTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 253) 
AMENDMENTS TO THE PAYMENT AND SETTLEMENT SYSTEMS ACT, 2007 
(51 OF 2007) 
1. In section 23, in sub-sections ( 4), (5) and ( 6), after the words, figures and brackets “the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949)” “the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013)”, the words and figures “or 
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016” shall be inserted. 
2. In section 23A, in sub-section ( 3), after the words, figures and brackets “the Companies Act, 
2013”, the words and figures “or the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016” shall be inserted. 
THE TENTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 254) 
AMENDMENT TO THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP ACT, 2008 
(6 OF 2009) 
In section 64, clause ( c) shall be omitted. 
THE ELEVENTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 255) 
AMENDMENTS TO THE COMPANIES ACT, 2013 
(18 OF 2013) 
1. In section 2,— 
(a) for clause ( 23), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(23) “Company Liquidator” means a person appointed by the Tribunal as the Company 
Liquidator in accordance with the provisions of section 275 for the winding up of a company 
under this Act;”; 
(b) after clause ( 94) , the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(94A) “winding up” means winding up under this Act or liquidation under the Insolvency 
and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, as applicable.”. 
2. In section 8, in sub-section ( 9), for the words and figures “the Rehabilitation and Insolvency Fund 
formed under section 269”, the words and figures “Insolvency and Bankruptcy Fund formed under 
section 224 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016” shall be substituted. 
3. In section 66, in sub-section ( 8), for the words, brackets and figures “is unable, within the meaning 
of sub-section ( 2) of section 271, to pay the amount of his debt or claim,”, the words and figures 
“commits a default, within the meaning of section 6 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, in 
respect of the amount of his debt or claim,” shall be substituted. 124 4. In section 77, in sub-section ( 3), after the words “the liquidator”, the words and figures “appointed 
under this Act or the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, as the case may be,” shall be inserted. 
5. In section 117, in sub-section ( 3), in clause ( f), for the word and figures “section 304”, the words 
and figures “section 59 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016” shall be substituted. 
6. In section 224, in sub-section ( 2), after the words “wound up under this Act”, the words and figures 
“or under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016” shall be inserted. 
7. In section 230,— 
(a) in sub-section ( 1), after the word “liquidator”, the words and figures “appointed under this Act 
or under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, as the case may be,” shall be inserted; 
(b) in sub-section ( 6), after the words “on the liquidator”, the words and figures “appointed under 
this Act or under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, as the case may be,” shall be inserted; 
8. In section 249, in sub-section ( 1), for clause ( e), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
“(e) is being wound up under Chapter XX of this Act or under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Code, 2016.”. 
9. Sections 253 to 269 shall be omitted. 
10. For section 270, the following section shall be substituted, namely:— 
“270. Winding up by Tribunal.—The provisions of Part I shall apply to the winding up of a 
company by the Tribunal under this Act.”. 
11. For section 271, the following section shall be substituted, namely:— 
“271. Circumstances in which company may be wound up by Tribunal.—A company may, on a 
petition under section 272, be wound up by the Tribunal,— 
(a) if the company has, by special resolution, resolved that the company be wound up by the 
Tribunal;  
(b) if the company has acted against the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the 
security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality; 
(c) if on an application made by the Registrar or any other person authorised by the Central 
Government by notification under this Act, the Tribunal is of the opinion that the affairs of the 
company have been conducted in a fraudulent manner or the company was formed for fraudulent 
and unlawful purpose or the persons concerned in the formation or management of its affairs have 
been guilty of fraud, misfeasance or misconduct in connection therewith and that it is proper that 
the company be wound up;  
(d) if the company has made a default in filing with the Registrar its financial statements or 
annual returns for immediately preceding five consecutive financial years; or 
(e) if the Tribunal is of the opinion that it is just and equitable that the company should be 
wound up.”.  
12. For section 272, the following section shall be substituted, namely:— 
“272. Petition for winding up.—( 1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a petition to the 
Tribunal for the winding up of a company shall be presented by— 
(a) the company; 125 (b) any contributory or contributories; 
(c) all or any of the persons specified in clauses ( a) and ( b); 
(d) the Registrar; 
(e) any person authorised by the Central Government in that behalf; or 
(f) in a case falling under clause ( b) of section 271, by the Central Government or a State 
Government. 
(2) A contributory shall be entitled to present a petition for the winding up of a company, 
notwithstanding that he may be the holder of fully paid-up shares, or that the company may have no 
assets at all or may have no surplus assets left for distribution among the shareholders after the 
satisfaction of its liabilities, and shares in respect of which he is a contributory or some of them were 
either originally allotted to him or have been held by him, and registered in his name, for at least six 
months during the eighteen months immediately before the commencement of the winding up or have 
devolved on him through the death of a former holder. 
(3) The Registrar shall be entitled to present a petition for winding up under section 271, except 
on the grounds specified in clause ( a) or clause ( e) of that sub-section: 
Provided that the Registrar shall obtain the previous sanction of the Central Government to the 
presentation of a petition: 
Provided further that the Central Government shall not accord its sanction unless the company 
has been given a reasonable opportunity of making representations. 
(4) A petition presented by the company for winding up before the Tribunal shall be admitted 
only if accompanied by a statement of affairs in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(5) A copy of the petition made under this section shall also be filed with the Registrar and the 
Registrar shall, without prejudice to any other provisions, submit his views to the Tribunal within 
sixty days of receipt of such petition.”. 
13. In section 275,— 
(a) for sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(2) The provisional liquidator or the Company Liquidator, as the case may, shall be 
appointed by the Tribunal from amongst the insolvency professionals registered under the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016;”; 
(b) sub-section ( 4) shall be omitted. 
14. For section 280, the following section shall be substituted, namely:— 
“280. Jurisdiction of Tribunal.—The Tribunal shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, have jurisdiction to entertain, or dispose of,— 
(a) any suit or proceeding by or against the company; 
(b) any claim made by or against the company, including claims by or against any of its 
branches in India; 
(c) any application made under section 233; 
(d) any question of priorities or any other question whatsoever, whether of law or facts, 
including those relating to assets, business, actions, rights, entitlements, privileges, benefits, 
duties, responsibilities, obligations or in any matter arising out of, or in relation to winding up of 
the company, 126 whether such suit or proceeding has been instituted, or is instituted, or such claim or question has arisen 
or arises or such application has been made or is made or such scheme has been submitted, or is 
submitted, before or after the order for the winding up of the company is made.”. 
15. Section 289 shall be omitted. 
16. The heading “Part II.—Voluntary winding up” shall be omitted. 
17. Sections 304 to 323 shall be omitted. 
18. Section 325 shall be omitted. 
19. For section 326, the following section shall be substituted, namely:— 
“326. Overriding preferential payments.—( 1) In the winding up of a company under this Act, the 
following debts shall be paid in priority to all other debts:— 
(a) workmen’s dues; and 
(b) where a secured creditor has realised a secured asset, so much of the debts due to such 
secured creditor as could not be realised by him or the amount of the workmen’s portion in his 
security (if payable under the law), whichever is less, pari passu  with the workmen’s dues:  
Provided that in case of the winding up of a company, the sums referred to in sub-clauses ( i) 
and ( ii) of clause ( b) of the Explanation , which are payable for a period of two years preceding 
the winding up order or such other period as may be prescribed, shall be paid in priority to all 
other debts (including debts due to secured creditors), within a period of thirty days of sale of 
assets and shall be subject to such charge over the security of secured creditors as may be 
prescribed. 
(2) The debts payable under the proviso to sub-section ( 1) shall be paid in full before any 
payment is made to secured creditors and thereafter debts payable under that sub-section shall be paid 
in full, unless the assets are insufficient to meet them, in which case they shall abate in equal 
proportions. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, and section 327— 
(a) “workmen”, in relation to a company, means the employees of the company,                       
being workmen within the meaning of clause ( s) of section 2 of the Industrial Disputes                     
Act, 1947 (14 of 1947); 
(b) “workmen’s dues”, in relation to a company, means the aggregate of the following sums 
due from the company to its workmen, namely:— 
(i) all wages or salary including wages payable for time or piece work and salary earned 
wholly or in part by way of commission of any workman in respect of services rendered to 
the company and any compensation payable to any workman under any of the provisions of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947); 
(ii) all accrued holiday remuneration becoming payable to any workman or, in the case of 
his death, to any other person in his right on the termination of his employment before or by 
the effect of the winding up order or resolution; 
(iii) unless the company is being wound up voluntarily merely for the purposes of 
reconstruction or amalgamation with another company or unless the company has, at the 
commencement of the winding up, under such a contract with insurers as is mentioned in 
section 14 of the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 (19 of 1923), rights capable of being 127 transferred to and vested in the workmen, all amount due in respect of any compensation or 
liability for compensation under the said Act in respect of the death or disablement of any 
workman of the company; 
(iv) all sums due to any workman from the provident fund, the pension fund, the gratuity 
fund or any other fund for the welfare of the workmen, maintained by the company; 
(c) “workmen’s portion’’, in relation to the security of any secured creditor of a company, 
means the amount which bears to the value of the security the same proportion as the amount of 
the workmen’s dues bears to the aggregate of the amount of workmen’s dues and the amount of 
the debts due to the secured creditors. 
Illustration 
The value of the security of a secured creditor of a company is Rs. 1,00,000. The total amount 
of the workmen’s dues is Rs. 1,00,000. The amount of the debts due from the company to its 
secured creditors is Rs. 3,00,000. The aggregate of the amount of workmen’s dues and the 
amount of debts due to secured creditors is Rs. 4,00,000. The workmen’s portion of the security 
is, therefore, one-fourth of the value of the security, that is Rs. 25,000.”. 
20. In section 327,— 
(a) after sub-section ( 6), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(7) Sections 326 and 327 shall not be applicable in the event of liquidation under the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.”; 
(b) in the Explanation , for clause ( c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(c) the expression “relevant date” means in the case of a company being wound up by the 
Tribunal, the date of appointment or first appointment of a provisional liquidator, or if no such 
appointment was made, the date of the winding up order, unless, in either case, the company had 
commenced to be wound up voluntarily before that date under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Code, 2016;”. 
21. For section 329, the following section shall be substituted, namely:— 
“329. Transfers not in good faith to be void .—Any transfer of property, movable or immovable, 
or any delivery of goods, made by a company, not being a transfer or delivery made in the ordinary 
course of its business or in favour of a purchaser or encumbrancer in good faith and for valuable 
consideration, if made within a period of one year before the presentation of a petition for winding up 
by the Tribunal under this Act shall be void against the Company Liquidator.”. 
22. For section 334, the following section shall be substituted, namely:— 
“334. Transfer, etc., after commencement of winding up to be void.—In the case of a winding up 
by the Tribunal, any disposition of the property including actionable claims, of the company and any 
transfer of shares in the company or alteration in the status of its members, made after the 
commencement of the winding up shall, unless the Tribunal otherwise orders, be void.”. 
23. In section 336, in sub-section ( 1), in the opening paragraph, for the words “whether by the 
Tribunal or voluntarily, or which is subsequently ordered to be wound up by the Tribunal or which 
subsequently passes a resolution for voluntary winding up”, the words “by the Tribunal under this Act or 
which is subsequently ordered to be wound up by the Tribunal under this Act” shall be substituted. 128 24. In section 337, for the words “or which subsequently passes a resolution for voluntary winding 
up,”, the words “under this Act”, shall be substituted. 
25. In section 342, sub-sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4) shall be omitted. 
26. In section 343, for sub-section ( 1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely—  
“(1) The Company Liquidator may, with the sanction of the Tribunal, when the company is being 
wound up by the Tribunal,— 
(i) pay any class of creditors in full; 
(ii) make any compromise or arrangement with creditors or persons claiming to be creditors, 
or having or alleging themselves to have any claim, present or future, certain or contingent, 
against the company, or whereby the company may be rendered liable; or 
(iii) compromise any call or liability to call, debt, and liability capable of resulting in a debt, 
and any claim, present or future, certain or contingent, ascertained or sounding only in damages, 
subsisting or alleged to subsist between the company and a contributory or alleged contributory or 
other debtor or person apprehending liability to the company, and all questions in any way 
relating to or affecting the assets or liabilities or the winding up of the company, on such terms as 
may be agreed, and take any security for the discharge of any such call, debt, liability or claim, 
and give a complete discharge in respect thereof.”. 
27. In section 347, for sub-section ( 1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely— 
“(1) When the affairs of a company have been completely wound up and it is about to be 
dissolved, the books and papers of such company and those of the Company Liquidator may be 
disposed of in such manner as the Tribunal directs.”. 
28. In section 348, for sub-section ( 1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely— 
“(1) If the winding up of a company is not concluded within one year after its commencement, 
the Company Liquidator shall, unless he is exempted from so doing, either wholly or in part by the 
Central Government, within two months of the expiry of such year and thereafter until the winding up 
is concluded, at intervals of not more than one year or at such shorter intervals, if any, as may be 
prescribed, file a statement in such form containing such particulars as may be prescribed, duly 
audited, by a person qualified to act as auditor of the company, with respect to the proceedings in, and 
position of, the liquidation, with the Tribunal: 
Provided that no such audit as is referred to in this sub-section shall be necessary where the 
provisions of section 294 apply;”. 
29. For section 357, the following section shall be substituted, namely:— 
“357. Commencement of winding up by Tribunal.—The winding up of a company by the 
Tribunal under this Act shall be deemed to commence at the time of the presentation of the petition 
for the winding up.”. 
30. In section 370, in the proviso, after the words “obtained for the winding up the company”, the 
words and figures “in accordance with the provisions of this Act or of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Code, 2016” shall be inserted. 
31. In section 372, after the words “The provisions of this Act”, the words and figures “or of the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, as the case may be,” shall be inserted. 
32. In section 419, for sub-section ( 4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 129 “(4) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish such number of benches of the 
Tribunal, as it may consider necessary, to exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the 
Adjudicating Authority conferred on such Tribunal by or under Part II of the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code, 2016.”.  
33. In section 424,— 
(i) in sub-section ( 1), after the words, “other provisions of this Act”, the words and figures “or of 
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016” shall be inserted; 
(ii) in sub-section ( 2), after the words, “under this Act”, the words and figures “or under the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016” shall be inserted. 
34. In section 429, for sub-section ( 1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(1) The Tribunal may, in any proceedings for winding up of a company under this Act or in any 
proceedings under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, in order to take into custody or under 
its control all property, books of account or other documents, request, in writing, the Chief 
Metropolitan Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate or the District Collector within whose jurisdiction 
any such property, books of account or other documents of such company under this Act or of 
corporate persons under the said Code, are situated or found, to take possession thereof, and the Chief 
Metropolitan Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate or the District Collector, as the case may be, shall, 
on such request being made to him,— 
(a) take possession of such property, books of account or other documents; and 
(b) cause the same to be entrusted to the Tribunal or other persons authorised by it.”. 
35. For section 434, the following section shall be substituted, namely:— 
“434. Transfer of certain pending proceeding.—( 1) On such date as may be notified by the 
Central Government in this behalf,— 
(a) all matters, proceedings or cases pending before the Board of Company Law 
Administration (herein in this section referred to as the Company Law Board) constituted under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 10E of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), immediately before such 
date shall stand transferred to the Tribunal and the Tribunal shall dispose of such matters, 
proceedings or cases in accordance with the provisions of this Act; 
(b) any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Company Law Board made before 
such date may file an appeal to the High Court within sixty days from the date of communication 
of the decision or order of the Company Law Board to him on any question of law arising out of 
such order:  
Provided that the High Court may if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by 
sufficient cause from filing an appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further 
period not exceeding sixty days; and 
(c) all proceedings under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), including proceedings 
relating to arbitration, compromise, arrangements and reconstruction and winding up of 
companies, pending immediately before such date before any District Court or High Court, shall 
stand transferred to the Tribunal and the Tribunal may proceed to deal with such proceedings 
from the stage before their transfer: 
Provided that only such proceedings relating to the winding up of companies shall be 
transferred to the Tribunal that are at a stage as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 130 (2) The Central Government may make rules consistent with the provisions of this Act to ensure 
timely transfer of all matters, proceedings or cases pending before the Company Law Board or the 
courts, to the Tribunal under this section.”. 
 36. In section 468, for sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(i) as to the mode of proceedings to be held for winding up of a company by the Tribunal 
under this Act; 
(ii) for the holding of meetings of creditors and members in connection with proceedings 
under section 230; 
(iii) for giving effect to the provisions of this Act as to the reduction of the capital; 
(iv) generally for all applications to be made to the Tribunal under the provisions of this Act; 
(v) the holding and conducting of meetings to ascertain the wishes of creditors and 
contributories; 
(vi) the settling of lists of contributories and the rectifying of the register of members where 
required, and collecting and applying the assets; 
(vii) the payment, delivery, conveyance, surrender or transfer of money, property, books or 
papers to the liquidator; 
(viii) the making of calls; and 
(ix) the fixing of a time within which debts and claims shall be proved.”. 
37. In Schedule V, in Part II, in section III, for clause ( b), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
“(b) where the company— 
(i) is a newly incorporated company, for a period of seven years from the date of its 
incorporation, or  
(ii) is a sick company, for whom a scheme of revival or rehabilitation has been ordered by the 
Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction for a period of five years from the date of 
sanction of scheme of revival, or 
(iii) is a company in relation to which a resolution plan has been approved by the National 
Company Law Tribunal under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 for a period of five 
years from the date of such approval, 
it may pay remuneration up to two times the amount permissible under section II.”. 
1[THE TWELFTH SCHEDULE 
[See clause ( d) of section 29A] 
ACTS FOR THE PURPOSES OF CLAUSE ( d) OF SECTION 29A 
(1) The Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1922 (22 of 1922); 
(2) The Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934); 
(3) The Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944); 
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 38 (w.e.f. 6-6-2018).   131 (4) The Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954); 
(5) The Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955); 
(6) The Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956); 
(7) The Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961); 
(8) The Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962); 
(9) The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 (6 of 1974); 
(10) The Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act, 1974        
(52 of 1974); 
(11) The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 (14 of 1981); 
(12) The Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 (1 of 1986); 
(13) The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (29 of 1986); 
(14) The Prohibition of  Benami  Property Transactions Act, 1988 (45 of 1988); 
(15) The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (49 of 1988); 
(16) The Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992); 
(17) The Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999); 
(18) The Competition Act, 2002 (12 of 2003); 
(19) The Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002 (15 of 2003); 
(20) The Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009); 
(21) The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 (42 of 2010); 
(22) The Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013) or any previous company law; 
(23) The Black Money (Undisclosed Foreign Income and Assets) and Imposition of Tax Act, 2015 
(22 of 2015); 
(24) The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016); 
(25) The Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 (12 of 2017) and respective State Acts 
imposing State goods and services tax; 
(26) such other Acts as may be notified by the Central Government. 
Every notification issued under this Schedule shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued, before 
each House of Parliament.] 
--------------------------The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015--------------------------
1 
 THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN)  ACT, 2015  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN  
3. General principles to be followed in administration of Act.  
CHAPTER III  
JUVENILE  JUSTICE  BOARD  
4. Juvenile Justice Board.  
5. Placement of person, who cease to be a child during process of inquiry.  
6. Placement of persons, who committed an offence, when person was below the age of eighteen 
years.  
7. Procedure in relation to Board.  
8. Powers, functions and responsibilities of the Board.  
9. Procedure to be followed by a Magistrate who has not been empowered under this Act.  
CHAPTER  IV 
PROCEDURE IN RELATION TO CHILDREN IN CONFLICT WITH LAW  
10. Apprehension of child alleged to be in conflict with law.  
11. Role of person in whose charge child in conflict with law is placed.  
12. Bail to a person who is apparently a child alleged to be i n conflict with law.  
13. Information to parents, guardian or probation officer.  
14. Inquiry by Board regarding child in conflict with law.  
15. Preliminary assessment into heinous offences by Board.  
16. Review of pendency of inquiry.  
17. Orders regarding a child not found to be in conflict with law.  
18. Orders regarding child found to be in conflict with law.  
19. Powers of Children’s Court.  
20. Child attained age of twenty -one years and yet to complete prescribed term of stay in place of 
safety.  2 
 SECTIONS  
21. Order that may not be passed against a child in conflict with law.  
22. Proceeding under Chapter VIII of the Code of Criminal Procedure not to apply against child.  
23. No joint proceedings of child in conflict with law and person not a child.  
24. Removal of disqualification on the findings of an offence.  
25. Special provision in respect of pending cases.  
26. Provision with respect of run away child in conflict with law.  
CHAPTER V  
CHILD  WELFARE COMMITTEE  
27. Child Welfare Committee.  
28. Procedure in relation to Committee.  
29. Powers of Committee.  
30. Functions and responsibilities of Committee.  
CHAPTER VI  
PROCEDURE IN RELATION TO CHILDREN IN NEED OF CARE AND PROTECTION  
31. Production before Committee.  
32. Mandatory reporting regarding a child found se parated from guardian.  
33. Offence of non -reporting.  
34. Penalty for non -reporting.  
35. Surrender of children.  
36. Inquiry.  
37. Orders passed regarding a child in need of care and protection.  
38. Procedure for declaring a child legally free for adoption.  
CHAPTER VII  
REHABILITATION AND SOCIAL RE -INTEGRATION  
39. Process of rehabilitation and social re -integration.  
40. Restoration of child in need of care and protection.  
41. Registration of child care institutions.  
42. Penalty for non -registration of child car e institutions.  
43. Open shelter.  
44. Foster care.  
45. Sponsorship.  
46. After care of children leaving child care institution.  
47. Observation homes.  
48. Special homes.  3 
 SECTIONS  
49. Place of safety.  
50. Children’s Home.  
51. Fit facility.  
52. Fit person.  
53. Rehabilitation and re -integration services in institutions registered under this Act and management 
thereof.  
54. Inspection of institutions registered under this Act.  
55. Evaluation of functioning of structures.  
CHAPTER VIII  
ADOPTION  
56. Adoption.  
57. Eligibility of prospective adoptive parents.  
58. Procedure for adoption by Indian prospective adoptive parents living in India.  
59. Procedure for inter -country adoption of an orphan or abandoned or surrendered child.  
60. Procedure for inter -country relativ e adoption.  
61. Court procedure and penalty against payment in consideration of adoption.  
62. Additional procedural requirements and documentation.  
63. Effect of adoption.  
64. Reporting of adoption.  
65. Specialised Adoption Agencies.  
66. Adoption of children residing in institutions not registered as adoption agencies.  
67. State Adoption Resource Agency.  
68. Central Adoption Resource Authority.  
69. Steering Committee of Authority.  
70. Powers of Authority.  
71. Annual Report of Authority.  
72. Grants by Central Government.  
73. Accounts and audit of Authority.  
CHAPTER IX  
OTHER OFFENCES AGAINST CHILDREN  
74. Prohibition on disclosure of identity of children.  
75. Punishment for cruelty to child.  
76. Employment of child for begging.  
77. Penalty for giving intoxicating liquor or narcotic drug or psychotropic substance to a child.  4 
 SECTIONS  
78. Using a child for vending, peddling, carrying, supplying or smuggling any intoxicating liquor, 
narcotic drug or psychotropic substance.  
79. Exploitation of a child empl oyee.  
80. Punitive measures for adoption without following prescribed procedures.  
81. Sale and procurement of children for any purpose.  
82. Corporal punishment.  
83. Use of child by militant groups or other adults.  
84. Kidnapping and abduction of child.  
85. Offences committed on disabled children.  
86. Classification of offences and designated court.  
87. Abetment.  
88. Alternative punishment.  
89. Offence committed by child under this Chapter.  
CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
90. Attendance of parent or guardian of chil d. 
91. Dispensing with attendance of child.  
92. Placement of a child suffering from disease requiring prolonged medical treatment in an approved 
place.  
93. Transfer of a child who is mentally ill or addicted to alcohol or other drugs.  
94. Presumption and d etermination of age.  
95. Transfer of a child to place of residence.  
96. Transfer of child between Children’s Homes, or special homes or fit facility or fit person in 
different parts of India.  
97. Release of a child from an institution.  
98. Leave of absence  to a child placed in an institution.  
99. Reports to be treated as confidential.  
100. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
101. Appeals.  
102. Revision.  
103. Procedure in inquiries, appeals and revision proceedings.  
104. Power of the Committee or the B oard to amend its own orders.  
105. Juvenile justice fund.  
106. State Child Protection Society and District Child Protection Unit.  
107. Child Welfare Police Officer and Special Juvenile Police Unit.  5 
 SECTIONS  
108. Public awareness on provisions of Act.  
109. Monitoring of implementation of Act.  
110. Power to make rules.  
111. Repeal and savings.  
112. Power to remove difficulties.  
 
 
 
  6 
 THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (C ARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN) ACT, 2015  
ACT NO. 2 OF 2016  
[31st December,  2015 .] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to children alleged and found to be in conflict 
with law and children in need of care and protection by catering to their basic needs through 
proper care, protection, development, treatment, social re -integr ation, by adopting a                
child -friendly approach in the adjudication and disposal of matters in the best interest of 
children and for their rehabilitation through processes provided, and institutions and bodies 
established, herein under and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS , the provisions of the Constitution confer powers and impose duties, under clause ( 3) 
of article 15 , clauses ( e) and (f) of article 39 , article 45  and article 47 , on the State to ensure that all the 
needs of chi ldren are met and that their basic human rights are fully protected;  
AND WHEREAS , the Government of India has acceded on the 11th December, 1992 to the Convention 
on the Rights of the Child, adopted by the General Assembly of United Nations, which has pres cribed a 
set of standards to be adhered to by all State parties in securing the best interest of the child;  
AND WHEREAS , it is expedient to re -enact the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)               
Act, 2000 (56 of 2000) to make compreh ensive provisions for children alleged and found to be in conflict 
with law and children in need of care and protection, taking into consideration the standards prescribed in 
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the United Nations Standard Minimum Ru les for the 
Administration of Juvenile Justice, 1985 (the Beijing Rules), the United Nations Rules for the Protection 
of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty (1990), the Hague Convention on Protection of Children and                 
Co-operation in Respect of Inter -country Adoption (1993), and other related international instruments.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application .—(1) This Ac t may be called the Juvenile 
Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the provisions of 
this Act shall apply to all matters concerning children in need of care and protection and children in 
conflict with law, inclu ding — 
(i) apprehension, detention, prosecution, penalty or imprisonment, rehabilitation and social                   
re-integration of children in conflict with law;  
(ii) procedures and decisions or orders relating to rehabilitation, adoption, re-integration, and 
restoration of children in need of care and protection.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(1) “abandoned child ” means a child deserted by his biological or adoptive parents or guardians, 
who has been d eclared as abandoned by the Committee after due inquiry;  
(2) “adoption ” means the process through which the adopted child is permanently separated from 
his biological parents and becomes the lawful child of his adoptive parents with all the rights, 
privile ges and responsibilities that are attached to a biological child;  
                                                           
1. 15th January, 2016,  vide notification No. S .O. 110(E) , dated 1 2th January, 2016, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 7 
 (3) “adoption regulations ” means the regulations framed by the Authority and notified by the 
Central Government in respect of adoption;  
(4) “administrator ” means any district official not be low the rank of Deputy Secretary to the 
State, on whom magisterial powers have been conferred;  
(5) “aftercare ” means making provision of support, financial or otherwise, to persons, who have 
completed the age of eighteen years but have not completed the age of twenty -one years, and have 
left any institutional care to join the mainstream of the society;  
(6) “author ised foreign adoption agency ” means a foreign social or child welfare agency that is 
authorised by the Central Adoption Resource Authority on the recommendation of their Central 
Authority or Government department of that country for sponsoring the applicat ion of non -resident 
Indian or overseas citizen of India or persons of Indian origin or foreign prospective adoptive parents 
for adoption of a child from India;  
(7) “Authority ” means the Central Adoption Resource Authority constituted under section 68;  
(8) “begging ” means — 
(i) soliciting or receiving alms in a public place or entering into any private premises for the 
purpose of soliciting or receiving alms, under any pretence;  
(ii) exposing or exhibiting with the object of obtaining or extorting alms, any sore, wound, 
injury, deformity or disease, whether of himself or of any other person or of an animal;  
(9) “best interest of child ” means the basis for any decision taken regarding the child, to ensure 
fulfilment of his basic rights and needs, identity, soc ial well -being and physical, emotional and 
intellectual development;  
(10) “Board ” means a Juvenile Justice Board constituted under section 4;  
(11) “Central Authority ” means the Government department recognised as such under the Hague 
Convention on Protecti on of Children and Cooperation in Inter -country Adoption (1993);  
(12) “child ” means a person who has not completed eighteen years of age;  
(13) “child in conflict with law ” means a child who is alleged or found to have committed an 
offence and who has not c ompleted eighteen years of age on the date of commission of such offence;  
(14) “child in need of care and protection ” means a child — 
(i) who is found without any home or settled place of abode and without any ostensible 
means of subsistence; or  
(ii) who is  found working in contravention of labour laws for the time being in force or is 
found begging, or living on the street; or  
(iii) who resides with a person (whether a guardian of the child or not) and such person — 
(a) has injured, exploited, abused or negl ected the child or has violated any other law for 
the time being in force meant for the protection of child; or  
(b) has threatened to kill, injure, exploit or abuse the child and there is a reasonable 
likelihood of the threat being carried out; or  
(c) has killed, abused, neglected or exploited some other child or children and there is a 
reasonable likelihood of the child in question being killed, abused, exploited or neglected by 
that person; or  
(iv) who is mentally ill or mentally or physically challenged or suffering from terminal or 
incurable disease, having no one to support or look after or having parents or guardians unfit to 
take care, if found so by the Board or the Committee; or  8 
 (v) who has a parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is found t o be unfit or 
incapacitated, by the Committee or the Board, to care for and protect the safety and well -being of 
the child; or  
(vi) who does not have parents and no one is willing to take care of, or whose parents have 
abandoned or surrendered him; or  
(vii) who is missing or run away child, or whose parents cannot be found after making 
reasonable inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed; or  
(viii) who has been or is being or is likely to be abused, tortured or exploited for the purpose 
of sexual abuse or  illegal acts; or  
(ix) who is found vulnerable and is likely to be inducted into drug abuse or trafficking; or  
(x) who is being or is likely to be abused for unconscionable gains; or  
(xi) who is victim of or affected by any armed conflict, civil unrest or natural calamity; or  
(xii) who is at imminent risk of marriage before attaining the age of marriage and whose 
parents, family members, guardian and any other persons are likely to be responsible for 
solemnisation of such marriage;  
(15) “child friendly ” means any behaviour, conduct, practice, process, attitude, environment or 
treatment that is humane, considerate and in the best interest of the child;  
(16) “child legally free for adoption ” means a child declared as such by the Committee after 
making due inqu iry under section 38;  
(17) “Child Welfare Officer ” means an officer attached to a Children ’s Home, for carrying out the 
directions given by the Committee or, as the case may be, the Board with such responsibility as may 
be prescribed;  
(18) “Child Welfare Police Officer ” means an officer designated as such under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 107;  
(19) “Children ’s Home ” means a Children ’s Home, established or maintained, in every district or 
group of districts, by the State Government, either by itself, or thro ugh a voluntary or                            
non-governmental organisation, and is registered as such for the purposes specified in section 50;  
(20) “Children ’s Court ” means a court established under the Commissions for Protection of Child 
Rights Act, 200 5 (4 of 2006) or a Special Court under the Protection of Children from Sexual 
Offences Act, 2012 (32 of 2012), wherever existing and where such courts have not been designated, 
the Court of Sessions having jurisdiction to try offences under the Act;  
(21) “child care institution ” means Children Home, open shelter, observation home, special home, 
place of safety, Specialised Adoption Agency and a fit facility recognised under this Act for 
providing care and protection to children, who are in need of such serv ices; 
(22) “Committee ” means Child Welfare Committee constituted under section 27;  
(23) “court ” means a civil court, which has jurisdiction in matters of adoption and guardianship 
and may include the District Court, Family Court and City Civil Courts;  
(24) “corporal punishment ” means the subjecting of a child by any person to physical punishment 
that involves the deliberate infliction of pain as retribution for an offence, or for the purpose of 
disciplining or reforming the child;  
(25) “childline services ” means a twenty -four hours emergency outreach service for children in 
crisis which links them to emergency or long -term care and rehabilitation service;  
(26) “District Child Protection Unit ” means a Child Protection Unit for a District, established by 
the S tate Government under section 106, which is the focal point to ensure the implementation of this 
Act and other child protection measures in the district;  9 
 (27) “fit facility ” means a facility being run by a governmental organisation or a registered 
voluntar y or non -governmental organisation, prepared to temporarily own the responsibility of a 
particular child for a specific purpose, and such facility is recognised as fit for the said purpose, by 
the Committee, as the case may be, or the Board, under sub -section (1) of section 51;  
(28) “fit person ” means any person, prepared to own the responsibility of a child, for a specific 
purpose, and such person is identified after inquiry made in this behalf and recognised as fit for the 
said purpose, by the Committee or, as the case may be, the Board, to rec eive and take care of the 
child;  
(29) “foster care ” means placement of a child, by the Committee for the purpose of alternate care 
in the domestic environment of a family, other than the child ’s biological family, that has been 
selected, qualified, approve d and supervised for providing such care;  
(30) “foster family ” means a family found suitable by the District Child Protection Unit to keep 
children in foster care under section 44;  
(31) “guardian ” in relation to a child, means his natural guardian or any o ther person having, in 
the opinion of the Committee or, as the case may be, the Board, the actual charge of the child, and 
recognised by the Committee or, as the case may be, the Board as a guardian in the course of 
proceedings;  
(32) “group foster care ” means a family like care facility for children in need of care and 
protection who are without parental care, aiming on providing personalised care and fostering a sense 
of belonging and identity, through family like and community based solutions;  
(33) “heino us offences ” includes the offences for which the minimum punishment under the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or any other law for the time being in force is imprisonment for seven 
years or more;  
(34) “inter-country adoption ” means adoption of a child from India by non -resident Indian or by a 
person of Indian origin or by a foreigner;  
(35) “juvenile ” means a child below the age of eighteen years;  
(36) “narcotic drug ” and “psychotropic substance ” shall have the meanings, respectively, 
assigned to them in the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985);  
(37) “no objection certificate ” for inter -country adoption means a certificate issued by the Central 
Adoption Resource Author ity for the said purpose;  
(38) “non-resident Indian ” means a person who holds an Indian passport and is presently residing 
abroad for more than one year;  
(39) “notification ” means the notification published in the Official Gazette of India, or as the case 
may be, in the Gazette of a State, and the expression “notify ” shall be construed accordingly;  
(40) “observation home ” means an observation home established and maintained i n every district 
or group of districts by a State Government, either by itself, or through a voluntary or                               
non-governmental organisation, and is registered as such, for the purposes specified in sub -section ( 1) 
of section 47;  
(41) “open shelter ” means a facility for children, established and maintained by the State 
Government, either by itself, or through a voluntary or non -governmental organisation under                         
sub-section ( 1) of section 43, and registered as s uch, for the purposes specified in that section;  
(42) “orphan ” means a child — 
(i) who is without biological or adoptive parents or legal guardian; or  
(ii) whose legal guardian is not willing to take, or capable of taking care of the child;  
(43) “overseas citizen of India ” means a person registered as such under the Citizenship            
Act, 1955 (57 of 1955);  10 
 (44) “person of Indian origin ” means a person, any of whose lineal ancestors is or was an Indian 
national, and who is presently holding a Person of  Indian Origin Card issued by the Central 
Government;  
(45) “petty offences ” includes the offences for which the maximum punishment under the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860) or any other law for the time being in force is imprisonment up to three 
years;  
(46) “place of safety ” means any place or institution, not being a police lockup or jail, established 
separately or attached to an observation home or a special home, as the case may be, the person in -
charge of which is willing to receive and take care of the children alleged or found to be in conflict 
with law, by an order of the Board or the Children ’s Court, both during inquiry and ongoing 
rehabilitation after having been found guilty for a period and purpose as specified in the order;  
(47) “prescribed ” mean s prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(48) “probation officer ” means an officer appointed by the State Government as a probation 
officer under the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 (20 of 1958 ) or the Legal -cum-Probation Officer 
appointed by the State Government under District Child Protection Unit;  
(49) “prospective adoptive parents ” means a person or persons eligible to adopt a child as per the 
provisions of section 57;  
(50) “public place ” shall have the same meaning assigned to it in the Immoral Traf fic 
(Prevention) Act, 1956  (104 of 1956 ); 
(51) “registered ”, with reference to child care institutions or agencies or facilities managed by the 
State Government, or a voluntary or non -governmental organisation, means observation homes, 
special homes, place  of safety, children ’s homes, open shelters or Specialised Adoption Agency or fit 
facility or any other institution that may come up in response to a particular need or agencies or 
facilities authorised and registered under section 41, for providing reside ntial care to children, on a 
short -term or long -term basis;  
(52) “relative ”, in relation to a child for the purpose of adoption under this Act, means a paternal 
uncle or aunt, or a maternal uncle or aunt, or paternal grandparent or maternal grandparent;  
(53) “State Agency ” means the State Adoption Resource Agency set up by the State Government 
for dealing with adoption and related matters under section 67;  
(54) “serious offences ” includes the offences for which the punishment under the Indian Penal 
Code (45  of 1860) or any other law for the time being in force, is imprisonment between three to 
seven years;  
(55) “special juvenile police unit ” means a unit of the police force of a district or city or, as the 
case may be, any other police unit like railway poli ce, dealing with children and designated as such 
for handling children under section 107;  
(56) “special home ” means an institution established by a State Government or by a voluntary or 
non-governmental organisation, registered under section 48, for housing and providing rehabilitative 
services to children in conflict with law, who are found, through inquiry, to have committed an 
offence and are sent to such institution by an order of the Board;  
(57) “Specialised Adoption Agency ” means an institution established by the State Government or 
by a voluntary or non -governmental organisation and recognised under section 65, for housing 
orphans, abandoned and surrendered children, placed there by order of the Committee, for the 
purpose o f adoption;  
(58) “sponsorship ” means provision of supplementary support, financial or otherwise, to the 
families to meet the medical, educational and developmental needs of the child;  
(59) “State Government ”, in relation to a Union territory, means the Adm inistrator of that Union 
territory appointed by the President under  article 239  of the Constitution;  11 
 (60) “surrendered child ” means a child, who is relinquished by the parent or guardian to the 
Commi ttee, on account of physical, emotional and social factors beyond their control, and declared as 
such by the Committee;  
(61) all words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in other Acts shall 
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts.  
CHAPTER II  
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN  
3. General principles to be followed in administration of Act .—The Central Government, the State 
Governments, the Board, and other agencies, as the case may be, while implementing the provisions of 
this Act shall be guided by the following fundamental principles, namely: — 
(i) Principle of presumption of innocence : Any child shall be presumed to be an innocent of any 
mala fide  or criminal intent up to the age of eighteen  years.  
(ii) Principle of dignity and worth : All human beings shall be treated with equal dignity and 
rights.  
(iii) Principle of participation : Every child shall have a right to be heard and to participate in all 
processes and decisions affecting his inter est and the child ’s views shall be taken into consideration 
with due regard to the age and maturity of the child.  
(iv) Principle of best interest : All decisions regarding the child shall be based on the primary 
consideration that they are in the best inter est of the child and to help the child to develop full 
potential.  
(v) Principle of family responsibility : The primary responsibility of care, nurture and protection of 
the child shall be that of the biological family or adoptive or foster parents, as the c ase may be.  
(vi) Principle of safety : All measures shall be taken to ensure that the child is safe and is not 
subjected to any harm, abuse or maltreatment while in contact with the care and protection system, 
and thereafter.  
(vii) Positive measures : All re sources are to be mobilised including those of family and 
community, for promoting the well -being, facilitating development of identity and providing an 
inclusive and enabling environment, to reduce vulnerabilities of children and the need for intervention  
under this Act.  
(viii) Principle of non -stigmatising semantics : Adversarial or accusatory words are not to be used 
in the processes pertaining to a child.  
(ix) Principle of non -waiver of rights : No waiver of any of the right of the child is permissible or  
valid, whether sought by the child or person acting on behalf of the child, or a Board or a Committee 
and any non -exercise of a fundamental right shall not amount to waiver.  
(x) Principle of equality and non -discrimination : There shall be no discriminatio n against a child 
on any grounds including sex, caste, ethnicity, place of birth, disability and equality of access, 
opportunity and treatment shall be provided to every child.  
(xi) Principle of right to privacy and confidentiality : Every child shall have a right to protection 
of his privacy and confidentiality, by all means and throughout the judicial process.  
(xii) Principle of institutionalisation as a measure of last resort : A child shall be placed in 
institutional care as a step of last resort after ma king a reasonable inquiry.  
(xiii) Principle of repatriation and restoration : Every child in the juvenile justice system shall 
have the right to be re -united with his family at the earliest and to be restored to the same socio -
economic and cultural status t hat he was in, before coming under the purview of this Act, unless such 
restoration and repatriation is not in his best interest.  12 
 (xiv) Principle of fresh sta rt: All past records of any child under the Juvenile Justice system 
should be erased except in spe cial circumstances.  
(xv) Principle of diversion : Measures for dealing with children in conflict with law without 
resorting to judicial proceedings shall be promoted unless it is in the best interest of the child or the 
society as a whole.  
(xvi) Principles of natural justice : Basic procedural standards of fairness shall be adhered to, 
including the right to a fair hearing, rule against bias and the right to review, by all persons or bodies, 
acting in a judicial capacity under this Act.  
CHAPTER III  
JUVENILE  JUSTICE  BOARD  
4. Juvenile Justice Board .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the State Government shall, constitute for every district, one or more 
Juvenile Justice Boards for exercising the powers and  discharging its functions relating to children in 
conflict with law under this Act.  
(2) A Board shall consist of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of First Class not 
being Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or Chief Judicial Magistrate (herein after referred to as Principal 
Magistrate) with at least three years experience and two social workers selected in such manner as may be 
prescribed, of whom at least one shall be a woman, forming a Bench and every such Bench shall have the 
powers conferred  by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) on a Metropolitan Magistrate or, 
as the case may be, a Judicial Magistrate of First Class.  
(3) No social worker shall be appointed as a member of the Board unless such person has been 
actively involved i n health, education, or welfare activities pertaining to children for atleast seven years or 
a practicing professional with a degree in child psychology, psychiatry, sociology or law.  
(4) No person shall be eligible for selection as a member of the Board, if he— 
(i) has any past record of violation of human rights or child rights;  
(ii) has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude, and such conviction has not been 
reversed or has not been granted full pardon in respect of such offence;  
(iii) has been removed or dismissed from service of the Central Government or a State 
Government or an undertaking or corporation owned or controlled by the Central Government or a 
State Government;  
(iv) has ever indulged in child abuse or employment of child labo ur or any other violation of 
human rights or immoral act.  
(5) The State Government shall ensure that induction training and sensitisation of all members 
including Principal Magistrate of the Board on care, protection, rehabilitation, legal provisions and j ustice 
for children, as may be prescribed, is provided within a period of sixty days from the date of appointment.  
(6) The term of office of the members of the Board and the manner in which such member may resign 
shall be such, as may be prescribed.  
(7) The appointment of any member of the Board, except the Principal Magistrate, may be terminated 
after holding an inquiry by the State Government, if he — 
(i) has been found guilty of misuse of power vested under this Act; or  
(ii) fails to attend the proceeding s of the Board consecutively for three months without any valid 
reason; or  
(iii) fails to attend less than three -fourths of the sittings in a year; or  
(iv) becomes ineligible under sub -section ( 4) during his term as a member.  13 
 5. Placement of person, who cease to be a child during process of inquiry .—Where an inquiry has 
been initiated in respect of any child under this Act, and during the course of such inquiry, the child 
completes the age of eighteen years, then, notwithstanding  anything contained in this Act or in any other 
law for the time being in force, the inquiry may be continued by the Board and orders may be passed in 
respect of such person as if such person had continued to be a child.  
6. Placement of persons, who commit ted an offence, when person was below the age of eighteen 
years .—(1) Any person, who has completed eighteen years of age, and is apprehended for committing an 
offence when he was below the age of eighteen years, then, such person shall, subject to the prov isions of 
this section, be treated as a child during the process of inquiry.  
(2) The person referred to in sub -section ( 1), if not released on bail by the Board shall be placed in a 
place of safety during the process of inquiry.  
(3) The person referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be treated as per the procedure specified under the 
provisions of this Act.  
7. Procedure in relation to Board .—(1) The Board shall meet at such times and shall observe such 
rules in regard to the transaction of business at its meet ings, as may be prescribed and shall ensure that all 
procedures are child friendly and that the venue is not intimidating to the child and does not resemble as 
regular courts.  
(2) A child in conflict with law may be produced before an individual member of the Board, when the 
Board is not in sitting.  
(3) A Board may act notwithstanding the absence of any member of the Board, and no order passed 
by the Board shall be invalid by the reason only of the absence of any member during any stage of 
proceedings:  
Prov ided that there shall be atleast two members including the Principal Magistrate present at the time 
of final disposal of the case or in making an order under sub -section ( 3) of section 18.  
(4) In the event of any difference of opinion among the members of the Board in the interim or final 
disposal, the opinion of the majority shall prevail, but where there is no such majority, the opinion of the 
Principal Magistrate, shall prevail.  
8. Powers, functions and responsibilities of the Board .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
any other law for the time being in force but save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the Board 
constituted for any district shall have the power to deal exclusively with all the proceedings under this 
Act, relating to child ren in conflict with law, in the area of jurisdiction of such Board.  
(2) The powers conferred on the Board by or under this Act may also be exercised by the High Court 
and the Children ’s Court, when the proceedings come before them under section 19 or in a ppeal, revision 
or otherwise.  
(3) The functions and responsibilities of the Board shall include — 
(a) ensuring the informed participation of the child and the parent or guardian, in every step of the 
process;  
(b) ensuring that the child ’s rights are protected throughout the process of apprehending the child, 
inquiry, aftercare and rehabilitation;  
(c) ensuring availability of legal aid for the child through the legal services institutions;  
(d) wherever necessary the Board shall provide an interpreter o r translator, having such 
qualifications, experience, and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed, to the child if he fails to 
understand the language used in the proceedings;  
(e) directing the Probation Officer, or in case a Probation Officer is not available to the Child 
Welfare Officer or a social worker, to undertake a social investigation into the case and submit a 
social investigation report within a period of fifteen days from the date of first production before the 
Board to ascertain the circum stances in which the alleged offence was committed;  14 
 (f) adjudicate and dispose of cases of children in conflict with law in accordance with the process 
of inquiry specified in section 14;  
(g) transferring to the Committee, matters concerning the child alle ged to be in conflict with law, 
stated to be in need of care and protection at any stage, thereby recognising that a child in conflict 
with law can also be a child in need of care simultaneously and there is a need for the Committee and 
the Board to be bot h involved;  
(h) disposing of the matter and passing a final order that includes an individual care plan for the 
child ’s rehabilitation, including follow up by the Probation Officer or the District Child Protection 
Unit or a member of a non -governmental org anisation, as may be required;  
(i) conducting inquiry for declaring fit persons regarding care of children in conflict with law;  
(j) conducting at least one inspection visit every month of residential facilities for children in 
conflict with law and recomm end action for improvement in quality of services to the District Child 
Protection Unit and the State Government;  
(k) order the police for registration of first information report for offences committed against any 
child in conflict with law, under this Ac t or any other law for the time being in force, on a complaint 
made in this regard;  
(l) order the police for registration of first information report for offences committed against any 
child in need of care and protection, under this Act or any other law f or the time being in force, on a 
written complaint by a Committee in this regard;  
(m) conducting regular inspection of jails meant for adults to check if any child is lodged in such 
jails and take immediate measures for transfer of such a child to the obse rvation home; and  
(n) any other function as may be prescribed.  
9. Procedure to be followed by a Magistrate who has not been empowered under this Act .—(1) 
When a Magistrate, not empowered to exercise the powers of the Board under this Act is of the opinion 
that the person alleged to have committed the offence and brought before him is a child, he shall, without 
any delay, record such opinion and forward the child immediately along with the record of such 
proceedings to the Board having jurisdiction.  
(2) In case a person alleged to have committed an offence claims before a court other than a Board, 
that the person is a child or was a child on the date of commission of the offence, or if the court itself is of 
the opinion that the person was a child on the dat e of commission of the offence, the said court shall make 
an inquiry, take such evidence as may be necessary (but not an affidavit) to determine the age of such 
person, and shall record a finding on the matter, stating the age of the person as nearly as ma y be:  
Provided that such a claim may be raised before any court and it shall be recognised at any stage, 
even after final disposal of the case, and such a claim shall be determined in accordance with the 
provisions contained in this Act and the rules made thereunder even if the person has ceased to be a child 
on or before the date of commencement of this Act.  
(3) If the court finds that a person has committed an offence and was a child on the date of 
commission of such offence, it shall forward the child to  the Board for passing appropriate orders and the 
sentence, if any, passed by the court shall be deemed to have no effect.  
(4) In case a person under this section is required to be kept in protective custody, while the person ’s 
claim of being a child is be ing inquired into, such person may be placed, in the intervening period in a 
place of safety.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE IN RELATION TO CHILDREN IN CONFLICT WITH LAW  
10. Apprehension of child alleged to be in conflict with law .—(1) As soon as a child alleged to be 
in conflict with law is apprehended by the police, such child shall be placed under the charge of the 
special juvenile police unit or the designated child welfare police officer, who shall produce the child 15 
 before the Board without any loss of time but within a period of twenty -four hours of apprehending the 
child excluding the time necessary for the journey, from the place where such child was apprehended:  
Provided that in no case, a child alleged to be in conflict with law shall be placed in a police l ockup or 
lodged in a jail.  
(2) The State Government shall make rules consistent with this Act, — 
(i) to provide for persons through whom (including registered voluntary or non -governmental 
organisations) any child alleged to be in conflict with law may be produced before the Board;  
(ii) to provide for the manner in which the child alleged to be in conflict with law may be sent to 
an observation home or place of safety, as the case may be.  
11. Role of person in whose charge child in conflict with law is plac ed.—Any person in whose 
charge a child in conflict with law is placed, shall while the order is in force, have responsibility of the 
said child, as if the said person was the child ’s parent and responsible for the child ’s maintenance:  
Provided that the chi ld shall continue in such person ’s charge for the period stated by the Board, 
notwithstanding that the said child is claimed by the parents or any other person except when the Board is 
of the opinion that the parent or any other person are fit to exercise charge over such child.  
12. Bail to a person who is apparently a child alleged to be in conflict with law .—(1) When any 
person, who is apparently a child and is alleged to have committed a abailable or non -bailable offence, is 
apprehended or detained by th e police or appears or brought before a Board, such person shall, 
notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or in any other 
law for the time being in force, be released on bail with or without surety or placed u nder the supervision 
of a probation officer or under the care of any fit person:  
Provided that such person shall not be so released if there appears reasonable grounds for believing 
that the release is likely to bring that person into association with any known criminal or expose the said 
person to moral, physical or psychological danger or the person ’s release would defeat the ends of justice, 
and the Board shall record the reasons for denying the bail and circumstances that led to such a decision.  
(2) Whe n such person having been apprehended is not released on bail under sub -section ( 1) by the 
officer -in-charge of the police station, such officer shall cause the person to be kept only in an observation 
home in such manner as may be prescribed until the per son can be brought before a Board.  
(3) When such person is not released on bail under sub -section ( 1) by the Board, it shall make an 
order sending him to an observation home or a place of safety, as the case may be, for such period during 
the pendency of t he inquiry regarding the person, as may be specified in the order.  
(4) When a child in conflict with law is unable to fulfil the conditions of bail order within seven days 
of the bail order, such child shall be produced before the Board for modification of  the conditions of bail.  
13. Information to parents, guardian or probation officer .—(1) Where a child alleged to be in 
conflict with law is apprehended, the officer designated as Child Welfare Police Officer of the police 
station, or the special juvenile p olice unit to which such child is brought, shall, as soon as possible after  
apprehending the child, inform — 
(i) the parent or guardian of such child, if they can be found, and direct them to be present at the 
Board before which the child is produced; and  
(ii) the probation officer, or if no probation officer is available, a Child Welfare Officer, for 
preparation and submission within two weeks to the Board, a social investigation report containing 
information regarding the antecedents and family background of the child and other material 
circumstances likely to be of assistance to the Board for making the inquiry.  
(2) Where a child is released on bail, the probation officer or the Child Welfare Officer shall be 
informed by the Board.  
14. Inquiry by Board reg arding child in conflict with law .—(1) Where a child alleged to be in 
conflict with law is produced before Board, the Board shall hold an inquiry in accordance with the 16 
 provisions of this Act and may pass such orders in relation to such child as it deems f it under sections 17 
and 18 of this Act.  
(2) The inquiry under this section shall be completed within a period of four months from the date of 
first production of the child before the Board, unless the period is extended, for a maximum period of two 
more months by the Board, having regard to the circumstances of the case and after recording the reasons 
in writing for such extension.  
(3) A preliminary assessment in case of heinous offences under section 15 shall be disposed of by the 
Board within a period o f three months from the date of first production of the child before the Board.  
(4) If inquiry by the Board under sub -section ( 2) for petty offences remains inconclusive even after 
the extended period, the proceedings shall stand terminated:  
Provided that for serious or heinous offences, in case the Board requires further extension of time for 
completion of inquiry, the same shall be granted by the Chief Judicial Magistrate or, as the case may be, 
the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, for reasons to be recorde d in writing.  
(5) The Board shall take the following steps to ensure fair and speedy inquiry, namely: — 
(a) at the time of initiating the inquiry, the Board shall satisfy itself that the child in conflict with 
law has not been subjected to any ill -treatment  by the police or by any other person, including a 
lawyer or probation officer and take corrective steps in case of such ill -treatment;  
(b) in all cases under the Act, the proceedings shall be conducted in simple manner as possible 
and care shall be taken to ensure that the child, against whom the proceedings have been instituted, is 
given child -friendly atmosphere during the proceedings;  
(c) every child brought before the Board shall be given the opportunity of being heard and 
participate in the inquiry;  
(d) cases of petty offences, shall be disposed of by the Board through summary proceedings, as 
per the procedure prescribed under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974);  
(e) inquiry of serious offences shall be disposed of by the Board, by followi ng the procedure, for 
trial in summons cases under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974);  
(f) inquiry of heinous offences, — 
(i) for child below the age of sixteen years as on the date of commission of an offence shall 
be disposed of by the Board  under clause ( e); 
(ii) for child above the age of sixteen years as on the date of commission of an offence shall 
be dealt with in the manner prescribed under section 15.  
15. Preliminary assessment into heinous offences by Board .—(1) In case of a heinous o ffence 
alleged to have been committed by a child, who has completed or is above the age of sixteen years, the 
Board shall conduct a preliminary assessment with regard to his mental and physical capacity to commit 
such offence, ability to understand the con sequences of the offence and the circumstances in which he 
allegedly committed the offence, and may pass an order in accordance with the provisions of               
sub-section ( 3) of section 18:  
Provided that for such an assessment, the Board may take the  assistance of experienced psychologists 
or psycho -social workers or other experts.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, it is clarified that preliminary assessment is not a trial, 
but is to assess the capacity of such child to commit and underst and the consequences of the alleged 
offence.  
(2) Where the Board is satisfied on preliminary assessment that the matter should be disposed of by 
the Board, then the Board shall follow the procedure, as far as may be, for trial in summons case under 
the Cod e of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974):  17 
 Provided that the order of the Board to dispose of the matter shall be appealable under sub -section ( 2) 
of section 101:  
Provided further that the assessment under this section shall be completed within the period specified 
in section 14.  
16. Review of pendency of inquiry .—(1) The Chief Judicial Magistrate or the Chief Metropolitan 
Magistrate shall review the pendency of cases of the Board once in every three months, and shall direct 
the Board to increase the freque ncy of its sittings or may recommend the constitution of additional 
Boards.  
(2) The number of cases pending before the Board, duration of such pendency, nature of pendency 
and reasons thereof shall be reviewed in every six months by a high level committee consisting of the 
Executive Chairperson of the State Legal Services Authority, who shall be the Chairperson, the Home 
Secretary, the Secretary responsible for the implementation of this Act in the State and a representative 
from a voluntary or non -governme ntal organisation to be nominated by the Chairperson.  
(3) The information of such pendency shall also be furnished by the Board to the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate or the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate and the District Magistrate on quarterly basis in such 
form as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
17. Orders regarding a child not found to be in conflict with law .—(1) Where a Board is satisfied 
on inquiry that the child brought before it has not committed any offence, then notwithstanding anything 
contr ary contained in any other law for the time being in force, the Board shall pass order to that effect.  
(2) In case it appears to the Board that the child referred to in sub -section ( 1) is in need of care and 
protection, it may refer the child to the Commit tee with appropriate directions.  
18. Orders regarding child found to be in conflict with law .—(1) Where a Board is satisfied on 
inquiry that a child irrespective of age has committed a petty offence, or a serious offence, or a child 
below the age of sixtee n years has committed a heinous offence, then, notwithstanding anything contrary 
contained in any other law for the time being in force, and based on the nature of offence, specific need 
for supervision or intervention, circumstances as brought out in the social investigation report and past 
conduct of the child, the Board may, if it so thinks fit, — 
(a) allow the child to go home after advice or admonition by following appropriate inquiry and 
counselling to such child and to his parents or the guardian;  
(b) direct the child to participate in group counselling and similar activities;  
(c) order the child to perform community service under the supervision of an organisation or 
institution, or a specified person, persons or group of persons identified by the Boa rd; 
(d) order the child or parents or the guardian of the child to pay fine:  
Provided that, in case the child is working, it may be ensured that the provisions of any labour 
law for the time being in force are not violated;  
(e) direct the child to be relea sed on probation of good conduct and placed under the care of any 
parent, guardian or fit person, on such parent, guardian or fit person executing a bond, with or without 
surety, as the Board may require, for the good behaviour and child ’s well -being for a ny period not 
exceeding three years;  
(f) direct the child to be released on probation of good conduct and placed under the care and 
supervision of any fit facility for ensuring the good behaviour and child ’s well -being for any period 
not exceeding three ye ars; 
(g) direct the child to be sent to a special home, for such period, not exceeding three years, as it 
thinks fit, for providing reformative services including education, skill development, counselling, 
behaviour modification therapy, and psychiatric su pport during the period of stay in the special home:  18 
 Provided that if the conduct and behaviour of the child has been such that, it would not be in the 
child ’s interest, or in the interest of other children housed in a special home, the Board may send such  
child to the place of safety.  
(2) If an order is passed under clauses ( a) to ( g) of sub -section ( 1), the Board may, in addition pass 
orders to — 
(i) attend school; or  
(ii) attend a vocational training centre; or  
(iii) attend a therapeutic centre; or  
(iv) prohibit the child from visiting, frequenting or appearing at a specified place; or  
(v) undergo a de -addiction programme.  
(3) Where the Board after preliminary assessment under section 15 pass an order that there is a need 
for trial of the said child as an adult, then the Board may order transfer of the trial of the case to the 
Children ’s Court having jurisdiction to try such offences.  
19. Powers of Children ’s Court .—(1) After the receipt of preliminary assessment from the Board 
under section 15, the Children ’s Court may decide that — 
(i) there is a need for trial of the child as an adult as per the provisions of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) and pass appropriate orders after trial subject to the provisions of this 
section and section  21, considering the special needs of the child, the tenets of fair trial and 
maintaining a child friendly atmosphere;  
(ii) there is no need for trial of the child as an adult and may conduct an inquiry as a Board and 
pass appropriate orders in accordance with the provisions of section 18.  
(2) The Children ’s Court shall ensure that the final order, with regard to a child in conflict with law, 
shall include an individual care plan for the rehabilitation of child, including follow up by the probation 
officer or the District Child Protection Unit or a social worker.  
(3) The Children ’s Court shall ensure that the child who is found to be in conflict with law is sent to a 
place of safety till he attains the age of twenty -one years and thereafter, the person shall  be transferred to 
a jail:  
Provided that the reformative services including educational services, skill development, alternative 
therapy such as counselling, behaviour modification therapy, and psychiatric support shall be provided to 
the child during the period of his stay in the place of safety.  
(4) The Children ’s Court shall ensure that there is a periodic follow up report every year by the 
probation officer or the District Child Protection Unit or a social worker, as required, to evaluate the 
progress o f the child in the place of safety and to ensure that there is no ill -treatment to the child in any 
form.  
(5) The reports under sub -section ( 4) shall be forwarded to the Children ’s Court for record and follow 
up, as may be required.  
20. Child attained age of twenty -one years and yet to complete prescribed term of stay in place 
of safety .—(1) When the child in conflict with the law attains the age of twenty -one years and is yet to 
complete the term of stay, the Children ’s Court shall provide for a follow up by the probation officer or 
the District Child Protection Unit or a social worker or by itself, as required, to evaluate if such child has 
undergone reformative changes and if the child can be a contributing member of the society and for this 
purpose the p rogress records of the child under sub -section ( 4) of section 19, along with evaluation of 
relevant experts are to be taken into consideration.  
(2) After the completion of the procedure specified under sub -section ( 1), the Children ’s Court may — 
(i) decide to release the child on such conditions as it deems fit which includes appointment of a 
monitoring authority for the remainder of the prescribed term of stay;  19 
 (ii) decide that the child shall complete the remainder of his term in a jail:  
Provided that each  State Government shall maintain a list of monitoring authorities and monitoring 
procedures as may be prescribed.  
21. Order that may not be passed against a child in conflict with law .—No child in conflict with 
law shall be sentenced to death or for life i mprisonment without the possibility of release, for any such 
offence, either under the provisions of this Act or under the provisions of the Indian Penal Code                      
(45 of 1860) or any other law for the time being in force.  
22. Proceeding un der Chapter VIII of the Code of Criminal Procedure not to apply against 
child .—Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973              
(2 of 1974), or any preventive detention law for the time being in force,  no proceeding shall be instituted 
and no order shall be passed against any child under Chapter VIII of the said Code.  
23. No joint proceedings of child in conflict with law and person not a child .—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in  section 223  of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) 
or in any other law for the time being in force, there shall be no joint proceedings of a child alleged to be 
in conflict with law, with a person who is not a child.  
(2) If during the inquiry by the Board or by the Children ’s Court, the person alleged to be in conflict 
with law is found that he is not a child, such person shall not be tried along with a child.  
24. Removal of disqualificatio n on the findings of an offence .—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force, a child who has committed an offence and has been 
dealt with under the provisions of this Act shall not suffer disqualification, if any, a ttached to a conviction 
of an offence under such law:  
Provided that in case of a child who has completed or is above the age of sixteen years and is found to 
be in conflict with law by the Children ’s Court under clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of section 19,  the 
provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall not apply.  
(2) The Board shall make an order directing the Police, or by the Children ’s Court to its own registry 
that the relevant records of such conviction shall be destroyed after the expiry of the period of app eal or, 
as the case may be, a reasonable period as may be prescribed:  
Provided that in case of a heinous offence where the child is found to be in conflict with law under 
clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of section 19, the relevant records of conviction of such child shall be 
retained by the Children ’s Court.  
25. Special provision in respect of pending cases .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, 
all proceedings in respect of a child alleged or found to be in conflict with law pending before any Bo ard 
or court on the date of commencement of this Act, shall be continued in that Board or court as if this Act 
had not been enacted.  
26. Provision with resp ect of run away child in conflict with law .—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
to the contrary contained i n any other law for the time being in force, any police officer may take charge 
of a child in conflict with law who has run away from a special home or an observation home or a place 
of safety or from the care of a person or institution under whom the chil d was placed under this Act.  
(2) The child referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be produced, within twenty -four hours, preferably 
before the Board which passed the original order in respect of that child, if possible, or to the nearest 
Board where the child is found.  
(3) The Board shall ascertain the reasons for the child having run away and pass appropriate orders 
for the child to be sent back either to the institution or person from whose custody the child had run away 
or any other similar place or pe rson, as the Board may deem fit:  
Provided that the Board may also give additional directions regarding any special steps that may be 
deemed necessary, for the best interest of the child.  
(4) No additional proceeding shall be instituted in respect of such c hild. 20 
 CHAPTER V  
CHILD  WELFARE COMMITTEE  
27. Child Welfare Committee .—(1) The State Government shall by notification in the Official 
Gazette constitute for every district, one or more Child Welfare Committees for exercising the powers and 
to discharge the duties conferred on such Committees in relation to children in need of care and protection 
under this Act and ensure that induction training and sensitisation of all members of the committee is 
provided within two months from the date of notification.  
(2) The Committee shall consist of a Chairperson, and four other members as the State Government 
may think fit to appoint, of whom at  least one shall be a woman and another, an expert on the matters 
concerning children.  
(3) The District Child Protection Unit s hall provide a Secretary and other staff that may be required 
for secretarial support to the Committee for its effective functioning.  
(4) No person shall be appointed as a member of the Committee unless such person has been actively 
involved in health, edu cation or welfare activities pertaining to children for at  least seven years or is a 
practicing professional with a degree in child psychology or psychiatry or law or social work or sociology 
or human development.  
(5) No person shall be appointed as a memb er unless he possesses such other qualifications as may be 
prescribed.  
(6) No person shall be appointed for a period of more than three years as a member of the Committee.  
(7) The appointment of any member of the Committee shall be terminated by the State Government 
after making an inquiry, if — 
(i) he has been found guilty of misuse of power vested on him under this Act;  
(ii) he has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude and such conviction has not 
been reversed or he has not been granted fu ll pardon in respect of such offence;  
(iii) he fails to attend the proceedings of the Committee consecutively for three months without 
any valid reason or he fails to attend less than three -fourths of the sittings in a year.  
(8) The District Magistrate sha ll conduct a quarterly review of the functioning of the Committee.  
(9) The Committee shall function as a Bench and shall have the powers conferred by the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) on a Metropolitan Magistrate or, as the case may be, a Ju dicial 
Magistrate of First Class.  
(10) The District Magistrate shall be the grievances redressal authority for the Child Welfare 
Committee and anyone connected with the child, may file a petition before the District Magistrate, who 
shall consider and pass appropriate orders.  
28. Procedure in relation to Committee .—(1) The Committee shall meet at least twenty days in a 
month and shall observe such rules and procedures with regard to the transaction of business at its 
meetings, as may be prescribed.  
(2) A vis it to an existing child care institution by the Committee, to check its functioning and well 
being of children shall be considered as a sitting of the Committee.  
(3) A child in need of care and protection may be produced before an individual member of the 
Committee for being placed in a Children ’s Home or fit person when the Committee is not in session.  
(4) In the event of any difference of opinion among the members of the Committee at the time of 
taking any decision, the opinion of the majority shall prevail but where there is no such majority, the 
opinion of the Chairperson shall prevail.  
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Committee may act, notwithstanding the absence 
of any member of the Committee, and no order made by the Committee shall be invalid by reason only of 
the absence of any member during any stage of the proceeding:  21 
 Provided that there shall be at least three members present at the time of final disposal of the case.  
29. Powers of Committee .—(1) The Committee sha ll have the authority to dispose of cases for the 
care, protection, treatment, development and rehabilitation of children in need of care and protection, as 
well as to provide for their basic needs and protection.  
(2) Where a Committee has been constituted  for any area, such Committee shall, notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, but save as otherwise expressly provided 
in this Act, have the power to deal exclusively with all proceedings under this Act relating to c hildren in 
need of care and protection.  
30. Functions and responsibilities of Committee .—The functions and responsibilities of the 
Committee shall include — 
(i) taking cognizance of and receiving the children produced before it;  
(ii) conducting inquiry on a ll issues relating to and affecting the safety and well -being of the 
children under this Act;  
(iii) directing the Child Welfare Officers or probation officers or District Child Protection Unit or 
non-governmental organisations to conduct social investigati on and submit a report before the 
Committee;  
(iv) conducting inquiry for declaring fit persons for care of children in need of care and 
protection;  
(v) directing placement of a child in foster care;  
(vi) ensuring care, protection, appropriate rehabilitatio n or restoration of children in need of care 
and protection, based on the child ’s individual care plan and passing necessary directions to parents 
or guardians or fit persons or children ’s homes or fit facility in this regard;  
(vii) selecting registered institution for placement of each child requiring institutional support, 
based on the child ’s age, gender, disability and needs and keeping in mind the available capacity of 
the institution;  
(viii) conducting at least two inspection visits per month of res idential facilities for children in 
need of care and protection and recommending action for improvement in quality of services to the 
District Child Protection Unit and the State Government;  
(ix) certifying the execution of the surrender deed by the parent s and ensuring that they are given 
time to reconsider their decision as well as making all efforts to keep the family together;  
(x) ensuring that all efforts are made for restoration of abandoned or lost children to their families 
following due process, as  may be prescribed;  
(xi) declaration of orphan, abandoned and surrendered child as legally free for adoption after due 
inquiry;  
(xii) taking suo motu  cognizance of cases and reaching out to children in need of care and 
protection, who are not produced befo re the Committee, provided that such decision is taken by at 
least three members;  
(xiii) taking action for rehabilitation of sexually abused children who are reported as children in 
need of care and protection to the Committee by Special Juvenile Police Un it or local police, as the 
case may be, under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (32 of 2012);  
(xiv) dealing with cases referred by the Board under sub -section ( 2) of section 17;  
(xv) co-ordinate with the police, labour department an d other agencies involved in the care and 
protection of children with support of the District Child Protection Unit or the State Government;  22 
 (xvi) in case of a complaint of abuse of a child in any child care institution, the Committee shall 
conduct an inqu iry and give directions to the police or the District Child Protection Unit or labour 
department or childline services, as the case may be;  
(xvii) accessing appropriate legal services for children;  
(xviii) such other functions and responsibilities, as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER V I 
PROCEDURE IN RELATION TO CHILDREN IN NEED OF CARE AND PROTECTION  
31. Production before Committee .—(1) Any child in need of care and protection may be produced 
before the Committee by any of the following persons, namely: — 
(i) any police officer or special juvenile police unit or a designated Child Welfare Police Officer 
or any officer of District Child Protection Unit or inspector appointed under any labour law for the 
time being in force;  
(ii) any public servant;  
(iii) Childline S ervices or any voluntary or non -governmental organisation or any agency as may 
be recognised by the State Government;  
(iv) Child Welfare Officer or probation officer;  
(v) any social worker or a public spirited citizen;  
(vi) by the child himself; or  
(vii) any nurse, doctor or management of a nursing home, hospital or maternity home:  
Provided that the child shall be produced before the Committee without any loss of time but within a 
period of twenty -four hours excluding the time necessary for the journey.  
(2) The State Government may make rules consistent with this Act, to provide for the manner of 
submitting the report to the Committee and the manner of sending and entrusting the child to children ’s 
home or fit facility or fit person, as the case may be, duri ng the period of the inquiry.  
32. Mandatory reporting regarding a child found separated from guardian .—(1) Any individual 
or a police officer or any functionary of any organisation or a nursing home or hospital or maternity 
home, who or which finds and tak es charge, or is handed over a child who appears or claims to be 
abandoned or lost, or a child who appears or claims to be an orphan without family support, shall within 
twenty -four hours (excluding the time necessary for the journey), give information to the Childline 
Services or the nearest police station or to a Child Welfare Committee or to the District Child Protection 
Unit, or hand over the child to a child care institution registered under this Act, as the case may be.  
(2) The information regarding a  child referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be mandatorily uploaded on 
a portal as may be specified by the Central Government or the Committee or the District Child Protection 
Unit or the child care institution, as the case may be.  
33. Offence of non -reporting .—If information regarding a child as required under section 32 is not 
given within the period specified in the said section, then, such act shall be regarded as an offence.  
34. Penalty for non -reporting .—Any person who has committ ed an offence under section 33 shall 
be liable to imprisonment up to six months or fine of ten thousand rupees or both.  
35. Surrender of children .—(1) A parent or guardian, who for physical, emotional and social factors 
beyond their control, wishes to surr ender a child, shall produce the child before the Committee.  
(2) If, after prescribed process of inquiry and counselling, the Committee is satisfied, a surrender deed 
shall be executed by the parent or guardian, as the case may be, before the Committee.  
(3) The parents or guardian who surrendered the child, shall be given two months time to reconsider 
their decision and in the intervening period the Committee shall either allow, after due inquiry, the child 23 
 to be with the parents or guardian under supervisi on, or place the child in a Specialised Adoption Agency, 
if he or she is below six years of age, or a children ’s home if he is above six years.  
36. Inquiry .—(1) On production of a child or receipt of a report under section 31, the Committee 
shall hold an i nquiry in such manner as may be prescribed and the Committee, on its own or on the report 
from any person or agency as specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 31, may pass an order to send the 
child to the children ’s home or a fit facility or fit person, a nd for speedy social investigation by a social 
worker or Child Welfare Officer or Child Welfare Police Officer:  
Provided that all children below six years of age, who are orphan, surrendered or appear to be 
abandoned shall be placed in a Specialised Adopti on Agency, where available.  
(2) The social investigation shall be completed within fifteen days so as to enable the Committee to 
pass final order within four months of first production of the child:  
Provided that for orphan, abandoned or surrendered childr en, the time for completion of inquiry shall 
be as specified in section 38.  
(3) After the completion of the inquiry, if Committee is of the opinion that the said child has no 
family or ostensible support or is in continued need of care and protection, it m ay send the child to a 
Specialised Adoption Agency if the child is below six years of age, children ’s home or to a fit facility or 
person or foster family, till suitable means of rehabilitation are found for the child, as may be prescribed, 
or till the chi ld attains the age of eighteen years:  
Provided that the situation of the child placed in a children ’s home or with a fit facility or person or a 
foster family, shall be reviewed by the Committee, as may be prescribed.  
(4) The Committee shall submit a quarterly report on the nature of disposal of cases and pendency of 
cases to the District Magistrate in the manner as may be prescribed, for review of pendency of cases.  
(5) After review under sub -section ( 4), the District Magistrate shall direct the Commi ttee to take 
necessary remedial measures to address the pendency, if necessary and send a report of such reviews to 
the State Government, who may cause the constitution of additional Committees, if required:  
Provided that if the pendency of cases continues  to be unaddressed by the Committee even after three 
months of receiving such directions, the State Government shall terminate the said Committee and shall 
constitute a new Committee.  
(6) In anticipation of termination of the Committee and in order that no  time is lost in constituting a 
new Committee, the State Government shall maintain a standing panel of eligible persons to be appointed 
as members of the Committee.  
(7) In case of any delay in the constitution of a new Committee under sub -section ( 5), the Child 
Welfare Committee of a nearby district shall assume responsibility in the intervening period.  
37. Orders passed regarding a child in need of care and protection .—(1) The Committee on being 
satisfied through the inquiry that the child before the Commi ttee is a child in need of care and protection, 
may, on consideration of Social Investigation Report submitted by Child Welfare Officer and taking into 
account the child ’s wishes in case the child is sufficiently mature to take a view, pass one or more of the 
following orders, namely: — 
(a) declaration that a child is in need of care and protection;  
(b) restoration of the child to parents or guardian or family with or without supervision of Child 
Welfare Officer or designated social worker;  
(c) placement of the child in Children ’s Home or fit facility or Specialised Adoption Agency for 
the purpose of adoption for long term or temporary care, keeping in mind the capacity of the 
institution for housing such children, either after reaching the conclusion that th e family of the child 
cannot be traced or even if traced, restoration of the child to the family is not in the best interest of the 
child;  
(d) placement of the child with fit person for long term or temporary care;  24 
 (e) foster care orders under section 44;  
(f) sponsorship orders under section 45;  
(g) directions to persons or institutions or facilities in whose care the child is placed, regarding 
care, protection and rehabilitation of the child, including directions relating to immediate shelter and 
services such as medical attention, psychiatric and psychological support including need -based 
counselling, occupational therapy or behaviour modification therapy, skill training, legal aid, 
educational services, and other developmental activities, as required, as well as follow -up and 
coordination with the District Child Protection Unit or State Government and other agencies;  
(h) declaration that the child is legally free for adoption under section 38.  
(2) The Com mittee may also pass orders for — 
(i) declaration of fit persons for foster care;  
(ii) getting after care support under section 46 of the Act; or  
(iii) any other order related to any other function as may be prescribed.  
38. Procedure for declaring a child legally free for adoption .—(1) In case of orphan and 
abandoned child, the Committee shall make all efforts for tracing the parents or guardians of the child and 
on completion of such inquiry, if it is established that the child is either an orphan having no one to take 
care, or abandoned, the Committee shall  declare the child legally free for adoption:  
Provided that such declaration shall be made within a period of two months from the date of 
production of the child, for children who are up to two years of age and within four months for children 
above two yea rs of age:  
Provided further that notwithstanding anything contained in this regard in any other law for the time 
being in force, no first information report shall be registered against any biological parent in the process 
of inquiry relating to an abandone d or surrendered child under this Act.  
(2) In case of surrendered child, the institution where the child has been placed by the Committee on 
an application for surrender, shall bring the case before the Committee immediately on completion of the 
period spe cified in section 35, for declaring the child legally free for adoption.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, a child of a 
mentally retarded parents or a unwanted child of victim of sexual assault, such child  may be declared free 
for adoption by the Committee, by following the procedure under this Act.  
(4) The decision to declare an orphan, abandoned or surrendered child as legally free for adoption 
shall be taken by at least three members of the Committee.  
(5) The Committee shall inform the State Agency and the Authority regarding the number of children 
declared as legally free for adoption and number of cases pending for decision in the manner as may be 
prescribed, every month.  
CHAPTER VII  
REHABILITATION AND SOCIAL RE -INTEGRATION  
39. Process of rehabilitation and social re -integration .—(1) The process of rehabilitation and 
social integration of children under this Act shall be undertaken, based on the individual care plan of the 
child, preferably through family based care such as by restoration to family or guardian with or without 
supervision or sponsorship, or adoption or foster care:  
Provided that all efforts shall be made to keep siblings placed in institutional or non -institutional care, 
together, unl ess it is in their best interest not to be kept together.  
(2) For children in conflict with law the process of rehabilitation and social integration shall be 
undertaken in the observation homes, if the child is not released on bail or in special homes or p lace of 
safety or fit facility or with a fit person, if placed there by the order of the Board.  25 
 (3) The children in need of care and protection who are not placed in families for any reason may be 
placed in an institution registered for such children under  this Act or with a fit person or a fit facility, on a 
temporary or long -term basis, and the process of rehabilitation and social integration shall be undertaken 
wherever the child is so placed.  
(4) The Children in need of care and protection who are leavi ng institutional care or children in 
conflict with law leaving special homes or place of safety on attaining eighteen years of age, may be 
provided financial support as specified in section 46, to help them to re -integrate into the mainstream of 
the societ y. 
40. Restoration of child in need of care and protection .—(1) The restoration and protection of a 
child shall be the prime objective of any Children ’s Home, Specialised Adoption Agency or open shelter.  
(2) The Children ’s Home, Specialised Adoption Agency  or an open shelter, as the case may be, shall 
take such steps as are considered necessary for the restoration and protection of a child deprived of his 
family environment temporarily or permanently where such child is under their care and protection.  
(3) The Committee shall have the powers to restore any child in need of care and protection to his 
parents, guardian or fit person, as the case may be, after determining the suitability of the parents or 
guardian or fit person to take care of the child, and gi ve them suitable directions.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, “restoration and protection of a child ” means 
restoration to — 
(a) parents;  
(b) adoptive parents;  
(c) foster parents;  
(d) guardian; or  
(e) fit person.  
41. Registration of child care institutions .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
law for the time being in force, all institutions, whether run by a State Government or by voluntary or 
non-governmental organisations, which are meant, either wh olly or partially, for housing children in need 
of care and protection or children in conflict with law, shall, be registered under this Act in such manner 
as may be prescribed, within a period of six months from the date of commencement of this Act, 
regar dless of whether they are receiving grants from the Central Government or, as the case may be, the 
State Government or not:  
Provided that the institutions having valid registration under the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection 
of Children) Act, 2000 (56 of 2000) on the date of commencement of this Act shall be deemed to have 
been registered under this Act.  
(2) At the time of registration under this section, the State Government shall determine and record the 
capacity and purpose of the institution and sha ll register the institution as a Children ’s Home or open 
shelter or Specialised Adoption Agency or observation home or special home or place of safety, as the 
case may be.  
(3) On receipt of application for registration under sub -section ( 1), from an existi ng or new institution 
housing children in need of care and protection o r children in conflict with law, the State Government 
may grant provisional registration, within one month from the date of receipt of application, for a 
maximum period of six months, i n order to bring such institution under the purview of this Act, and shall 
determine the capacity of the Home which shall be mentioned in the registration certificate:  
Provided that if the s aid institution does not fulfil  the prescribed criteria for regist ration, within the 
period specified in sub -section ( 1), the provisional registration shall stand cancelled and the provisions of 
sub-section ( 5) shall apply.  26 
 (4) If the State Government does not issue a provisional registration certificate within one month  from 
the date of application, the proof of receipt of application for registration shall be treated as provisional 
registration to run an institution for a maximum period of six months.  
(5) If the application for registration is not disposed of within six  months by any officer or officers of 
any State Government, it shall be regarded as dereliction of duty on their part by their higher controlling 
authority and appropriate departmental proceedings shall be initiated.  
(6) The period of registration of an in stitution shall be five years, and it shall be subject to renewal in 
every five years.  
(7) The State Government may, after following the procedure as may be prescribed, cancel or 
withhold registration, as the case may be, of such institutions which fail to  provide rehabilitation and 
reintegration services as specified in section 53 and till such time that the registration of an institution is 
renewed or granted, the State Government shall manage the institution.  
(8) Any child care institution registered und er this section shall be duty bound to admit children, 
subject to the capacity of the institution, as directed by the Committee, whether they are receiving grants 
from the Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government or not.  
(9) Notwiths tanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the inspection 
committee appointed under section 54, shall have the powers to inspect any institution housing children, 
even if not registered under this Act to determine whether such  institution is housing children in need of 
care and protection.  
42. Penalty for non -registration of child care institutions .—Any person, or persons, in -charge of 
an institution housing children in need of care and protection and children in conflict with law, who fails 
to comply with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 41, shall be punished with imprisonment 
which may extend to one year or a fine of not less than one lakh rupees or both:  
Provided that every thirty days delay in applying for regist ration shall be considered as a separate 
offence . 
43. Open shelter .—(1) The State Government may establish and maintain, by itself or through 
voluntary or non -governmental organisations, as many open shelters as may be required, and such open 
shelters shal l be registered as such, in the manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The open shelters referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall function as a community based facility for 
children in need of residential support, on short -term basis, with the objective of protectin g them from 
abuse or weaning them, or keeping them, away from a life on the streets.  
(3) The open shelters shall send every month information, in the manner as may be prescribed, 
regarding children availing the services of the shelter, to the District Chil d Protection Unit and the 
Committee.  
44. Foster care .—(1) The children in need of care and protection may be placed in foster care, 
including group foster care for their care and protection through orders of the Committee, after following 
the procedure as may be prescribed in this regard, in a family which does not include the child ’s 
biological or adoptive parents or in an unrelated family recognised as suitable for the purpose by the State 
Government, for a short or extended period of time.  
(2) The select ion of the foster family shall be based on family ’s ability, intent, capacity and prior 
experience of taking care of children.  
(3) All efforts shall be made to keep siblings together in foster families, unless it is in their best 
interest not to be kept to gether.  
(4) The State Government, after taking into account the number of children, shall provide monthly 
funding for such foster care through District Child Protection Unit after following the procedure, as may 
be prescribed, for inspection to ensure well  being of the children.  
(5) In cases where children have been placed in foster care for the reason that their parents have been 
found to be unfit or incapacitated by the Committee, the child ’s parents may visit the child in the foster 27 
 family at regular intervals, unless the Committee feels that such visits are not in the best interest of the 
child, for reasons to be recorded therefor; and eventually, the child may return to the parent ’s homes once 
the parents are determined by the Committee to be fit to take care of the child.  
(6) The foster family shall be responsible for providing education, health and nutrition to the child 
and shall ensure the overall well being of the child in such manner, as may be prescribed.  
(7) The State Government may make rules  for the purpose of defining the procedure, criteria and the 
manner in which foster care services shall be provided for children.  
(8) The inspection of foster families shall be conducted every month by the Committee in the form as 
may be prescribed to chec k the well -being of the child and whenever a foster family is found lacking in 
taking care of the child, the child shall be removed from that foster family and shifted to another foster 
family as the Committee may deem fit.  
(9) No child regarded as adoptable by the Committee shall be given for long -term foster care.  
45. Sponsorship .—(1) The State Government shall make rules for the purpose of undertaking various 
programmes of sponsorship of children, such as individual to individual sponsorship, grou p sponsorship 
or community sponsorship.  
(2) The criteria for sponsorship shall include, — 
(i) where mother is a widow or divorced or abandoned by family;  
(ii) where children are orphan and are living with the extended family;  
(iii) where parents are victims  of life threatening disease;  
(iv) where parents are incapacitated due to accident and unable to take care of children both 
financially and physically.  
(3) The duration of sponsorship shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(4) The sponsorship programme may pr ovide supplementary support to families, to Children ’s Homes 
and to special homes to meet medical, nutritional, educational and other needs of the children, with a view 
to improving their quality of life.  
46. After care of children leaving child care insti tution .—Any child leaving a child care institution 
on completion of eighteen years of age may be provided with financial support in order to facilitate 
child ’s re-integration into the mainstream of the society in the manner as may be prescribed.  
47. Observation homes .—(1) The State Government shall establish and maintain in every district or 
a group of districts, either by itself, or through voluntary or non -governmental organisations, observation 
homes, which shall be registered under section 41 of this Act, for temporary reception, care and 
rehabilitation of any child alleged to be in conflict with law, during the pendency of any inquiry under 
this Act.  
(2) Where the State Government is of the opinion that any registered institution other than a hom e 
established or maintained under sub -section ( 1), is fit for the temporary reception of such child alleged to 
be in conflict with law during the pendency of any inquiry under this Act, it may register such institution 
as an observation home for the purpos es of this Act.  
(3) The State Government may, by rules made under this Act, provide for the management and 
monitoring of observation homes, including the standards and various types of services to be provided by 
them for rehabilitation and social integrati on of a child alleged to be in conflict with law and the 
circumstances under which, and the manner in which, the registration of an observation home may be 
granted or withdrawn.  
(4) Every child alleged to be in conflict with law who is not placed under the  charge of parent or 
guardian and is sent to an observation home shall be segregated according to the child ’s age and gender, 
after giving due consideration to physical and mental status of the child and degree of the offence 
committed.  28 
 48. Special homes .—(1) The State Government may establish and maintain either by itself or through 
voluntary or non -governmental organisations, special homes, which shall be registered as such, in the 
manner as may be prescribed, in every district or a group of districts, as  may be required for rehabilitation 
of those children in conflict with law who are found to have committed an offence and who are placed 
there by an order of the Juvenile Justice Board made under section 18.  
(2) The State Government may, by rules, provide for the management and monitoring of special 
homes, including the standards and various types of services to be provided by them which are necessary 
for social re -integration of a child, and the circumstances under which, and the manner in which, the 
regis tration of a special home may be granted or withdrawn.  
(3) The rules made under sub -section ( 2) may also provide for the segregation and separation of 
children found to be in conflict with law on the basis of age, gender, the nature of offence committed by  
them and the child ’s mental and physical status.  
49. Place of safety .—(1) The State Government shall set up atleast one place of safety in a State 
registered under section 41, so as to place a person above the age of eighteen years or child in conflict 
with law, who is between the age of sixteen to eighteen years and is accused of or convicted for 
committing a heinous offence.  
(2) Every place of safety shall have separate arrangement and facilities for stay of such children or 
persons during the process of  inquiry and children or persons convicted of committing an offence.  
(3) The State Government may, by rules, prescribe the types of places that can be designated as place 
of safety under sub -section ( 1) and the facilities and services that may be provided therein.  
50. Children ’s Home .—(1) The State Government may establish and maintain, in every district or 
group of districts, either by itself or through voluntary or non -governmental organisations, Children ’s 
Homes, which shall be registered as such, for th e placement of children in need of care and protection for 
their care, treatment, education, training, development and rehabilitation.  
(2) The State Government shall designate any Children ’s Home as a home fit for children with special 
needs delivering spe cialised services, depending on requirement.  
(3) The State Government may, by rules, provide for the monitoring and management of Children ’s 
Homes including the standards and the nature of services to be provided by them, based on individual 
care plans for  each child.  
51. Fit facility .—(1) The Board or the Committee shall recognise a facility being run by a 
Governmental organisation or a voluntary or non -governmental organisation registered under any law for 
the time being in force to be fit to temporarily take the responsibility of a child for a specific purpose after 
due inquiry regarding the suitability of the facility and the organisation to take care of the child in such 
manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Board or the Committee may withdraw the recognition under sub -section ( 1) for reasons to be 
recorded in writing.  
52. Fit person .—(1) The Board or the Committee shall, after due verification of credentials, 
recognise any person fit to temporarily receive a child for care, protection and treatment  of such child for 
a specified period and in the manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Board or Committee, as the case may be, may withdraw the recognition granted under sub -
section ( 1) for reasons to be recorded in writing.  
53. Rehabilitation and re -integr ation services in institutions registered under this Act and 
management thereof .—(1) The services that shall be provided, by the institutions registered under this 
Act in the process of rehabilitation and re -integration of children, shall be in such manner  as may be 
prescribed, which may include — 
(i) basic requirements such as food, shelter, clothing and medical attention as per the prescribed 
standards;  29 
 (ii) equipment such as wheel -chairs, prosthetic devices, hearing aids, braille kits, or any other 
suitab le aids and appliances as required, for children with special needs;  
(iii) appropriate education, including supplementary education, special education, and appropriate 
education for children with special needs:  
Provided that for children between the age of  six to fourteen years, the provisions of the Right of 
Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 (35 of 2009) shall apply;  
(iv) skill development;  
(v) occupational therapy and life skill education;  
(vi) mental health interventions, including coun selling specific to the need of the child;  
(vii) recreational activities including sports and cultural activities;  
(viii) legal aid where required;  
(ix) referral services for education, vocational training, de -addiction, treatment of diseases where 
require d; 
(x) case management including preparation and follow up of individual care plan;  
(xi) birth registration;  
(xii) assistance for obtaining the proof of identity, where required; and  
(xiii) any other service that may reasonably be provided in order to ensu re the well -being of the 
child, either directly by the State Government, registered or fit individuals or institutions or through 
referral services.  
(2) Every institution shall have a Management Committee, to be set up in a manner as may be 
prescribed, to manage the institution and monitor the progress of every child.  
(3) The officer in -charge of every institution, housing children above six years of age, shall facilitate 
setting up of children ’s committees for participating in such activities as may be pre scribed, for the safety 
and well -being of children in the institution.  
54. Inspection of institutions registered under this Act .—(1) The State Government shall appoint 
inspection committees for the State and district, as the case may be, for all institutions registered or 
recognised to be fit under this Act for such period and for such purposes, as may be prescribed.  
(2) Such inspection committees shall mandatorily conduct visits to all facilities housing children in 
the area allocated, at least o nce in three months in a team of not less than three members, of whom at least 
one shall be a woman and one shall be a medical officer, and submit reports of the findings of such visits 
within a week of their visit, to the District Child Protection Units o r State Government, as the case may 
be, for further action.  
(3) On the submission of the report by the inspection committee within a week of the inspection, 
appropriate action shall be taken within a month by the District Child Protection Unit or the State  
Government and a compliance report shall be submitted to the State Government.  
55. Evaluation of functioning of structures .—(1) The Central Government or State Government 
may independently evaluate the functioning of the Board, Committee, special juvenile  police units, 
registered institutions, or recognised fit facilities and persons, at such period and through such persons or 
institutions as may be prescribed by that Government.  
(2) In case such independent evaluation is conducted by both the Governments,  the evaluation made 
by the Central Government shall prevail.  
CHAPTER VIII  
ADOPTION  
56. Adoption .—(1) Adoption shall be resorted to for ensuring right to family for the orphan, 
abandoned and surrendered children, as per the provisions of this Act, the rule s made thereunder and the 
adoption regulations framed by the Authority.  30 
 (2) Adoption of a child from a relative by another relative, irrespective of their religion, can be made 
as per the provisions of this Act and the adoption regulations framed by the Au thority.  
(3) Nothing in this Act shall apply to the adoption of children made under the provisions of the Hindu 
Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956 (78 of 1956).  
(4) All inter -country adoptions shall be done only as per the provisions of this Act and the ad option 
regulations framed by the Authority.  
(5) Any person, who takes or sends a child to a foreign country or takes part in any arrangement for 
transferring the care and custody of a child to another person in a foreign country without a valid order 
from the Court, shall be punishable as per the provisions of section 80.  
57. Eligibility of prospective adoptive parents .—(1) The prospective adoptive parents shall be 
physically fit, financially sound, mentally alert and highly motivated to adopt a child for p roviding a good 
upbringing to him.  
(2) In case of a couple, the consent of both the spouses for the adoption shall be required.  
(3) A single or divorced person can also adopt, subject to fulfilment of the criteria and in accordance 
with the provisions of a doption regulations framed by the Authority.  
(4) A single male is not eligible to adopt a girl child.  
(5) Any other criteria that may be specified in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.  
58. Procedure for adoption by Indian prospective adoptiv e parents living in India .—(1) Indian 
prospective adoptive parents living in India, irrespective of their religion, if interested to adopt an orphan 
or abandoned or surrendered child, may apply for the same to a Specialised Adoption Agency, in the 
manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.  
(2) The Specialised Adoption Agency shall prepare the home study report of the prospective adoptive 
parents and upon finding them eligible, will refer a child declared legally free for adopti on to them along  
with the child study report and medical report of the child, in the manner as provided in the adoption 
regulations framed by the Authority.  
(3) On the receipt of the acceptance of the child from the prospective adoptive parents along with the 
child study report and medical report of the child signed by such parents, the Specialised Adoption 
Agency shall give the child in pre -adoption foster care and file an application in the court for obtaining 
the adoption order, in the manner as provided  in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.  
(4) On the receipt of a certified copy of the court order, the Specialised Adoption Agency shall send 
immediately the same to the prospective adoptive parents.  
(5) The progress and wellbeing of the chil d in the adoptive family shall be followed up and 
ascertained in the manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.  
59. Procedure for inter -country adoption of an orphan or abandoned or surrendered child .—(1) 
If an orphan or abandoned or surrendered child could not be placed with an Indian or non -resident Indian 
prospective adoptive parent despite the joint effort of the Specialised Adoption Agency and State Agency 
within sixty days from the date the child has been declared le gally free for adoption, such child shall be 
free for inter -country adoption:  
Provided that children with physical and mental disability, siblings and children above five years of 
age may be given preference over other children for such inter -country adopt ion, in accordance with the 
adoption regulations, as may be framed by the Authority.  
(2) An eligible non -resident Indian or overseas citizen of India or persons of Indian origin shall be 
given priority in inter -country adoption of Indian children.  31 
 (3) A no n-resident Indian or overseas citizen of India, or person of Indian origin or a foreigner, who 
are prospective adoptive parents living abroad, irrespective of their religion, if interested to adopt an 
orphan or abandoned or surrendered child from India, ma y apply for the same to an authorised foreign 
adoption agency, or Central Authority or a concerned Government department in their country of habitual 
residence, as the case may be, in the manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed by the 
Authori ty. 
(4) The authorised foreign adoption agency, or Central Authority, or a concerned Government 
department, as the case may be, shall prepare the home study report of such prospective adoptive parents 
and upon finding them eligible, will sponsor their appl ication to Authority for adoption of a child from 
India, in the manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.  
(5) On the receipt of the application of such prospective adoptive parents, the Authority shall 
examine and if it finds the applicants suitable, then, it will refer the application to one of the Specialised 
Adoption Agencies, where children legally free for adoption are available.  
(6) The Specialised Adoption Agency will match a child with such prospective adoptive parents and 
send the child study report and medical report of the child to such parents, who in turn may accept the 
child and return the child study and medical report duly signed by them to the said agency.  
(7) On receipt of the acceptance of the child from the p rospective adoptive parents, the Specialised 
Adoption Agency shall file an application in the court for obtaining the adoption order, in the manner as 
provided in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.  
(8) On the receipt of a certified copy of t he court order, the specialised adoption agency shall send 
immediately the same to Authority, State Agency and to the prospective adoptive parents, and obtain a 
passport for the child.  
(9) The Authority shall intimate about the adoption to the immigration authorities of India and the 
receiving country of the child.  
(10) The prospective adoptive parents shall receive the child in person from the specialised adoption 
agency as soon as the passport and visa are issued to the child.  
(11) The authorised foreign adoption agency, or Central Authority, or the concerned Government 
department, as the case may be, shall ensure the submission of progress reports about the child in the 
adoptive family and will be responsible for making alternative arrangement in the case  of any disruption, 
in consultation with Authority and concerned Indian diplomatic mission, in the manner as provided in the 
adoption regulations framed by the Authority.  
(12) A foreigner or a person of Indian origin or an overseas citizen of India, who has habitual 
residence in India, if interested to adopt a child from India, may apply to Authority for the same along 
with a no objection certificate from the diplomatic mission of his country in India, for further necessary 
actions as provided  in the adop tion regulations framed by the Authority.  
60. Procedure for inter -country relative adoption .—(1) A relative living abroad, who intends to 
adopt a child from his relative in India shall obtain an order from the court and apply for no objection 
certificate f rom Authority, in the manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.  
(2) The Authority shall on receipt of the order under sub -section ( 1) and the application from either 
the biological parents or from the adoptive parents, issue n o objection certificate under intimation to the 
immigration authority of India and of the receiving country of the child.  
(3) The adoptive parents shall, after receiving no objection certificate under sub -section ( 2), receive 
the child from the biological parents and shall facilitate the contact of the adopted child with his siblings 
and biological parents from time to time.  
61. Court procedure and penalty against payment in consideration of adoption .—(1) Before 
issuing an adoption order, the court shall sa tisfy itself that — 
(a) the adoption is for the welfare of the child; ( b) due consideration is given to the wishes of the 
child having regard to the age and understanding of the child; and ( c) that neither the prospective 32 
 adoptive parents has given or agree d to give nor the specialised adoption agency or the parent or 
guardian of the child in case of relative adoption has received or agreed to receive any payment or 
reward in consideration of the adoption, except as permitted under the adoption regulations f ramed by 
the Authority towards the adoption fees or service charge or child care corpus.  
(2) The adoption proceedings shall be held in camera and the case shall be disposed of by the court 
within a period of two months from the date of filing.  
62. Addition al procedural requirements and documentation .—(1) The documentation and other 
procedural requirements, not expressly provided in this Act with regard to the adoption of an orphan, 
abandoned and surrendered child by Indian prospective adoptive parents livin g in India, or by                        
non-resident Indian or overseas citizen of India or person of Indian origin or foreigner prospective 
adoptive parents, shall be as per the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.  
(2) The specialised adoption agency shall ensure that the adoption case of prospective adoptive 
parents is disposed of within four months from the date of receipt of application and the authorised 
foreign adoption agency, Authority and State Agency shall track the progress of the adop tion case and 
intervene wherever necessary, so as to ensure that the time line is adhered to.  
63. Effect of adoption .—A child in respect of whom an adoption order is issued by the court, shall 
become the child of the adoptive parents, and the adoptive parents shall become the parents of the child as 
if the child had been born to the adoptive parents, for all purposes, including intestacy, with effect from 
the date on which the adoption order takes effect, and on and from such date all the ties of the ch ild in the 
family of his or her birth shall stand severed and replaced by those created by the adoption order in the 
adoptive family:  
Provided that any property which has vested in the adopted child immediately before the date on 
which the adoption order t akes effect shall continue to vest in the adopted child subject to the obligations, 
if any, attached to the ownership of such property including the obligations, if any, to maintain the 
relatives in the biological family.  
64. Reporting of adoption .—Notwith standing anything contained in any other law for the time being 
in force, information regarding all adoption orders issued by the concerned courts, shall be forwarded to 
Authority on monthly basis in the manner as provided in the adoption regulations frame d by the 
Authority, so as to enable Authority to maintain the data on adoption.  
65. Specialised Adoption Agencies .—(1) The State Government shall recognise one or more 
institutions or organisations in each district as a Specialised Adoption Agency, in such  manner as may be 
provided in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority, for the rehabilitation of orphan, abandoned 
or surrendered children, through adoption and non -institutional care.  
(2) The State Agency shall furnish the name, address and conta ct details of the Specialised Adoption 
Agencies along with copies of certificate or letter of recognition or renewal to Authority, as soon as the 
recognition or renewal is granted to such agencies.  
(3) The State Government shall get every Specialised Adopt ion Agency inspected at least once in a 
year and take necessary remedial measures, if required.  
(4) In case any Specialised Adoption Agency is in default in taking necessary steps on its part as 
provided in this Act or in the adoption regulations framed by  the Authority, for getting an orphan or 
abandoned or surrendered child legally free for adoption from the Committee or in completing the home 
study report of the prospective adoptive parents or in obtaining adoption order from the court within the 
stipula ted time, such Specialised Adoption Agency shall be punishable with a fine which may extend up 
to fifty thousand rupees and in case of repeated default, the recognition of the Specialised Adoption 
Agency shall be withdrawn by the State Government.  
66. Adop tion of children residing in institutions not registered as adoption agencies .—(1) All the 
institutions registered under this Act, which may not have been recognised as Specialised Adoption 
Agencies, shall also ensure that all orphan or abandoned or surren dered children under their care are 33 
 reported, produced and declared legally free for adoption, by the Committee as per the provisions of 
section 38.  
(2) All institutions referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall develop formal linkages with nearby 
Specialised A doption Agency and shall furnish details of the children declared legally free for adoption to 
that Specialised Adoption Agency along with all relevant records in the manner as may be prescribed, for 
the placement of such children in adoption.  
(3) If any s uch institution contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), it shall be 
liable to fine of fifty thousand rupees for each instance to be imposed by the registering authority and it 
may also attract de -recognition in the event of persistent flouting of such provisions.  
67. State Adoption Resource Agency .—(1) The State Government shall set up a State Adoption 
Resource Agency for dealing with adoptions and related matters in the State under the guidance of 
Authority.  
(2) The State Ag ency, wherever already exists, shall be deemed to be set up under this Act.  
68. Central Adoption Resource Authority .—The Central Adoption Resource Agency existing 
before the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have been constituted as the Central Adoption 
Resource Authority under this Act to perform the following functions, namely: — 
(a) to promote in -country adoptions and to facilitate inter -State adoptions in co -ordination with 
State Agency;  
(b) to regulate inter -country adoptions;  
(c) to frame re gulations on adoption and related matters from time to time as may be necessary;  
(d) to carry out the functions of the Central Authority under the Hague Convention on Protection 
of Children and Cooperation in respect of Inter -country Adoption;  
(e) any othe r function as may be prescribed.  
69. Steering Committee of Authority .—(1) The Authority shall have a Steering Committee with 
following members:  
(a) Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government of India, who shall be 
the Chairperson —ex officio ; 
(b) Joint Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government of India, dealing 
with Authority —ex officio ; 
(c) Joint Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government of India, dealing 
with Finance —ex officio ; 
(d) one State  Adoption Resource Agency and two Specialised Adoption Agencies;  
(e) one adoptive parent and one adoptee;  
(f) one advocate or a professor having at least ten years of experience in family law;  
(g) Member -Secretary, who shall also be Chief Executive Officer  of the organisation.  
(2) Criteria for the selection or nomination of the Members mentioned at ( d) to ( f), their tenure as well 
as the terms and conditions of their appointment shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Steering Committee shall have the f ollowing functions, namely: — 
(a) to oversee the functioning of Authority and review its working from time to time so that it 
operates in most effective manner;  
(b) to approve the annual budget, annual accounts and audit reports as well as the action plan a nd 
annual report of Authority;  34 
 (c) to adopt the recruitment rules, service rules, financial rules of Authority as well as the other 
regulations for the exercise of the administrative and programmatic powers within the organisation, 
with the prior approval of the Central Government;  
(d) any other function that may be vested with it by the Central Government from time to time.  
(4) The Steering Committee shall meet once in a month in the manner as may be prescribed.  
(5) The Authority shall function from its headquarter and through its regional offices as may be set up 
as per its functional necessity.  
70. Powers of Authority .—(1) For the efficient performance of its functions, Authority shall have 
the following powers, namely: — 
(a) to issue instructions to any  Specialised Adoption Agency or a Children Home or any child 
care institution housing any orphan, abandoned or surrendered child, any State Agency or any 
authorised foreign adoption agency and such directions shall be complied by such agencies;  
(b) recomme nding to the concerned Government or Authority to take appropriate action against 
any official or functionary or institution under its administrative control, in case of persistent non -
compliance of the instructions issued by it;  
(c) forwarding any case of  persistent non -compliance of its instructions by any official or 
functionary or institution to a Magistrate having jurisdiction to try the same and the Magistrate to 
whom any such case is forwarded shall proceed to hear the same as if the case has been fo rwarded to 
him under  section 346  of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974);  
(d) any other power that may be vested with it by the Central Government.  
(2) In case of any difference of opinio n in an adoption case, including the eligibility of prospective 
adoptive parents or of a child to be adopted, the decision of Authority shall prevail.  
71. Annual Report of Authority .—(1) The Authority shall submit an annual report to the Central 
Government  in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual report of Authority to be laid before each House 
of Parliament.  
72. Grants by Central Government .—(1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation 
made by Parl iament by law in this behalf, pay to the Authority by way of grants such sums of money as 
the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for performing the functions of Authority under 
this Act.  
(2) The Authority may spend such sums of money as it  thinks fit for performing the functions, as 
prescribed under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the grants referred 
to in sub -section ( 1). 
73. Accounts and audit of Authority .—(1) The Authority shall maintain proper acc ounts and other 
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of Authority shall be audited by th e Comptroller and Auditor -General at such 
intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be 
payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor -General.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General and any person appointed by him in connection with the 
audit of the accounts of the Authority under this Act shall, have the same rights and privileges and the 
Authority in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the rig ht to 
demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to 
inspect any of the offices of Authority.  
(4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General or any other 
person appo inted by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually 
to the Central Government by the Authority.  35 
 (5) The Central Government shall cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
received, before e ach House of Parliamen t. 
CHAPTER IX  
OTHER OFFENCES AGAINST CHILDREN  
74. Prohibition on disclosure of identity of children .—(1) No report in any newspaper, magazine, 
news -sheet or audio -visual media or other forms of communication regarding any inquiry or investigation 
or judicial procedure, shall disclose the name, address or school or any other particular, which may lead to 
the identification of a child in conflict with law or a child in need of care and protection or a child victim 
or witness of a crime,  involved in such matter, under any other law for the time being in force, nor shall 
the picture of any such child be published:  
Provided that for reasons to be recorded in writing, the Board or Committee, as the case may be, 
holding the inquiry may permit  such disclosure, if in its opinion such disclosure is in the best interest of 
the child.  
(2) The Police shall not disclose any record of the child for the purpose of character certificate or 
otherwise in cases where the case has been closed or disposed of . 
(3) Any person contravening the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to six months or fine which may extend to two lakh rupees or both.  
75. Punishment for cruelty to child .—Whoever, having the ac tual charge of, or control over, a 
child, assaults, abandons, abuses, exposes or wilfully neglects the child or causes or procures the child to 
be assaulted, abandoned, abused, exposed or neglected in a manner likely to cause such child unnecessary 
mental or physical suffering, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
years or with fine of one lakh rupees or with both:  
Provided that in case it is found that such abandonment of the child by the biological parents is due to 
circumstances beyond their control, it shall be presumed that such abandonment is not wilful and the 
penal provisions of this section shall not apply in such cases:  
Provided further that if such offence is committed by any person employed by or managing an 
organisation, which is entrusted with the care and protection of the child, he shall be punished with 
rigorous imprisonment which may extend up to five years, and fine which may extend up to five lakhs 
rupees:  
Provided also that on account of the aforesaid  cruelty, if the child is physically incapacitated or 
develops a mental illness or is rendered mentally unfit to perform regular tasks or has risk to life or limb, 
such person shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment, not less than three years but wh ich may be 
extended up to ten years and shall also be liable to fine of five lakhs rupees.  
76. Employment of child for begging .—(1) Whoever employs or uses any child for the purpose of 
begging or causes any child to beg shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
five years and shall also be liable to fine of one lakh rupees:  
Provided that, if for the purpose of begging, the person amputates or maims the child, he shall be 
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term not less than seven years which may extend up to ten 
years, and shall also be liable to fine of five lakh rupees.  
(2) Whoever, having the actual charge of, or control over the child, abets the commission of an 
offence under sub -section ( 1), shall be punish able with the same punishment as provided for in sub -
section ( 1) and such person shall be considered to be unfit under sub -clause ( v) of clause ( 14) of                  
section 2:  
Provided that the said child, shall not be considered a child in conflict wi th law under any 
circumstances, and shall be removed from the charge or control of such guardian or custodian and 
produced before the Committee for appropriate rehabilitation.  
77. Penalty for giving intoxicating liquor or narcotic drug or psychotropic subs tance to a 
child .—Whoever gives, or causes to be given, to any child any intoxicating liquor or any narcotic drug or 36 
 tobacco products or psychotropic substance, except on the order of a duly qualified medical practitioner, 
shall be punishable with rigorous  imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and shall also 
be liable to a fine which may extend up to one lakh rupees.  
78. Using a child for vending, peddling, carrying, supplying or smuggling any intoxicating 
liquor, narcotic drug or psychotr opic substance .—Whoever uses a child, for vending, peddling, 
carrying, supplying or smuggling any intoxicating liquor, narcotic drug or psychotropic substance, shall 
be liable for rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and shall a lso be liable to 
a fine up to one lakh rupees.  
79. Exploitation of a child employee .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time 
being in force, whoever ostensibly engages a child and keeps him in bondage for the purpose of 
employment or wit hholds his earnings or uses such earning for his own purposes shall be punishable with 
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine of one 
lakh rupees.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the term “employment ” shall also include selling 
goods and services, and entertainment in public places for economic gain.  
80. Punitive measures for adoption without following prescribed procedures .—If any person or 
organi sation offers or gives or receives, any orphan, abandoned or surrendered child, for the purpose of 
adoption without following the provisions or procedures as provided in this Act, such person or 
organisation shall be punishable with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend 
upto three years, or with fine of one lakh rupees, or with both:  
Provided in case where the offence is committed by a recognised adoption agency, in addition to the 
above punishment awarded to the persons in -charge o f, and responsible for the conduct of the day -to-day 
affairs of the adoption agency, the registration of such agency under section 41 and its recognition under 
section 65 shall also be withdrawn for a minimum period of one year.  
81. Sale and procurement of  children for any purpose .—Any person who sells or buys a child for 
any purpose shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years 
and shall also be liable to fine of one lakh rupees:  
Provided that where such offence i s committed by a person having actual charge of the child, 
including employees of a hospital or nursing home or maternity home, the term of imprisonment shall not 
be less than three years and may extend up to seven years.  
82. Corporal punishment .—(1) Any person in -charge of or employed in a child care institution, who 
subjects a child to corporal punishment with the aim of disciplining the child, shall be liable, on the first 
conviction, to a fine of ten thousand rupees and for every subsequent offence, sh all be liable for 
imprisonment which may extend to three months or fine or with both.  
(2) If a person employed in an institution referred to in sub -section ( 1), is convicted of an offence 
under that sub -section, such person shall also be liable for dismiss al from service, and shall also be 
debarred from working directly with children thereafter.  
(3) In case, where any corporal punishment is reported in an institution referred to in sub -section ( 1) 
and the management of such institution does not cooperate wi th any inquiry or comply with the orders of 
the Committee or the Board or court or State Government, the person in -charge of the management of the 
institution shall be liable for punishment with imprisonment for a term not less than three years and shall 
also be liable to fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.  
83. Use of child by militant groups or other adults .—(1) Any non -State, self -styled militant group 
or outfit declared as such by the Central Government, if recruits or uses any child for any purpose, shall 
be liable for rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to 
fine of five lakh rupees.  
(2) Any adult or an adult group uses children for illegal activities either individually or as a gang shall 
be liable for rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to 
fine of five lakh rupees.  37 
 84. Kidnapping and abduction of child .—For the purposes of this Act, the provisions of sections 
359 to 369 of the Indian Pe nal Code (45 of 1860), shall mutatis mutandis  apply to a child or a minor who 
is under the age of eighteen years and all the provisions shall be construed accordingly.  
85. Offences committed on disabled children .—Whoever commits any of the offences referre d to in 
this Chapter on any child who is disabled as so certified by a medical practitioner, then, such person shall 
be liable to twice the penalty provided for such offence.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this Act, the term “disability ” shall have the same meaning as 
assigned to it under clause ( i) of section 2  of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, 
Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 (1 of 1996).  
86 Classification of offences and designated court .—(1) Where an offence under this Act is 
punishable with imprisonment for a term more than seven years, then, such offence shall be cognizable, 
non-bailable and triable by a Children ’s Court.  
(2) Where an offence under this Act is punishable with imprisonment for a term of three years and 
above, but not more than seven years, then, such offence shall be cognizable, non -bailable and triable by a 
Magistrate of First Class.  
(3) Where an offence, under this Act , is punishable with imprisonment for less than three years or 
with fine only, then, such offence shall be non -cognizable, bailable and triable by any Magistrate.  
87. Abetment .—Whoever abets any offence under this Act, if the act abetted is committed in 
consequence of the abetment, shall be punished with the punishment provided for that offence.  
Explanation. —An act or offence is said to be committed in consequence of abetment, when it is 
committed in consequence of the instigation, or in pursuance of the conspiracy or with the aid, which 
constitutes the abetment.  
88. Alternative punishment .—Where an act or omission constitutes an offence punishable under this 
Act and also under any other law for the time being in force, then, notwithstanding anything conta ined in 
any such law, the offender found guilty of such offence shall be liable for punishment under such law 
which provides for punishment which is greater in degree.  
89. Offence committed by child under this Chapter .—Any child who commits any offence und er 
this Chapter shall be considered as a child in conflict with law under this Act.  
CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
90. Attendance of parent or guardian of child .—The Committee or the Board, as the case may be, 
before which a child is brought under any of the provisions of this Act, may, whenever it so thinks fit, 
require any parent or guardian having the actual charge of the child to be present at any proceeding in 
respect of that child.  
91. Dispensing with attendance of child .—(1) If, at any stage during the course of an inquiry, the 
Committee or the Board is satisfied that the attendance of the child is not essential for the purpose of 
inquiry, the Committee or the Board, as the case may be, shall dispense with the attendance of a child and 
limit the same for  the purpose of recording the statement and subsequently, the inquiry shall continue 
even in the absence of the child concerned, unless ordered otherwise by the Committee or the Board.  
(2) Where the attendance of a child is required before the Board or the  Committee, such child shall be 
entitled to travel reimbursement for self and one escort accompanying the child as per actual expenditure 
incurred, by the Board, or the Committee or the District Child Protection Unit, as the case may be.  
92. Placement of a  child suffering from disease requiring prolonged medical treatment in an 
approved place .—When a child, who has been brought before the Committee or the Board, is found to 
be suffering from a disease requiring prolonged medical treatment or physical or men tal complaint that 
will respond to treatment, the Committee or the Board, as the case may be, may send the child to any 
place recognised as a fit facility as prescribed for such period as it may think necessary for the required 
treatment.  38 
 93. Transfer of a  child who is mentally ill or addicted to alcohol or other drugs .—(1) Where it 
appears to the Committee or the Board that any child kept in a special home or an observation home or a 
Children ’s Home or in an institution in pursuance of the provisions of th is Act, is a mentally ill person or 
addicted to alcohol or other drugs which lead to behavioural changes in a person, the Committee or the 
Board, may order removal of such child to a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home in 
accordance with the p rovisions of the Mental Health Act, 1987 (14 of 1987) or the rules made thereunder.  
(2) In case the child had been removed to a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home under 
sub-section ( 1), the Committee or the Board may, on the basis of the advi ce given in the certificate of 
discharge of the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home, order to remove such child to an 
Integrated Rehabilitation Centre for Addicts or similar centres maintained by the State Government for 
mentally ill persons ( including the persons addicted to any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance) and 
such removal shall be only for the period required for the inpatient treatment of such child.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, — 
(a) “Integrated Rehabilitation Centre for Addicts ” shall have the meaning assigned to it under the 
scheme called “Central Sector Scheme of Assistance for Prevention of Alcoholism and Substance 
(Drugs) Abuse and for Social Defence Services ” framed by the Central Government  in the Ministry 
of Social Justice and Empowerment or any other corresponding scheme for the time being in force;  
(b) “mentally ill person ” shall have the same meaning assigned to it in clause ( l) of section 2  of 
the Mental Health Act, 1987 (14 of 1987);  
(c) “psychiatric hospital ” or “psychiatric nursing home ” shall have the same meaning assigned to 
it in clause ( q) of section 2  of the Mental Health Act, 1987 (14 of 1987).  
94. Presumption and determination of age .—(1) Where, it is obvious to the Committee or the 
Board, based on the appearance of the person brought before it under any of the provisions of this Act 
(other than for the purpose of giving evidence) that the said person is a child, the Committee or the Board 
shall record such observation stating the age of the child as nearly as may be and proceed with the inquiry 
under section 14 or section 36, as the case may be, without waiting for  further confirmation of the age.  
(2) In case, the Committee or the Board has reasonable grounds for doubt regarding whether the 
person brought before it is a child or not, the Committee or the Board, as the case may be, shall undertake 
the process of age determination, b y seeking evidence by obtaining — 
(i) the date of birth certificate from the school, or the matriculation or equivalent certificate from 
the concerned examination Board, if available; and in the absence thereof;  
(ii) the birth certificate gi ven by a corporation or a municipal authority or a panchayat;  
(iii) and only in the absence of ( i) and ( ii) above, age shall be determined by an ossification test or 
any other latest medical age determination test conducted on the orders of the Committee o r the 
Board:  
Provided such age determination test conducted on the order of the Committee or the Board shall be 
completed within fifteen days from the date of such order.  
(3) The age recorded by the Committee or the Board to be the age of person so brought  before it shall, 
for the purpose of this Act, be deemed to be the true age of that person.  
95. Transfer of a child to place of residence .—(1) If during the inquiry it is found that a child hails 
from a place outside the jurisdiction, the Board or Committe e, as the case may be, shall, if satisfied after 
due inquiry that it is in the best interest of the child and after due consultation with the Committee or the 
Board of the child ’s home district, order the transfer of the child, as soon as possible, to the said 
Committee or the Board, along with relevant documents and following such procedure as may be 
prescribed:  
Provided that such transfer can be made in case of a child in conflict with law, only after the inquiry 
has been completed and final order passed by the Board:  39 
 Provided further that in case of inter -State transfer, the child shall be, if convenient, handed over to 
the Committee or the Board, as the case may be, of the home district of the child, or to the Committee or 
the Board in the capital city o f the home State.  
(2) Once the decision to transfer is finalised, the Committee or Board, as the case may be, shall give 
an escort order to the Special Juvenile Police Unit to escort the child, within fifteen days of receiving such 
order:  
Provided that a g irl child shall be accompanied by a woman police officer:  
Provided further that where a Special Juvenile Police Unit is not available, the Committee or Board, 
as the case may be, shall direct the institution where the child is temporarily staying or District Child 
Protection Unit, to provide an escort to accompany the child during travel.  
(3) The State Government shall make rules to provide for travelling allowance to the escorting staff 
for the child, which shall be paid in advance.  
(4) The Committee  or the Board, as the case may be, receiving the transferred child will process for 
restoration or rehabilitation or social re -integration, as provided in this Act.  
96. Transfer of child between Children ’s Homes, or special homes or fit facility or fit per son in 
different parts of India .—(1) The State Government may at any time, on the recommendation of a 
Committee or Board, as the case may be, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, and keeping the 
best interest of the child in mind, order the chil d’s transfer from any Children ’s Home or special home or 
fit facility or fit person, to a home or facility, within the State with prior intimation to the concerned 
Committee or the Board:  
Provided that for transfer of a child between similar home or facili ty or person within the same 
district, the Committee or Board, as the case may be, of the said district shall be competent to issue such 
an order.  
(2) If transfer is being ordered by a State Government to an institution outside the State, this shall be 
done only in consultation with the concerned State Government.  
(3) The total period of stay of the child in a Children ’s Home or a special home shall not be increased 
by such transfer.  
(4) Orders passed under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be deemed to be ope rative for the Committee or 
the Board, as the case may be, of the area to which the child is sent.  
97. Release of a child from an institution .—(1) When a child is kept in a Children ’s Home or 
special home, on a report of a probation officer or social worker or of Government or a voluntary or non -
governmental organisation, as the case may be, the Committee or the Board may consider, the release of 
such child, either absolutely or on such conditions as it may think fit to impose, permitting the child to 
live with parents or guardian or under the supervision of any authorised person named in the order, 
willing to receive and take charge, educate and train the child, for some useful trade or calling or to look 
after the child for rehabilitation:  
Provided th at if a child who has been released conditionally under this section, or the person under 
whose supervision the child has been placed, fails to fulfil such conditions, the Board or Committee may, 
if necessary, cause the child to be taken charge of and to b e placed back in the concerned home.  
(2) If the child has been released on a temporary basis, the time during which the child is not present 
in the concerned home in pursuance of the permission granted under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be 
part of th e time for which the child is liable to be kept in the children or special home:  
Provided that in case of a child in conflict with law fails to fulfil the conditions set by the Board as 
mentioned in sub -section ( 1), the time for which he is still liable to  be kept in the institution shall be 
extended by the Board for a period equivalent to the time which lapses due to such failure.  
98. Leave of absence to a child placed in an institution .—(1) The Committee or the Board, as the 
case may be, may permit leave of absence to any child, to allow him, on special occasions like 
examination, marriage of relatives, death of kith or kin or accident or serious illness of parent or any 40 
 emergency of like nature, under supervision, for a period generally not exceeding seve n days in one 
instance, excluding the time taken in journey.  
(2) The time during which a child is absent from an institution where he is placed, in pursuance of 
such permission granted under this section, shall be deemed to be part of the time for which he  is liable to 
be kept in the Children ’s Home or special home.  
(3) If a child refuses, or has failed to return to the Children ’s Home or special home, as the case may 
be, on the leave period being exhausted or permission being revoked or forfeited, the Boar d or Committee 
may, if necessary, cause him to be taken charge of and to be taken back to the concerned home:  
Provided that when a child in conflict with law has failed to return to the special home on the leave 
period being exhausted or on permission bein g revoked or forfeited, the time for which he is still liable to 
be kept in the institution shall be extended by the Board for a period equivalent to the time which lapses 
due to such failure.  
99. Reports to be treated as confidential .—(1) All reports rela ted to the child and considered by the 
Committee or the Board shall be treated as confidential:  
Provided that the Committee or the Board, as the case may be, may, if it so thinks fit, communicate 
the substance thereof to another Committee or Board or to the child or to the child ’s parent or guardian, 
and may give such Committee or the Board or the child or parent or guardian, an opportunity of 
producing evidence as may be relevant to the matter stated in the report.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the victim shall not be denied access to their case 
record, orders and relevant papers.  
100. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government, or the State Govern ment or any person acting under the directions of 
the Central Government or State Government, as the case may be, in respect of anything which is done in 
good faith or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rules or regulations made thereun der. 
101. Appeals .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, any person aggrieved by an order made by 
the Committee or the Board under this Act may, within thirty days from the date of such order, prefer an 
appeal to the Children ’s Court, except for decis ions by the Committee related to Foster Care and 
Sponsorship After Care for which the appeal shall lie with the District Magistrate:  
Provided that the Court of Sessions, or the District Magistrate, as the case may be, may entertain the 
appeal after the exp iry of the said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented 
by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time and such appeal shall be decided within a period of 
thirty days.  
(2) An appeal shall lie against an order of the B oard passed after making the preliminary assessment 
into a heinous offence under section 15 of the Act, before the Court of Sessions and the Court may, while 
deciding the appeal, take the assistance of experienced psychologists and medical specialists othe r than 
those whose assistance has been obtained by the Board in passing the order under the said section.  
(3) No appeal shall lie from, — 
(a) any order of acquittal made by the Board in respect of a child alleged to have committed an 
offence other than the heinous offence by a child who has completed or is above the age of sixteen 
years; or  
(b) any order made by a Committee in respect of finding that a person is not a child in need of 
care and protection.  
(4) No second appeal shall lie from any order of the Court of Session, passed in appeal under this 
section.  
(5) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Children ’s Court may file an appeal before the High 
Court in accordance with the procedure specified in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  41 
 102. Revision .—The High Court may, at any time, either on its own motion or on an application 
received in this behalf, call for the record of any proceeding in which any Committee or Board or 
Children ’s Court, or Court has passed an order, for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality or 
propriety of any such order and may pass such order in relation thereto as it thinks fit:  
Provided that the High Court shall not pass an order under this section prejudicial to any person 
without giving him a reasona ble opportunity of being heard.  
103. Procedure in inquiries, appeals and revision proceedings .—(1) Save as otherwise expressly 
provided by this Act, a Committee or a Board while holding any inquiry under any of the provisions of 
this Act, shall follow such  procedure as may be prescribed and subject thereto, shall follow, as far as may 
be, the procedure laid down in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) for trial of summons 
cases.  
(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided by or under this Act, the procedure to be followed in 
hearing appeals or revision proceedings under this Act shall be, as far as practicable, in accordance with 
the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
104. Power of the Committee or the Board to amend its  own orders .—(1) Without prejudice to 
the provisions for appeal and revision contained in this Act, the Committee or the Board may, on an 
application received in this behalf, amend any orders passed by itself, as to the institution to which a child 
is to b e sent or as to the person under whose care or supervision a child is to be placed under this Act:  
Provided that during the course of hearing for amending any such orders, there shall be at least two 
members of the Board of which one shall be the Principal  Magistrate and at least three members of the 
Committee and all persons concerned, or their authorised representatives, whose views shall be heard by 
the Committee or the Board, as the case may be, before the said orders are amended.  
(2) Clerical mistakes in orders passed by the Committee or the Board or errors arising therein from 
any accidental slip or omission may, at any time, be corrected by the Committee or the Board, as the case 
may be, either on its own motion or on an application received in this b ehalf.  
105. Juvenile justice fund .—(1) The State Government may create a fund in such name as it thinks 
fit for the welfare and rehabilitation of the children dealt with under this Act.  
(2) There shall be credited to the fund such voluntary donations, contributions or subscriptions as may 
be made by any individual or organisation.  
(3) The fund created under sub -section ( 1) shall be administered by the Department of the State 
Government implementing this Act in such manner and for such purposes as may be  prescribed.  
106. State Child Protection Society and District Child Protection Unit .—Every State Government 
shall constitute a Child Protection Society for the State and Child Protection Unit for every District, 
consisting of such officers and other employ ees as may be appointed by that Government, to take up 
matters relating to children with a view to ensure the implementation of this Act, including the 
establishment and maintenance of institutions under this Act, notification of competent authorities in 
relation to the children and their rehabilitation and co -ordination with various official and non -official 
agencies concerned and to discharge such other functions as may be prescribed.  
107. Child Welfare Police Officer and Special Juvenile Police Unit .—(1) In every police station, at 
least one officer, not below the rank of assistant sub -inspector, with aptitude, appropriate training and 
orientation may be designated as the child welfare police officer to exclusively deal with children either 
as victims or perpetrators, in co -ordination with the police, voluntary and non -governmental 
organisations.  
(2) To co -ordinate all functions of police related to children, the State Government shall constitute 
Special Juvenile Police Units in each district and city, hea ded by a police officer not below the rank of a 
Deputy Superintendent of Police or above and consisting of all police officers designated under sub -
section ( 1) and two social workers having experience of working in the field of child welfare, of whom 
one s hall be a woman.  42 
 (3) All police officers of the Special Juvenile Police Units shall be provided special training, 
especially at induction as child welfare police officer, to enable them to perform their functions more 
effectively.  
(4) Special Juvenile Poli ce Unit also includes Railway police dealing with children.  
108. Public awareness on provisions of Act .—The Central Government and every State 
Government, shall take necessary measures to ensure that — 
(a) the provisions of this Act are given wide publicity  through media including television, radio 
and print media at regular intervals so as to make the general public, children and their parents or 
guardians aware of such provisions;  
(b) the officers of the Central Government, State Government and other conce rned, persons are 
imparted periodic training on the matters relating to the implementation of the provisions of this Act.  
109. Monitoring of implementation of Act .—(1) The National Commission for Protection of Child 
Rights constituted under  section 3 , or as the case may be, the State Commission for Protection of Child 
Rights constituted under  section 17  (herein referred to as the National Comm ission or the State 
Commission, as the case may be), of the Commissions for Protection of Child rights Act, 2005                    
(4 of 2006), shall, in addition to the functions assigned to them under the said Act, also monitor the 
implementation of the  provisions of this Act, in such manner, as may be prescribed.  
(2) The National Commission or, as the case may be, the State Commission, shall, while inquiring 
into any matter relating to any offence under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in th e National 
Commission or the State Commission under the Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 (4 
of 2006).  
(3) The National Commission or, as the case may be, the State Commission, shall also include its 
activities under this section, in the  annual report referred to in  section 16  of the Commissions for 
Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 (4 of 2006).  
110. Power to make rules .—(1) The State Government shall, by notification in the Off icial Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act:  
Provided that the Central Government may, frame model rules in respect of all or any of the matters 
with respect to which the State Government is required to make rules and where any such mod el rules 
have been framed in respect of any such matter, they shall apply to the State mutatis mutandis  until the 
rules in respect of that matter are made by the State Government and while making any such rules, they 
conform to such model rules.  
(2) In par ticular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(i) manner of inquiry in case of a missing or run away child or whose parents cannot be found 
under sub -claus e (vii) of clause ( 14) of section 2;  
(ii) responsibilities of the Child Welfare Officer attached to a Children ’s Home under clause ( 17) 
of section 2;  
(iii) qualifications of the members of the Board under sub -section ( 2) of section 4;  
(iv) induction training and sensitisation of all members of the Board under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 4;  
(v) term of office of the members of the Board and the manner in which such member may resign 
under sub -section ( 6) of section 4;  
(vi) time of the meetings of the Bo ard and the rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of 
business at its meeting under sub -section ( 1) of section 7;  
(vii) qualifications, experience and payment of fees of an interpreter or translator under clause ( d) 
of sub -section ( 3) of section 8 ; 
(viii) any other function of the Board under clause ( n) of sub -section ( 3) of section 8;  43 
 (ix) persons through whom any child alleged to be in conflict with law may be produced before 
the Board and the manner in which such a child may be sent to an observ ation home or place of safety 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 10;  
(x) manner in which a person apprehended and not released on bail by the officer -in-charge of the 
police station may be kept in an observation home until such person is brought before a Boa rd under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 12;  
(xi) format for information on pendency in the Board to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or the Chief 
Metropolitan Magistrate and District Magistrate on quarterly basis under sub -section ( 3) of                       
section 16;  
(xii) monitoring procedures and list of monitoring authorities under sub -section ( 2) of section 20;  
(xiii) manner in which the relevant records of the child may be destroyed by the Board, police or 
the court under sub -section ( 2) of section 24;  
(xiv) qualifications of the members of the Child Welfare Committee under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 27;  
(xv) rules and procedures with regard to transaction of business at the meetings of the Child 
Welfare Committee under sub -section ( 1) of section 28;  
(xvi) process of restoration of abandoned or lost children to their families under clause ( x) of 
section 30;  
(xvii) manner of submitting the report to the Committee and the manner of sending and entrusting 
the child to Children ’s Home or fit facility or fit per son under sub -section ( 2) of section 31;  
(xviii) manner of holding an inquiry by the Child Welfare Committee under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 36;  
(xix) manner in which a child may be sent to a Specialised Adoption Agency if the child is below 
six years of age, Children ’s Home or to a fit facility or person or foster family, till suitable means of 
rehabilitation are found for the child including manner in which situation of the child placed in a 
Children ’s Home or with a fit facility or person or foster fami ly, may be reviewed by the Committee 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 36;  
(xx) manner in which a quarterly report may be submitted by the Committee to the District 
Magistrate for review of pendency of cases under sub -section ( 4) of section 36;  
(xxi) any ot her order related to any other function of the Committee under clause ( iii) of                      
sub-section ( 2) of section 37;  
(xxii) information to be given every month by the Committee to State Agency and Authority 
regarding number of children declar ed legally free for adoption and number of cases pending under 
sub-section ( 5) of section 38;  
(xxiii) manner in which all institutions under this Act shall be registered under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 41;  
(xxiv) procedure for cancelling or withholding re gistration of an institution that fails to provide 
rehabilitation and re -integration services under sub -section ( 7) of section 41;  
(xxv) manner in which information shall be sent every month by the open shelter to the District 
Child Protection Unit and Committee under sub -section ( 3) of section 43;  
(xxvi) procedure for placing children in foster care including group foster care under                       
sub-section ( 1) of section 44;  
(xxvii ) procedure for inspection of children in foster care under sub -section ( 4) of section 44;  
(xxviii ) manner in which foster family shall provide education, health and nutrition to the child 
under sub -section ( 6) of section 44;  44 
 (xxix) procedure and criteria in which foster care services shall be provided to children und er sub -
section ( 7) of section 44;  
(xxx) format for inspection of foster families by the Committee to check the well being of 
children under sub -section ( 8) of section 44;  
(xxxi) purpose of undertaking various programmes of sponsorship of children, such as individual 
to individual sponsorship, group sponsorship or community sponsorship under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 45;  
(xxxii ) duration of sponsorship under sub -section ( 3) of section 45;  
(xxxiii ) manner of providing financial support to any child leaving i nstitutional care on 
completing eighteen years of age under section 46;  
(xxxiv ) management and monitoring of observation homes, including the standards and various 
types of services to be provided by them for rehabilitation and social integration of a chil d alleged to 
be in conflict with law and the circumstances under which, and the manner in which, the registration 
of an observation home may be granted or withdrawn under sub -section ( 3) of section 47;  
(xxxv) management and monitoring of special homes incl uding the standards and various types of 
services to be provided to them under sub -section ( 2) and sub -section ( 3) of section 48;  
(xxxvi ) monitoring and management of children ’s homes including the standards and the nature of 
services to be provided by the m, based on individual care plans for each child under sub -section  (3) 
of section 50;  
(xxxvii ) manner in which a Board or the Committee shall recognise, a facility being run by a 
Governmental organisation or a voluntary or non -governmental organisation registered under any law 
for the time being in force, fit to temporarily take the responsibility of a child for a specific purpose 
after due inquiry regarding the suitability of the facility and the organisation to take care of the child 
under sub -section (1) of section 51;  
(xxxviii ) procedure of verification of credentials, for recognising any person fit to temporarily 
receive a child for care, protection and treatment of such child for a specified period by the Board or 
the Committee under sub -section ( 1) of section 52;  
(xxxix ) manner in which services shall be provided by an institution under this Act for 
rehabilitation and re -integration of children and standards for basic requirements such as food, shelter, 
clothing and medical attention under sub -section (1) of section 53;  
(xl) manner in which Management Committee shall be set up by each institution for management 
of the institution and monitoring of the progress of every child under sub -section ( 2) of section 53;  
(xli) activities that may be taken up b y children ’s committees under sub -section ( 3) of section 53;  
(xlii) appointment of inspection committees for all institutions registered or recognised fit, for the 
State and district under sub -section ( 1) of section 54;  
(xliii) manner in which Central Government or State Government may independently evaluate the 
functioning of the Board, Committee, special juvenile police units, registered institutions, or 
recognised fit facilities and persons, including the period and through persons or institutions un der 
sub-section ( 1) of section 55;  
(xliv) manner in which institutions shall furnish details of children declared legally free for 
adoption to the Specialised Adoption Agency under sub -section ( 2) of section 66;  
(xlv) any other function of the Authority un der clause ( e) of section 68;  
(xlvi) criteria for the selection or nomination of the Members of the Steering Committee of the 
Authority and their tenure as well as the terms and conditions of their appointment under                         
sub-section ( 2) of section 69;  45 
 (xlvii) manner in which Steering Committee of the Authority shall meet under sub -section ( 4) of 
section 69;  
(xlviii ) manner in which the Authority shall submit an annual report to the Central Government 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 71;  
(xlix) functions of the Authority under sub -section ( 2) of section 72;  
(l) manner in which the Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and 
prepare an annual statement of accounts under sub -section ( 1) of section 73;  
(li) period t hat the Committee or Board may think necessary for the treatment of children who are 
found to be suffering from a disease requiring prolonged medical treatment or physical or mental 
complaint that will respond to treatment to a fit facility under section 9 2; 
(lii) procedure for transfer of child under sub -section ( 1) of section 95;  
(liii) provision for travelling allowance to the escorting staff for the child under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 95;  
(liv) procedure to be followed by the Committee or a Board while holding any inquiry, appeal or 
revision under sub -section ( 1) of section 103;  
(lv) manner in which juvenile justice fund shall be administered under sub -section ( 3) of                
section 105;  
(lvi) functioning of the Child Protection Society for the State and Child Protection Units for every 
district under section 106;  
(lvii) to enable the National Commission, or as the case may be, the State Commission to monitor 
implementation of the provisions of this Act under sub -section ( 1) of section 109;  
(lviii) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period o f thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, 
the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be ; so, however, that any such modification or annulm ent shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule or regulation.  
(4) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before the State Legislature.  
111. Repea l and savings .—(1) The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000                 
(56 of 2000) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Acts shall be 
deemed to have been done or  taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
112. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, r emove 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) However, order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House o f Parliament.  
--------------------------The National Waterways Act, 2016--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL WATERWAYS ACT, 2016  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Existing national waterways and declaration of certain inland waterways as national waterways.  
3. Declaration as to expediency of control and development by Union of waterways specified in 
Schedule for certain purposes.  
4. Amendment of section 2 of Act 82 of 1985.  
5. Repeal of certain enactments and saving.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
  2 
 THE NATIONAL WATERWAYS ACT, 2016  
ACT NO. 17 OF 2016  
[25th March , 2016 .] 
An Act  to make provisions for existing national waterways and to provide for the declaration of 
certain inland waterways to be national waterways and also to provide for the regulation and 
development of the said waterways for the purposes of shipping and naviga tion and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the National Waterways Act, 2016.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Existing national waterways and declaration of certain inland waterways as national 
waterways .—(1) The existing national waterways spec ified at serial numbers 1 to 5 in the Schedule along 
with their limits given in column ( 3) thereof, which have been declared as such under the Acts referred to 
in sub -section ( 1) of section 5, shall, subject to the modifications made under this Act, contin ue to be 
national waterways for the purposes of shipping and navigation under this Act.  
(2) The regulation and development of the waterways referred to in sub -section ( 1) which have been 
under the control of the Central Government shall continue, as if the  said waterways are declared as 
national waterways under the provisions of this Act.  
(3) The inland waterways specified at serial numbers 6 to 111 in the Schedule along with their limits 
given in column ( 3) thereof are hereby declared to be national waterw ays for the purposes of shipping and 
navigation.  
3. Declaration as to expediency of control and development by Union of waterways specified in 
Schedule for certain purposes .—Save as provided in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 2, it is hereby 
declared that it is expedient in the public interest that the Union should take under its control the 
regulation and development of the waterways specified in the Schedule for the purposes of shipping and 
navigation to the extent provided in the Inland Waterways Au thority of India Act, 1985 (82 of 1985).  
4. Amendment of section 2 of Act 82 of 1985 .—In the Inland Waterways Authority of India              
Act, 1985 , in section 2 , for clause ( h), the following  clause shall be substituted, namely: — 
„(h) “national waterway ” means the inland waterway declared by section 2 of the National 
Waterways Act, 2016, to be a national waterway.  
Explanation. —If Parliament declares by law any other waterway to be a national waterway, then, 
from the date on which such declaration takes effect, such other waterway — 
(i) shall also be deemed to be a national waterway within the meaning of this clause; and  
(ii) the provisions of this Act shall, with necessary modifications (including modification for 
construing any reference to the commencement of this Act as a reference to the date aforesaid), 
apply to such national waterway; ‟. 
5. Repeal of certain enactments and s aving .—(1) The following Acts, namely: — 
(a) the National Waterway (Allahabad -Haldia Stretch of the Ganga Bhagirathi -Hooghly River) 
Act, 1982 (49 of 1982);  
(b) the National Waterway (Sadiya -Dhubri Stretch of Brahmaputra River) Act, 1988                            
(40 of 1988);  
                                                           
1. 12th April, 2016, vide notification No. S .O. 1384  (E), dated 1 1th April, 2016 , see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3 (ii). 
 3 
 (c) the National Waterway (Kollam -Kottapuram Stretch of West Coast Canal and Champakara 
and Udyogmandal Canals) Act, 1992 (25 of 1992);  
(d) the National Waterway (Talcher -Dhamra Stretch of Rivers, Geonkhali -Charbatia Stretch of 
East Coa st Canal, Charbatia -Dhamra Stretch of Matai River and Mahanadi Delta Rivers) Act, 2008 
(23 of 2008); and  
(e) the National Waterway (Kakinada -Puducherry Stretch of Canals and the Kaluvelly Tank, 
Bhadrachalam -Rajahmundry Stretch of River Godavari and Wazirabad -Vijayawada Stretch of River 
Krishna) Act, 2008 (24 of 2008),   
are hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Acts referred to in                 
sub-section ( 1), in so far as they are in conformi ty with the provisions of this Act, shall be deemed to have 
been done or omitted to be done or taken or not taken under the provisions of this Act.  
  4 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 2)  
Sl. No.  National Waterways  Limits of the National Waterways  
(1) (2) (3) 
 1. National Waterway 1  Allahabad -Haldia Stretch of the Ganga —Bhagirathi -Hooghly 
Rivers with the following limits, namely: — 
From road bridge at Allahabad across the river Ganga, about                 
2 kilometres upstream of the confluence of the rivers Ganga  and 
Yamuna at Triveni to the inland waterway limit on the tidal 
waters of the river Hooghly from a line drawn between No. 1 
Refuge house at the entrance to Baratola river commonly called 
channel creek, to a position 2.5 kilometres due south of Saugor 
lighthouse, and then connected to the right or south bank at the 
entrance to the Hijili or Russulpore river, through river Ganga, 
lock canal and feeder canal at Farakka, river Bhagirathi and river 
Hooghly.  
2. National Waterway 2  Sadiya -Dhubri  Stretch of Brahmaputra River with the following 
limits, namely: — 
From a line drawn across the Brahmaputra river from the point on 
the north bank of the Kundil river at its confluence with the 
Brahmaputra river near Sadiya to the beginning of the river isl and 
Majuli and therefrom through all the channels of the Brahmaputra 
river on either side of the river island Majuli up to the end of the 
river island Majuli and then up to the international border                  
down stream of Dhubri.  
3. National Waterway 3  Kollam -Kozhikode Stretch of West Coast Canal and Champakara 
and Udyogmandal Canals with the following limits, namely: — 
The northern limit of the West Coast Canal shall be Kozhikode at 
Lat 11°13 ‟39”N, Lon 75°46 ‟44”E and the southern limit shall be 
a line drawn across the Ashtamudi KayaI at a distance of 100 
metres south of Kollam jetty.  
The Champakara Canal starting from the confluence with the 
West Coast Canal and ending at the railway bridge (railway 
siding for Co chin Oil Refinery) near Fertilisers and Chemicals 
Travancore Limited, boat basin.  
The Udyogmandal Canal starting from the confluence with West 
Coast Canal and ending at the Padalarn road bridge                     
(Eloor -Edayar).  
  5 
 (1) (2) (3) 
 4. National Waterway 4  Kakinada -Puducherry Stretch of Canals and the Kaluvelly Tank, 
Nashik -Bhadrachalam -Rajahmundry Stretch of River Godavari 
and Bridge near village Galagali -Wazirabad -Vijayawada Stretch 
of River Krishna with the following limits, namely: — 
Kakinada -Puducherry canal  
(Canal system consisting of Kakinada canal, Eluru canal, 
Commamur canal and North Buckingham canal, portion of the 
Coovum river linking North and South Buckingham canals, 
South Buckingham canal and Kaluvelly tank)  
Northern limit: A  line drawn across the Kakinada canal parallel 
to the Jagannadhapuram road bridge, Kakinada at a distance of 
500 metres down stream at Lat 16°  56‟ 24” N, Lon 82°  14‟20”E;  
Southern limit: Junction of East Coast Highway and 
Chinnakalawari -Kanakachettikulam r oad at Kanakachettikulam 
which is the end point of the artificial canal link to Kaluvelly tank 
at Lat 20°  0‟ 07” N, Lon 79°  52‟ 12” E.  
River Godavari  
Western limit: Road bridge on Mumbai -Agra Highway at Nashik 
across river Godavari at Lat  20° 0‟ 07” N, Lon 73°  48‟ 12” E;  
Eastern limit: Sir Arthur Cotton barrage across river Godavari at 
Dowlaiswaram, Rajahmundry at Lat 16°  56‟ 05” N, Lon 81°  45‟ 
32” E.  
River Krishna  
Western limit: Bridge near village Galagali Lat 16°25‟ 28” N, 
Lon 75°26‟19”  E. 
Eastern limit: Prakasam barrage across river Krishna at 
Vijayawada at Lat 16°  30‟ 18” N, Lon 80°  36‟ 23” E.  
 5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 National Waterway 5  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talcher -Dhamra Stretch of Brahmani -Kharsua -Tantighai -Pandua 
Nala -Dudhei Nala -Kani Dhamra -river system, Geonkhali -
Charbatia Stretch of East Coast Canal, Charbatia -Dhamra Stretch 
of Matai River and Mahanadi Delta Rivers with the following 
limits, namely: — 
East Coast Canal and Matai river  (Consisting of old Hijli tidal 
canal, Orissa coast canal and Matai river)   
Northern limit: Confluence point of Hooghly river and Hijli tidal 
canal at Geonkhali at Lat 22°12‟ 20” N, Lon 88°  03‟ 07” E;  
Southern limit: Confluence of Matai river and Dhamra river near 
Dhamra Fishing harbour at Lat  20° 47‟ 42” N, Lon 86°  53‟            
03” E.  
 6 
 (1) (2) (3) 
Brahmani -Kharsua -Dhamra river system  (Consisting of 
Brahmani -Kharsua -Tantighai -Pandua  Nala -Dudhei Nala -Kani -
Dhamra rivers)  
North -Western limit: Samal barrage across river Brahmani, 
Talcher at Lat 21o 04‟ 26” N, Lon 86o 08‟ 05” E;  
South -Eastern limit: An imaginary line drawn across Dhamra 
river at East Point of Kalibhanj Dian Reserved Forest near 
Chandnipal at Lat 20o46‟ 26” N, Lon 86o 57‟ 15” E.  
Mahanadi delta rivers  (Consisting of Hansua river, Atharabank i 
Creek, Nuna nala, Gobri nala, Kharnasi river and Mahanadi river)  
(Alternate route -Hansua river enters into Bay of Bengal through 
northern point of False point bay, then enters river Kharnasi at 
southern end of False point bay, river Atharabanki, a northe rnly 
distributory of river Mahanadi)  
Northern limit: Confluence of Kharsua river with Brahmani river 
at Ramchandrapur at Lat 20o 36‟ 55”N, Lon 86o 45‟ 05” E;  
Southern limit: An imaginary line in continuation to the Northern 
break water structure across the  entrance channel at Paradip Port 
at Lat 20o15‟ 38”N, Long 86o‟ 40‟ 55” E.  
 6. National Waterway 6  Aai River:  
Upstream of Bridge at Adalguri No. 3 at Lat 26o33‟32”N, Lon 
90o34‟01”E to confluence with Brahmaputra river at Lat 
26o12‟50”N, Lon 90o36‟24”E (4.7km upstream of Naranarayan 
Setu at Jogighopa).  
 7. National Waterway 7  Ajoy (Ajay) River:  
Bridge on Morgram -Panagarh State Highway No. 14 at 
Illambazar Lat 23o36‟56”N, Lon 87o31‟58”E to confluence of 
river Ajoy with river Bhagirathi at Lat 23o39‟23”N, Lon 
88o07‟57”E at Katwa.  
 8. National Waterway 8  Alappuzha -Changanassery Canal : 
Boat Jetty, Alappuzha at Lat 9o30‟03”N, Lon 76o20‟37”E to 
Changanassery Jetty at Lat 9o26‟42”N, Lon 76o31‟42”E.  
 9. National Waterway 9  Alappuzha -Kottayam Athirampuzha Canal : 
Boat Jetty, Alappuzha at Lat 9o30‟03”N, Lon 76o20‟37”E to 
Athirampuzha market Lat 9o40‟04”N, Lon 76o31‟54”E.  
    7 
  (1) (2) (3) 
 10. National Waterway 10  Amba River : 
Arabian Sea, Dharamtaar creed near village Revas at Lat 
18o50‟15”N, Lon 72o56‟31”E to a Bridge near Nagothane ST 
Stand at Lat 18o32‟20”N, Lon 73o08‟0”E.  
 11. National Waterway 11  Arunawati Aran River System : 
Bridge on State Highway No. 211 at Lat 20o13‟33”N, Lon 
77o33‟23”E to confluence of Arunawati and Aran rivers near 
Ratanapur village at Lat 19o59‟31”N, Lon 78o09‟38”E                       
to confluence of Aran and Penganga rivers near Chimata village 
at Lat 19o54‟08”N, Lon 78o12‟36”E.  
 12. National Waterway 12  Asi River : 
Ganga river confluence at Assi Ghat , Varanasi at Lat 
25o17‟19”N, Lon 83o 0‟25”E to near Newada, Varanasi at Lat 
25o16‟37”N, Lon 82o 58‟18”E.  
 13. National Waterway 13  AVM Canal : 
Poovar Beach at Lat 8o18‟30”N, Lon 77o04‟45”E to 
Erayumanthurai Bus Stop at Lat 8o14‟54”N, Lon 77o09‟34”E.  
 14. National Waterway 14  Baitarni River : 
Dattapur village at Lat 20o51‟45”N, Lon 86o 33‟30”E to 
confluence with Dhamra river near Laxmiprasad Dia at Lat 
20o45‟13” N, Lon 86o 49‟15”E.  
 15. National Waterway 15  Bakreswar Mayurakshi River System : 
Bakreswar  river from Nil Nirjan Dam at Lat 23o49‟31”N, Lon 
87o24‟59”E to confluence of Bakreswar and Mayurakshi rivers 
near Talgram village at Lat 23o 51‟58”N, Lon 88o02‟21”E.  
Mayurakshi river from Talgram village to confluence with 
Dwarka river near Dakshin Hijal village at Lat 23o 58‟22”N, Lon 
88o09‟21”E.  
 16. National Waterway 16  Barak River : 
Lakhipur Ferry Ghat Lat 24o47‟18”N, Lon 93o01‟16”E to Tuker 
Gram Lat 24o52‟34”N, Lon 92o29‟21”E.  
 17. National Waterway 17  Beas River : 
Talwara Barrage at Lat 31o57‟22”N, Lon 75o53‟37”E to 
confluence of Beas and Sutlej rivers near Harike at Lat 
31o09‟09”N, Lon 74o58‟08”E.  
 18. National Waterway 18  Beki River : 
Elenagamari Lat 26o38‟37”N, Lon 90o59‟02”E to Brahmaputra 
confluence at Lat 26o14‟24”N, Lon 90o47‟ 21”E.  8 
 (1) (2) (3) 
 19. National Waterway 19  Betwa River : 
Rirwa Buzurg Dariya at Lat 25o54‟17”N, Lon 79o45‟06”E to 
confluence of Betwa and Yamuna rivers near Merapur Daria 
village at Lat 25o55‟11”N, Lon 80o13‟08”E.  
 20. National Waterway 20  Bhavani River : 
Bhavani Sagar  Dam, Sathyamangalam at Lat 11o28‟16”N, Lon 
77o06‟49”E to confluence of Bhavani and Kaveri rivers at Kaveri 
river bridge on Salem -Coimbatore Highway: “National  
Highway -47 Lat 11o25‟54”N, Lon 77o41‟02”E.  
 21. National Waterway 21  Bheema River : 
Barrage ( approx 1 km . from Hippargi village) at Lat 17o09‟05”N, 
Lon 76o46‟34”E to confluence of Bheema and Krishna rivers at 
Gundloor Lat 16o24‟28”N, Lon 77o17‟13”E.  
 22. National Waterway 22  Birupa Badi Genguti Brahmani River System : 
Birupa Barrage at Choudwar at  Lat 20o30‟49”N, Lon 85o55‟20”E 
to Confluence of Birupa and Brahmani rivers near Upperkai Pada 
village at Lat 20o37‟36”N, Lon 86o24‟19”E including alternative 
route from, Samaspur village Lat 20o35‟41”N, Lon 86o06‟32”E to 
near Kharagpur village Lat 20o38‟ 28”N, Lon 86o17‟32”E.  
Bramani river from confluence of Birupa and Brhmani rivers near 
Upperkai Pada village at Lat 20o37‟36”N, Lon 86o24‟19”E to 
Bramani river at Katana Lat 20o39‟26”N, Lon 86o44‟53”E.  
 23. National Waterway 23  Budha Balanga River : 
Barrage  (approx 300m from Patalipura village) at Lat 
21o38‟13”N, Lon 86o50‟53”E to confluence of Budha Balanga 
river with Bay of Bengal at Chandipur Fishing Port Lat 
21o28‟12”N, Lon 87o04‟12”E.  
 24. National Waterway 24  Chambal River : 
Chambal road bridge on National Highway -92 Lat 26o41‟56”N, 
Lon 78o56‟09”E to confluence of Chambal and Yamuna rivers at 
Charakpura village Lat 26o29‟30”N, Lon 79o15‟01”E. 
 25. National Waterway 25  Chapora River : 
Bride at State Highway No. 124 (1  Km. from Maneri village) Lat 
15o‟42‟47”N. Lon 73o57‟23”E to Confluence of Chapora river 
with Arabian Sea at Morjim Lat 15o36‟33”N, Lon 73o44‟01”E.  
 26. National Waterway 26  Chenab River : 
Chenab road bridge at Lat 33o05‟07”N, Lon 74o48‟06”E to 
Bridge near Bhardakalan at Lat 32o48‟12”N, Lon 74o34‟53”E.  9 
 (1) (2) (3) 
 27. National Waterway 27  Cumberjua River : 
Confluence of Cumberjua and Zuvari rivers near Cortalim ferry 
terminal Lat 15o24‟40”N, Lon 73o54‟48”E to confluence of 
Cumberjua and Mandovi  rivers near Sao Martias Vidhan 
Parishad Lat 15o31‟26”N, Lon 73o55‟34”E.  
 28. National Waterway 28  Dabhol Creek Vashishti River : 
Arabian Sea at Dabhol Lat 17o34‟51”N, Lon 73o09‟18”E to 
bridge at Pedhe Lat 17o32‟39”N, Lon 73o30‟36”E.  
 29. National Waterway 29  Damodar River : 
Krishak Setu, Bardhman on State Highway No. 8 at Lat 
23o12‟40”N, Lon 87o50‟54”E to confluence with Hooghly river 
near Purbha Basudebpur at Lat 22o21‟01”N, Lon 88o05‟19”E.  
 30. National Waterway 30  Dehing River : 
Rail Bridge at Me rbil Majuli No. 1 Lat 27o19‟25”N, Lon 
95o18‟45”E to confluence of Dehing and Brahmaputra rivers near 
village Lachan at Lat 27o15‟10”N, Lon 94o40‟01”E.  
 31. National Waterway 31  Dhansiri/Chathe River : 
Bridge near Morongi T.E. village Lat 26o24‟41”N, Lon 
93o53‟47”E to Numaligarh Lat 26o42‟01”N, Lon 93o35‟15”E.  
 32. National Waterway 32  Dikhu River : 
Bridge at Nazira on State Highway No 1 Lat 26o55‟18”N, Lon 
94o44‟27”E to confluence of Dikhu and Brahmaputra rivers at 
Lat 26o59‟58”N, Lon 94o27‟42”E.  
 33. National Waterway 33  Doyans River : 
Bridge near Sialmari Lat 26o10‟47”N, Lon 93o59‟10”E to 
confluence of Doyans and Subansiri rivers at Lat 26o26‟53”N, 
Lon 93o57‟12”E.  
 34. National Waterway 34  DVC Canal : 
Durgapur Barrage Lat 23o28‟47”N, Lon 87o18‟19”E to 
Confluence point of DVC canal with Hoogly river near Tribeni 
Lat 23o0‟31”N, Lon 88o24‟55”E.  
 35. National Waterway 35  Dwarakeswar River : 
Bridge near Abantika Lat 23o06‟55”N, Lon 87o18‟47”E to 
confluence of Dwarakeswar and Silai rivers at Pratap pur Lat 
22o40‟17”N, Lon 87o46‟43”E.  
 36. National Waterway 36  Dwarka River : 
Bridge at Tarapith at Lat 24o06‟58”N, Lon 87o47‟51”E to 
confluence with Bhagirathi river near Maugram village at Lat 
23o43‟53”N, Lon 88o10‟51”E.  10 
 (1) (2) (3) 
 37. National Waterway 37  Gandak River : 
Bhaisaslotal Barrage near Triveni Ghat at Lat 27o26‟22”N, Lon 
83o54‟24”E to Gandak and Ganga rivers confluence at Hajipur 
Lat 25 39o18‟N, Lon 85o10‟28”E.  
 38. National Waterway 38  Gangadhar River : 
Pakriguri Bridge on National Hig hway -31C at Lat 26o27‟30”N, 
Lon 89o51‟25”E to Bangladesh Border at Binnachara Point III 
Lat 26o0‟32”N, Lon 89o49‟57”E.  
 39. National Waterway 39  Ganol River : 
Bangladesh Border at Mankachar Lat 25o31‟47”N, Lon 
89o51‟24”E to bridge near Dolbari at Lat 25o34‟20”N, Lon 
90o03‟46”E.  
 40. National Waterway 40  Ghaghra River : 
Faizabad at Lat 26o47‟51”N, Lon 82o06‟46”E to Ghaghra and 
Ganga river confluence at Manjhi Ghat Lat 25o44‟13”N, Lon 
84o42‟03”E.  
 41. National Waterway 41  Ghataprabha River : 
Barrage near Malali Lat 16o20‟01”N, Lon 75o11‟23”E to 
confluence with river Krishna at Chicksangam Lat 16o20‟13”N, 
Lon 75o47‟54”E.  
 42. National Waterway 42  Gomti River : 
Bara Imambara, Lucknow Lat 26o52‟21”N, Lon 80o54‟58”E to 
confluence of Gomti with river Ganga Lat 25o30‟31”N, Lon 
83o10‟17”E.  
 43. National Waterway 43  Gurupur River : 
Confluence of Netravathi river at Lat 12o50‟44”N, Lon 
74o49‟45”E to confluence of Mangalore Port Bridge at Lat 
12o55‟35”N, Lon 74o49‟37”E.  
 44. National Waterway 44  Ichamati River : 
Bridge on Border Main Road at Gobra near Bangladesh Border at 
Lat 22o53‟50”N, Lon 88o53‟49”E to near Bangladesh Border at 
Bansjhari Mallikpur Lat 22o39‟07”N, Lon 88o55‟35”E.  
 45. National Waterway 45  Indira Gandhi Canal : 
Harike Barrage at Lat 31o08‟33”N, Lon 74o56‟57”E to near 
Mohangarh Lat 27o18‟37”N, Lon 71o09‟10”E.  
 46. National Waterway 46  Indus River : 
Bridge on highway at Upshi village Lat 33o49‟43”N, Lon 
77o48‟56”E to Bridge on Shey -Chuchol road near Shey village 
Lat 34o03‟35”N, Lon 77o38‟33”E.  11 
 (1) (2) (3) 
 47. National Waterway 47  Jalangi River : 
Bridge on State Highway No. 14 near Plashipara at Lat 
23o47‟47”N, Lon 88o27‟09”E to confluence of Jalangi with 
Hooghly/Bhagirathi rivers at Nabadwip Lat 23o24‟39”N, Lon 
88o22‟48”E.  
 48. National Waterway 48 Jawai -Luni Rivers and Rann of Kutch :  
Jawai river from Jalore at Lat 25o20‟37”N, Lon 72o41‟09”E to 
Luni river near G andhav village to Rann of Kutch  at Lat 
23o32‟54”N, Lon 68o22‟27”E.  
 49. National Waterway 49  Jhelum River : 
Bridge on highway at Lat 33o49‟26”N, Lon 75o03‟50”E to Wuler 
lake, Srinagar at Lat 34o21‟37”N, Lon 74o36‟36”E.  
 50. National Waterway 50  Jinjiram River : 
Confluence with Brahmaputra river at Tumni Lat 25o51‟51”N, 
Lon 89o58‟57”E to Fulerchar Point. III at Brahmaputra river Lat 
25o44‟15”N, Lon 89o52‟53”E.  
 51. National Waterway 51  Kabini River : 
Kabini Dam Lat 11o58‟25”N, Lon 76o21‟10”E to Beeramballi at 
Lat 11o56‟10”N, Lon 76o14‟18”E.  
 52. National Waterway 52  Kali River : 
Kodasalli Dam Lat 14o55‟08”N, Lon 74o32‟07”E to confluence 
of Kali river with Arabian Sea near Sadashivgad bridge at Lat 
14o50‟31”N, Lon 74o07‟21”E.  
 53. National Waterway 53  Kalyan -Thane -Mumbai Waterway, Vasai  
Creek and Ulhas River : 
Arabian Sea at Navi Mumbai Lat 18o55‟50”N, Lon 72o53‟22”E 
via Ulhas river to bridge on State Highway No. 76 near Malegaon 
T. Waredi Lat 19o02‟38”N, Lon 73o19‟54”E;  
Bridge on Kalyan -Badlapur road near Kalyan railway yard at 
Kalyan Lat 19o14‟06”N, Lon 73o08‟49”E to Kalyan Lat 
19o15‟35”N, Lon 73o09‟28”E;  
Vasai Creek from Lat 19o18‟54”N to Lon 72o47‟30”E to Kasheli 
at Lat 19o13‟23”N, Lon 73o0‟21”E.  
 54. National Waterway 54  Karamnasa River : 
Bridge at Kakarait Lat 25o18‟11”N, Lon 83o31‟38”E to 
confluence of Karamnasa and Ganga rivers at Kutubpur Lat 
25o31‟06”N , Lon 83o52‟47”E.  
 55. National Waterway 55  Kaveri Kollidam River : 
Uratchikottai Barrage at Lat 11o29‟03”N, Lon 77o42‟14”E to 
confluence of river Kollidam with Bay of Bengal at Pazhaiyar 
Lat 11o21‟38”N, Lon 79o49‟53”E.  12 
 (1) (2) (3) 
 56. National Waterway  56 Kherkai River : 
Dam near Gangia village at Lat 22o45‟12”N, Lon 86o05‟09”E to 
confluence with Subarnrekha river at Jamshedpur Lat 
22o50‟13”N, Lon 86o09‟37”E.  
 57. National Waterway 57  Kopili River : 
Bridge at Banthai Gaon Tinali Bus Stop at Lat 26o10‟41”N, Lon 
92o13‟05”E to confluence with Brahmaputra river at Chandrapur 
No. 2 Lat 26o15‟07”N, Lon 91o56‟49”E.  
 58. National Waterway 58  Kosi River : 
Kosi Barrage at Hanuman Nagar Lat 26o31‟40”N, Lon 
86o55‟29”E to Confluence of Kosi with Ganga river at Kursela 
Lat 25o24‟40”N, Lon 87o15‟14”E.  
 59. National Waterway 59  Kottayam -Vaikom Canal : 
Kottayam, near Kodimatha at Lat 9o34‟39”N, Lon 76o31‟08”E to 
Vechoor joining National Waterway No. 3 at Lat 9o40‟0”N, Lon 
76o24‟11”E.  
 60. National Waterway 60  Kumar i River : 
Dam near Amruhasa village at Lat 23o06‟37”N, Lon 86o15‟51”E 
to Mukutmanipur Dam at Chiada Lat 22o57‟18”N, Lon 
86o44‟43”E.  
 61. National Waterway 61  Kynshi River : 
Bangladesh Border near Mawpyllum Lat 25o12‟07”N, Lon 
91o15‟21”E to bridge on Nonghyllam -Maweit road at Lat 
25o19‟35”N, Lon 91o04‟07”E.  
 62. National Waterway 62  Lohit River : 
Parasuram Kund at 27o52‟40”N, Lon 96o21‟40”E to Saikhowa 
Ghat, Sadiya Lat 27o47‟49”N, Lon 95o38‟14”E.  
 63. National Waterway 63  Luni River : 
Dam at Jaswantpura Lat 26o13‟35”N, Lon 73o41‟20”E to Barrage 
near Malipura Lat 24o57‟04”N, Lon 71o38‟02”E.  
 64. National Waterway 64  Mahanadi River : 
Sambalpur Barrage at Lat 21o27‟34”N, Lon 83o57‟50”E to 
Paradip at Lat 20o19‟38”N, Lon 86o40‟17”E.  
 65. National Waterway 65  Mahananda River : 
Bridge near Gosaipur at Lat 25o26‟41”N, Lon 88o05‟26”E to 
Bangladesh Border near Adampur at Lat 24o57‟17”N, Lon 
88o10‟59”E.  
 66. National Waterway 66  Mahi River : 
Kadana Dam Lat 23o18‟22”N, Lon 73o49‟37”E to confluence 
with Gulf of Khambhat near Kavi railway station Lat 
22o10‟35”N, Lon 72o30‟36”E.  
 67. National Waterway 67  Malaprabha River : 
Jakanuru at Lat 15o49‟51”N, Lon 75o38‟54”E to confluence with 
river Krishna at Kudalasangama Lat 16o12‟30”N, Lon 
76o04‟16”E.  
   13 
 (1) (2) (3) 
 68. National Waterway 68  Mandovir River : 
Bridge at Usgaon at Lat 15o26‟42”N, Lon 74o03‟12”E to 
confluence of Mandovi river with Arabian Sea at Reis Magos Lat 
15o28‟32”N, Lon 73o46‟46”E.  
 69. National Waterway 69  Manimutharu River : 
Manimutharu Dam Lat 8o39‟14”N, Lon 77o24‟47”E to 
confluence with Tramaraparani river near Aladiur Lat 8o41‟03”N, 
Lon 77o26‟07”E.  
 70. National Waterway 70  Manjara River : 
Singur Dam at Lat 17o44‟58”N, Lon 77o55‟41”E to confluence 
with ri ver Godavari at Kandakurthi at Lat 18o49‟07”N, Lon 
77o52‟20”E.  
 71. National Waterway 71  Mapusa/Moide River : 
Bridge on National Highway -17 at Mapusa Lat 15o35‟21”N, Lon 
73o49‟17”E to confluence point of Mapusa and Mandovi rivers at 
Porvorim Lat 15o30‟20”N, Lon 73o50‟42”E.  
 72. National Waterway 72  Nag River : 
Bridge near NIT Colony, Nagpur Lat 21o06‟17”N, Lon 
79o06‟03”E to confluence with river Kanhan near Sawangi 
village at Lat 21o05‟38”N, Lon 79o27‟54”E.  
 73. National Waterway 73  Narmada River : 
Pandhariya at Lat 21o57‟10”N, Lon 74o08‟27”E to confluence of 
Narmada with Arabian Sea at Gulf of Khambhat Lat 21o38‟27”N, 
Lon 72o33‟28”E.  
 74. National Waterway 74  Netravathi River : 
Netravathi Dam, Dharmsthala Lat 12o57‟55”N, Lon 75o22‟10”E 
to confluence with Arabian sea at Bengre Lat 12o50‟43”N, Lon 
74o49‟29”E.  
 75. National Waterway 75  Palar River:  
Rail bridge at Virudampattu, Vellore at Lat 12o56‟14”N, Lon 
79o07‟30”E to confluence with Bay of Bengal at 
Sadurangapattinam Lat 12o27‟52”N, Lon 80o09‟13”E.  
 76. National Waterway 76  Panchagangavali (Panchagangoli) River:  
Gangoli Port at Lat 13o38‟01”N, Lon 74o40‟08”E to Bridge at 
Badakere at Lat 13o44‟50”N, Lon 74o39‟15”E.  
 77. National Waterway 77  Pazhyar River : 
Bridge near Veeranarayana Mangalam village at Lat 8o13‟49”N, 
Lon 77o26‟27”E to confluence with Arabian Sea at Manakudi at 
Lat 8o05‟15”N, Lon 77o29‟08”E.  
 78. National Waterway 78  Penganga Wardha River System : 
Confluence of Aran and Penganga rivers near Chimata villag e at 
Lat 19o54‟08”N, Lon 78o12‟36”E to the confluence of Wardha 
and Pranahita rivers near Ravalli village at Lat 19o33‟59”N, Lon 
79o49‟0”E.  14 
 (1) (2) (3) 
 79. National Waterway 79  Pennar River : 
Penna Barrage, Pothireddypalem at Lat 14o28‟08”N, Lon 
79o59‟09”E to confluence with Bay of Bengal near Kudithipalem 
at Lat 14o35‟37”N, Lon 80o11‟31”E.  
 80. National Waterway 80  Ponniyar River : 
Sathanur Dam at Lat 12o11‟0”N, Lon 78o51‟01”E to Cuddalore at 
confluence of Bay of Bengal at Lat 11o46‟22”N, Lon 
79o47‟42”E.  
 81. National Waterway 81  Punpun River : 
Bridge on National Highway -83 near Pakri village Lat 
25o29‟50”N, Lon 85o06‟19”E to confluence with river Ganga at 
Fatuha Lat 25o30‟50”N, Lon 85o18‟17”E.  
 82. National Waterway 82  Puthimari River : 
Bridge on National Highway -31 near village Ghopla at Lat 
26o22‟01”N, Lon 91o39‟11”E to confluence with Brahmaputra 
river near Bamunbori at Lat 26o15‟28”N, Lon 91o20‟35”E.  
 83. National Waterway 83  Rajpuri Creek : 
Arabian Sea at Rajpuri Lat 18o18‟03”N, Lon 72o56‟43”E to 
Mhasala at Lat 18o08‟15”N, Lon 73o06‟45”E.  
 84. National Waterway 84  Ravi River : 
Dam at Gandhiar Lat 32o35‟51”N, Lon 75o59‟05”E to Ranjeet 
Sagar Dam at Basoli Lat 32o26‟36”N, Lon 75o43‟45”E.  
85. National Waterway 85  Revadanda Creek Kundalika River System : 
Arabian Sea at Revadanda Lat 18o32‟20”N, Lon 72o55‟33”E to 
bridge on Roha -Astami Road near Roha Nagar Lat 18o26‟32”N, 
Lon 73o07‟11”E.  
 86. National Waterway 86  Rupnarayan River : 
Confluence of Dwarakeswar and Silai rivers at Pratappur Lat 
22o40‟17”N, Lon 87o46‟43”E to confluence with Hooghly river 
at Geonkhali Lat 22o12‟42”N, Lon 88o03‟14”E.  
 87. National Waterway 87  Sabarmati River : 
Barrage near Sadoliya Lat 23o26‟50”N, Lon 72o48‟35”E to 
confluence with Gulf of Khambhat near  Khambhat Lat 
22o09‟18”N, Lon 72o27‟28”E.  
 88. National Waterway 88  Sal River:  
Orlim Deusa Bridge Lat 15o13‟11”N, Lon 73o57‟30”E to 
confluence with Arabian Sea at Mobor Lat 15o08‟32”N, Lon 
73o57‟0”E.  
 89. National Waterway 89  Savitri River (Bankot  Creek):  
Bridge near Sape at Lat 18o05‟54”N, Lon 73o20‟09”E to Arabian 
Sea at Bankot Lat 17o58‟47”N, Lon 73o01‟45”E.  
 90. National Waterway 90  Sharavati River:  
Honnavar Port Sea Mouth at Lat 14o17‟56”N, Lon 74o25‟27”E to 
link at highway at Gersoppa Lat 14o14‟15”N, Lon 74o39‟06”E.  15 
 (1) (2) (3) 
 91. National Waterway 91  Shastri River Jaigad Creek:  
Sangmeshwar at Lat 17o11‟16”N, Lon 73o33‟03”E to confluence 
with Arabian Sea at Jaigad Lat 17o19‟12”N, Lon 73o12‟39”E.  
 92. National Waterway 92  Silabati River:  
Barrage near Shimulia village at Lat 22o34‟53” N, Lon 
87o38‟31”E to confluence of Dwarakeswar and Silai rivers at 
Pratappur Lat 22o40‟17”N, Lon 87o46‟43”E.  
 93. National Waterway 93  Simsang River:  
Bangladesh Border at Lat 25o11‟05”N, Lon 90o39‟25”E to bridge 
on National Highway -62 near Nongalbibra Lat 25o27‟20”N, Lon 
90o42‟22”E.  
 94. National Waterway 94  Sone River:  
Sone Barrage near Dehri at Lat 24o50‟14” N, Lon 84o08‟03”E to 
confluence of Sone and Ganga rivers at Lat 25o42‟15”N, Lon 
84o52‟02”E.  
 95. National Waterway 95  Subansiri River:  
Gerukamukh Lat 27o27‟03” N, Lon 94o15‟16”E to Brahmaputra 
confluence at Lat 26o52‟25”N, Lon 93o54‟31”E.  
 96. National Waterway 96  Subarnrekha River:  
Chandil Dam at Lat 22o58‟29” N, Lon 86o01‟14”E to confluence 
with Bay of Bengal at Lat 21o33‟29”N, Lon 87o22‟59”E.  
 97. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 National Waterway 97  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sunderbans Waterways:  
(i) Namkhana at Lat 21o45‟46” N, Lon 88o13‟06”E to Athara 
Banki Khal Lat 21o56‟57”N, Lon 89o05‟32”E;  
(ii) Bidya River: Lot No. 124 at Lat 21o54‟43” N, Lon 
88o41‟08”E to near Uttar Danga at Lat 22o11‟48”N, Lon 
88o51‟55”E;  
(iii) Chhota Kalagachi (Chhoto Kalergachi ) River : 
Near Rajani ferry ghat Lat 22o19‟57” N, Lon 88o54‟21”E to near 
Nazat at Lat 22o26‟05”N, Lon 88o50‟12”E;  
(iv) Gomar River : Near Ramkrishnapur Lat 22o11‟53” N, Lon 
88o44‟42”E to near Gosaba Kheya ghat at Lat 22o10‟05”N, Lon 
88o47‟37”E;  
(v) Haribhanga River : Bangladesh Border Lat 21o53‟19” N, Lon 
89o01‟24 ”E to confluence with Jhila river at Lat 21o58‟18”N, Lon 
88o55‟08”E;  
(vi) Hogla  (Holgal )-Pathankhali  River : Near Parandar Lat 
22o12‟22” N, Lon 88o40‟43”E to near Sandeshkhai Ferry Ghat at 
Lat 22o21‟12”N, Lon 88o52‟48”E;  
(vii) Kalindi  (Kalandi ) River : Bangl adesh Border at Hingalganj 
Lat 22o28‟08” N, Lon 88o59‟46”E to Bangladesh Border near 
Khosbash at Lat 22o24‟41”N, Lon 88o58‟21”E;  
(viii) Katakhali  River : Bangladesh Border near Barunhat Lat 
22o30‟31” N, Lon 88o58‟25”E to Lebukhali ferry at Lat 
22o21‟45”N, Lon 88o57‟30”E;  16 
 (1) 
 
 
 
 
 (2) 
 
 
 
 
 (3) 
(ix) Matla River : Bay of Bengal at Lat 21o33‟04” N, Lon 
88o38‟26”E to Canning ferry ghat at Lat 22o18‟39”N, Lon 
88o40‟43”E;  
(x) Muri Ganga (Baratala ) River : Bay of Bengal near 
Bisalakshmipur Lat 21o37‟52” N, Lon 88o10‟0”E to near 
Kakdwi p at Lat 21o52‟17”N, Lon 88o09‟08”E;  
(xi) Raimangal  River : Hemnagar at Lat 22o11‟41” N, Lon 
88o58‟01”E to Rajnagar at Lat 22o33‟57”N, Lon 88o56‟17”E;  
(xii) Sahibkhali  (Sahebkhali ) River : Near Ramapur Lat 22o17‟52” 
N, Lon 88o56‟35”E to Bangladesh Border nea r Khosbash at Lat 
22o24‟41”N, Lon 88o58‟21” E; 
(xiii) Saptamukhi River : Bay of Bengal at Henry Island Lat 
21o34‟57” N, Lon 88o19‟08”E to near Chintamanipur at Lat 
21o51‟14”N, Lon 88o18‟41”E;  
(xiv) Thakurran River: Bay of Bengal at Lat 21o33‟32” N, Lon 
88o27‟45”E to Madhabpur at Lat 22o02‟52”N, Lon 88o33‟28”E;  
 98. National Waterway 98  Sutlej River : 
Sunni Road Bridge at Lat 31o14‟45” N, Lon 77o07‟34”E to 
Harike Dam at Lat 31o08‟33”N, Lon 74o56‟57”E.  
 99. National Waterway 99  Tamaraparani River : 
Sulochana Mudalir bridge, Tirunelveli Lat 8o43‟43” N, Lon 
77o42‟54”E to confluence with Bay of Bengal near Punnaikayal 
at Lat 8o38‟25”N, Lon 78o07‟38”E.  
100. National Waterway 100  Tapi River : 
Hatnur Dam Near Mangalwadi Lat 21o04‟22”N, Lon75o56‟45”E 
to Gulf of Khambhat (Arabian Sea) at Lat 21o02‟16”N, Lon 
72o39‟30”E.  
101. National Waterway 101  Tizu and Zungki Rivers : 
Longmatra at Lat 25o46‟12”N, Lon 94o44‟35”E to Avanghku at 
Myanmar border Lat 25o35‟03”N, Lon 94o53‟06”E and in Zungki 
river from bridge at Lat 25o48‟26”N, Lon 94o46‟36”E to 
confluence of Zungki and Tizu rivers at Lat 25o46‟58”N, Lon 
94o45‟21”E.  
102. National Waterway 102  Tlwang  (Dhaleswari River ): 
Khamrang near National Highway -54 Lat 23o55‟22”N, Lon 
92o39‟08”E to Bridge on National Highway -154 at Gharmura Lat 
24o17‟19”N, Lon 92o31‟0”E.  
103. National Waterway 103  Tons River : 
Bridge on National Highway -27 near Chakghat at Lat 
25o02‟05”N, Lon 81o43‟45”E to Ganga confluence at Sirsa Lat 
25o16‟32”N, Lon 82o05‟0”E.  
104. National Waterway 104  Tungabhadra River : 
Bridge on State Highway No. 29 near Chikka Jantakal village at 
Lat 15o24‟33”N, Lon 76o35‟13”E to confluence with river 
Krishna near village Murva Konda at Lat 15o57‟20”N, Lon 
78o14‟30”E.  17 
 (1) (2) (3) 
105. National Waterway 105  Udayavara River : 
Arabian Sea Mouth at Malpe Lat 13o20‟57”N, Lon 74o41‟28”E to 
Bridge near Manipura Lat 13o17‟33”N, Lon 74o46‟26”E.  
106. National Waterway 106  Umngot (Dwaki) River : 
Bangladesh Border near Larbamon Lat 25o11‟07”N Lon 
92o0‟54”E to Nongryngkoh at Lat 25o19‟05”N, Lon 92o02‟20”E.  
107. National Waterway 107  Vaigai River : 
Barrage near Anai Patti at Lat 10o05‟19”N, Lon 77o51‟10”E to 
Viragnoor Dam at Lat 9o53‟52”N, Lon 78o10‟34”E.  
108. National Waterway 108  Varuna River : 
Road bridge near Kuru at Lat 25o23‟15”N, Lon 82o44‟07”E to 
Ganga confluence at Saray Mohana, Varanasi Lat 25o19‟45”N, 
Lon 83o02‟41”E.  
109. National Waterway 109  Wainganga Pranahita River System : 
Bridge near Chandapur village at Lat 20o0‟30”N, Lon 
79o47‟08”E to confluence of river Godavari at Kaleshwaram Lat 
18o49‟33”N, Lon 79o54‟33”E.  
110. National Waterway 110  Yamuna River : 
Jagatpur (6km upstream of Wazirabad Barrage) Delhi Lat 
28o45‟28”N, Lon 77o13‟50”E to confluence of Yamuna and 
Ganga rivers at S angam, Allahabad at Lat 25o25‟24”N, Lon 
81o53‟20”E.  
111. National Waterway 111  Zuari River : 
Sanvordem bridge Lat 15o16‟15”N, Lon 74o07‟11”E to 
Marmugao Port Lat 15o25‟55”N, Lon 73o48‟13”E.  
 
 
--------------------------The Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act, 2016--------------------------
1 
 THE REAL ESTATE (REGULATION AND DEVELOPMENT) ACT, 2016  
____________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
 
CHAPTER II  
REGISTRATION OF REAL ESTATE PROJECT AND REGISTRATION OF  REAL ESTATE AGENTS  
3. Prior registration of real estate project with Real Estate Regulatory Authority . 
4. Application for registration of real estate projects . 
5. Grant of registration . 
6. Extension of registration . 
7. Revocation of registration . 
8. Obligation of Authority  consequent upon lapse of or on revocation of registration . 
9. Registration of real estate agents . 
10. Functions of real estate agents . 
 
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF PROMOTER  
11. Functions and duties of promoter . 
12. Obligations of promoter regarding veracity of the advertisement or prospectus . 
13. No deposit or advance to be taken by promoter without first entering into agreement for sale.  
14. Adherence to sanctioned plans and project specifications by the promoter . 
15. Obligations of promoter in case of transfer of a real e state project to a third party . 
16. Obligations of promoter regarding insurance of real estate project . 
17. Transfer of title . 
18. Return of amount and compensation . 
 
CHAPTER IV  
RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF ALLOTTEES  
19. Rights and duties of allottees . 
 
CHAPTET V  
THE REAL ESTATE  REGULATORY  AUTHORITY  
20. Establishment and incorporation of Real Estate Regulatory Authority . 
21. Composition of Authority . 
22. Qualifications of Chairperson and Members of Authority . 
23. Term of office of Chairperson and Members . 2 
 SECTIONS  
24. Salary and allowances payable t o Chairperson and Members . 
25. Administrative powers of Chairperson . 
26. Removal of Chairperson and Members from office in certain circumstances . 
27. Restrictions on Chairperson or Members on employment after cessation of office . 
28. Officers and other employees of Authority . 
29. Meetings of Authority . 
30. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceeding of Authority . 
31. Filing of complaints with the Authority or the adjudicating officer . 
32. Functions of Authority for promotion of real estate sector . 
33. Advocacy and awareness measures . 
34. Functions of Authority . 
35. Powers of Authority to call for information, conduct investigations . 
36. Power to issue interim orders . 
37. Powers of Authority to issue directions . 
38. Powers of Authority . 
39. Rectification of orders . 
40. Recovery of interest or penalty or compensati on and enforcement of order, etc . 
 
CHAPTER VI  
CENTRAL  ADVISORY  COUNCIL  
41. Establishment of Central Advisory Council . 
42. Functions of Central Advisory Council . 
 
CHAPTER VII  
THE REAL ESTATE  APPELLATE  TRIBUNAL  
43. Establishment of Real Estate Appellate Tribunal . 
44. Application for settlement of disputes and appeals to Appellate Tribunal . 
45. Composition of Appellate Tribunal . 
46. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members . 
47. Term of office of Chairperson and Members . 
48. Salary and allowances payable to Chairperson and Members . 
49. Removal of Chairperson and Member from office in certain circumstances . 
50. Restrictions on Chairperson or Judicial Member or Technical or Administrative Member on 
employment after cessation of office.  
51. Officers and other employees of Appellate Tri bunal.  
52. Vacancies.  
53. Powers of Tribunal.  
54. Administrative powers of Chairperson of Appellate Tribunal.  
55. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceeding of Appellate Tribunal.  
56. Right to legal representation.  
57. Orders passed by Appellate Tribunal to be executable as a decree.  
58. Appeal to High Court.  
 
  3 
 CHAPTER VIII  
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND ADJUDICATION  
SECTIONS  
59. Punishment for nonregistration under section 3.  
60. Penalty for contravention of section 4.  
61. Penalty for contravention of other provisions of this Act.  
62. Penalty for nonre gistration and contravention under sections 9 and 10.  
63. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Authority by promoter.  
64. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Appellate Tribunal by promoter.  
65. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Authority by  real estate agent.  
66. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Appellate Tribunal by real estate agent.  
67. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Authority by allottee . 
68. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Appellate Tribunal by allottee . 
69. Offences by companies . 
70. Compounding of offences . 
71. Power to adjudicate . 
72. Factors to be taken into account by the adjudicating officer . 
 
CHAPTER IX  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDITS AND REPORTS  
73. Grants and loans by Central Government . 
74. Grants and loans by State Governmen t. 
75. Constitution of Fund . 
76. Crediting sums realised by way of penalties to Consolidated Fund of India or State account . 
77. Budget, accounts and audit . 
78. Annual report . 
 
CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
79. Bar of jurisdiction . 
80. Cognizance of offences . 
81. Delegation . 
82. Power of appropriate Government to supersede Authority . 
83. Powers of appropriate Government to issue directions to Authority and obtain reports and returns . 
84. Power of appropriate Government to make rules . 
85. Power to make regulations . 
86. Laying of rules . 
87. Members, etc., to be  public servants . 
88. Application of other laws not barred . 
89. Act to have overriding effect . 
90. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
91. Power to remove difficulties . 
92. Repeal.  
 
  4 
 THE REAL ESTATE (R EGULATION AND DEVELOPMENT) ACT, 2016  
ACT NO. 16 OF 2016  
[25th March , 2016.]  
An Act to establish the Real Estate Regulatory Authority for regulation and promotion of the real 
estate sector and to ensure sale of plot, apartment or building, as the case may be, or sale of real 
estate project, in an efficient and transparent  manner and to protect the interest of consumers in 
the real estate sector and to establish an adjudicating mechanism for speedy dispute redressal and 
also to establish the Appellate Tribunal to hear appeals from the decisions, directions or orders of 
the Real Estate Regulatory Authority and the adjudicating officer and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: —  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commence ment .—(1) This Act may be called the Real Estate (Regulat ion 
and Development) Act, 2016.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming 
into force of that provision.  
 2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “adjudicating officer ” means the adjudicating officer appointed under  sub-section ( 1) of 
section 71;  
(b) “advertisement ” means any document described or issued as advertisement through any 
medium and includes any notice, circular or other documents or publicity in any form, informing 
persons about a real estate project, or offering for sale of a plot, building or apartment or inviting 
persons to purchase in any manner such plot, building or apartment or to make advances or deposits 
for such purposes;  
(c) “agreement for sale ” means an agreement entered into between the promoter and the allottee;  
(d) “allottee ” in relation to a real estate project, means the person to whom a plot, apartment or 
building, as the case may be, has been allotted, sold (whether as freehold or leasehold) or otherwise 
transferred by the promoter, and includes the person who subsequently acquires the sa id allotment 
through sale, transfer or otherwise but does not include a person to whom such plot, apartment or 
building, as the case may be, is given on rent;  
(e) “apartment ” whether called block, chamber, dwelling unit, flat, office, showroom, shop, 
godow n, premises, suit, tenement, unit or by any other name, means a separate and self -contained part 
of any immovable property, including one or more rooms or enclosed spaces, located on one or more 
floors or any part thereof, in a building or on a plot of lan d, used or intended to be used for any 
residential or commercial use such as residence, office, shop, showroom or godown or for carrying on 
any business, occupation, profession or trade, or for any other type of use ancillary to the purpose 
specified;  
(f) “Appellate Tribunal” means the Real Estate Appellate Tribunal established under section 43;  
                                                           
1. 1st May, 201 6, vide notification No. S.O. 1544 (E), (Except ss. 3 to 19, 40, 59 to 70, 79 & 80)  dated 2 6th April, 201 6, see 
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 5 
 (g) “appropriate Government ” means in r espect of matters relating to, — 
(i) the Union territory without Legislature, the Central Government;  
 (ii) the Union territory of Puducherry, the Union territory Government;  
(iii) the Union territory of Delhi, the Central Ministry of Urban Development;  
(iv) the State, the State Government;  
 (h) “architect ” means a person registered as an architect under the provis ions of the Architects 
Act, 1972  (20 of 1972) ; 
(i) “Authority ” means the Real Estate Regulatory Authority established under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 20;  
(j) “building ” includes any structure or erection or part of a structure or erection which is intended 
to be used for residential, commercial or for the purpose of any business, occupation, profession or 
trade, or for any other related purposes;  
(k) “carpet area ” means the net usable floor area of an apartment, excluding the area covered by 
the external walls, areas under services shafts, exclusive balcony or verandah area and exclusive open 
terrace area, but includes the area covered by the internal partition walls of t he apartment.  
 Explanation .— For the purpose of this clause, the expression “exclusive balcony or verandah 
area” means the area of the balcony or verandah, as the case may be, which is appurtenant to the net 
usable floor area of an apartment, meant for the  exclusive use of the allottee; and “exclusive open 
terrace area ” means the area of open terrace which is appurtenant to the net usable floor area of an 
apartment, meant for the exclusive use of the allottee;  
(l) “Chairperson ” means the Chairperson of the Real Estate Regulatory Authority appointed under 
section 21;  
(m) “commencement certificate ” means the commencement certificate or the building permit or 
the construction permit, by whatever name called issued by the competent authority to allow or 
permit t he promoter to begin development works on an immovable property, as per the sanctioned 
plan;  
(n) “common areas ” mean — 
(i) the  entire land for the real estate project or where the project is developed in phases and 
registration under this Act is sought for a phase, the entire land for that phase;  
(ii) the stair cases, lifts, staircase and lift lobbies, fir e escapes, and common en trances and 
exits of  buildings;  
(iii) the common basements, terraces, parks, play areas, open parking a reas and common 
storage spaces;  
(iv) the premises for the lodging of persons employed for the management of the property 
including accommodation for watc h and ward staffs or for the lodging of community service 
personnel;  
(v) installations of central services such as electricity, gas, water and sanitation,  
air-conditioning and incinerating, system for water con servation and renewable energy;  
(vi) the wate r tanks, sumps, motors, fans, compressors, ducts and all apparatus connected 
with installations for common use;  
(vii) all community and commercial facilities as provi ded in the real estate project;  
(viii) all other portion of the project necessary or convenient for its maintenance, s afety, etc., 
and in common use;  
  6 
 (o) “company ” means a company incorporated and registered under the Com panies Act, 2013   
(18 of 2013)  and includes, — 
(i) a corporation established by or unde r any Central Act or State Act;  
(ii) a development authority or any public authority established by the Government in this 
behalf under any law for the time being in force;  
(p) “competent authority ” means the local author ity or any authority created or established under 
any law for the time being in force by the appropriate Government which exercises authority over 
land under its jurisdiction, and has powers to give permission for development of such immovable 
property;  
(q) “completion certificate ” means the completion certificate, or such other certificate, by 
whatever name called, issued by the competent authority certifying that the real estate project has 
been developed according to the sanctioned plan, layout plan and specifications, as approved by the 
competent authority under the local laws;  
(r) “day” means the working day, in the concerned State or Union territory, as the case may be, 
notified by the appropriate Government from time to time;  
(s) “development ” with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means carrying out 
the development of immovable property, engineering or other operations in, on, over or under the 
land or the making of any material change in any immovable property or la nd and in cludes re -
development;  
(t) “development works ” means the external development works and internal developme nt works 
on immovable property;  
(u) “engineer ” means a person who possesses a bachelor's degree or equivalent from an 
institution recognised by the Al l India Council of Technical Education or any University or any 
institution recognised under a law or is registered as an engineer under any law fo r the time being in 
force;  
(v) “estimated cost of real estate project ” means the total cost involved in devel oping the real 
estate project and includes the land cost, taxes, cess,  development and other charges;  
(w) “external development works ” includes roads and road systems landscaping, water supply, 
sewe rage and drainage systems, electricity supply transformer,  sub-station, solid waste management 
and disposal or any other work which may have to be executed in the periphery of, or outside, a 
project for its benefit, as may be  provided under the local laws;  
(x) “family ” includes husband, wife, minor son and unmarried daughte r wholly dependent on a 
person;  
(y) “garage ” means a place within a project having a roof and walls on three sides for parking any 
vehicle, but does not include an unenclosed or uncovered parking sp ace such as open parking areas;  
(z) “immovable property ” includes land, buildings, rights of ways, lights or any other benefit 
arising out of land and things attached to the earth or permanently fastened to anything which is 
attached to the earth, but not st anding t imber, standing crops or grass;  
(za) “interest ” means the rates of interest payable by the promoter or the allottee, as the case may 
be. 
Explanation .—For the purpose of this clause — 
(i) the rate of interest chargeable from the allottee by the promo ter, in case of default, shall be 
equal to the rate of interest which the promoter shall be liable to pay th e allottee, in case of 
default;  
(ii) the interest payable by the promoter to the allottee shall be from the date the promoter 
received the amount or  any part thereof till the date the amount or part thereof and interest 7 
 thereon is refunded, and the interest payable by the allottee to the promoter shall be from the date 
the allottee defaults in payment to the promoter till the date it is paid;  
(zb) “internal development works ” means roads, footpaths, water supply, sewers, drains, parks, 
tree planting, street lighting, provision for community buildings and for treatment and disposal of 
sewage and sullage water, solid waste management and disposal, water conservation, energy 
management, fire protection and fire safety requirements, social in frastructure such as education  
health and other public amenities or any other work in a project for its be nefit, as per sanctioned 
plans;  
(zc) “local authority ” means t he Municipal Corporation or Municipality or Panchayats or any 
other Local Body constituted under any law for the time being in force for providing municipal 
services or basic services, as the case may be, in respect of areas under its jurisdiction ; 
(zd) “Member ” means the member of the Real Estate Regulatory Authority appointed under 
section 21 and includes the Chai rperson;  
(ze) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression 
“notify ” shall be construed accordingly;  
(zf) “occupancy certificate ” means the occupancy certificate, or such other certificate , by 
whatever name called, issued by the competent authority permitting occupation of any building, as 
provided under local laws, which has provision for civic infrastructure such as wat er, sanitation and 
electricity;  
(zg) “Person ” includes, — 
(i) an individ ual; 
(ii) a Hindu undivided family;  
(iii) a company;  
(iv) a firm under the Indian Partnership Act, 1932  (9 of 1932)  or the Limited Liability 
Partnership  Act, 2008  (6 of 2009) , as the case may be;  
(v) a competent authority;  
(vi) an association of persons or a body of individua ls whether incorporated or not;  
(vii) a co -operative society registered under any law rela ting to co -operative societies;  
(viii) any such other entity as the appropriate Government may, by notifi cation, specify  in this 
behalf;  
(zh) “planning area ” means a planning area or a development area or a local planning area or a 
regional development plan area, by whatever name called, or any other area specified as such by the 
appropriate Government or any competent auth ority and includes any area designated by the 
appropriate Government or the competent authority to be a planning area for future planned 
development, under the law relating to Town and Country Planning for the time being in force an d as 
revised from time t o time;  
(zi) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(zj) “project ” means the real estate pro ject as defined in clause  (zn); 
(zk) “promoter ” means, — 
(i) a person who constructs or causes to be constructed an independent building or a building 
consisting of apartments, or converts an existing building or a part thereof into apartments, for the 
purpose of selling all or some of the apartments to other persons  and includes his assignees; or  
(ii) a person who develops land into a project, whether or not the person also constructs 
structures on any of the plots, for the purpose of selling to other persons all or some of the plots in 
the said project, whether with or  without structures thereon; or   8 
 (iii) any development authority or any other  public b ody in respect of allottees of — 
(a) buildings or apartments, as the case may be, constructed by such authority or body on 
lands owned by them or placed at their disposal by the Gover nment; or  
(b) plots owned by such authority or body or placed at their disposal by the Government, 
for the purpose of selling all or some of the apartments or plots; or  
(iv) an apex State level co -operative housing finance society and a primary co -operative 
housing s ociety which constructs apartments or buildings for its Members or in respect of the 
allottees of such apartments or buildings; or  
(v) any other person who acts himself as a builder, coloniser, contractor, developer, estate 
developer or by any other name o r claims to be acting as the holder of a power of attorney from 
the owner of the land on which the building or apartment is constructed or plot is developed for 
sale; or  
(vi) such other person who constructs any building or apartment for sale to the genera l public.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, where the person who constructs or converts a 
building into apartments or develops a plot for sale and the person  who sells apartment s or plots 
are different person , both of them shall be deemed to b e the promoters and shall be jointly liable 
as such for the functions and responsibilities specified under this Act or the rules and regulations 
made thereunder;  
(zl) “prospectus ” means any document described or issued as a prospectus or any notice, circu lar, 
or other document offering for sale o f any real estate project or inviting any person to make advances 
or deposits for such purposes;  
(zm) “real estate agent ” means any person, who negotiates or acts on behalf of one person in a 
transaction of transfe r of his plot, apartment or building, as the case may be, in a real estate project, 
by way of sale, with another person or transfer of plot, apartment or building, as the case may be, of 
any other person to him and receives remuneration or fees or any othe r charges for his services 
whether as  a commission or otherwise and includes a person who introduces, through any medium, 
prospective buyers and sellers to each other for negotiation for sale or purchase of plot, apartment or 
building, as the case may be, and includes property dealers, brokers, mid dlemen by whatever name 
called;  
(zn) “real estate project ” means the development of a building or a building consisting of 
apartments, or converting an existing building or a part thereof into apartments, or the development of 
land into plots or apartment s, as the case may be, for the purpose of selling all or so me of the said 
apartments or plots or building, as the case may be, and includes the common areas, the development 
works, all improvements and structures thereon, and all easement, rights and appurtenances belonging 
thereto;  
(zo) “regulations ” means the re gulations made by the Authority under this Act;  
(zp) “rule” means the rules made under this Act by the appropriate Government;  
(zq) “sanctioned plan ” means the site plan, building plan, service plan, parking and circulation 
plan, landscape plan, layout pla n, zoning plan and such other plan and includes structural designs, if 
applicable, permissions such as environment permission and such other permissions, which are 
approved by the competent authority prior to start of a real estate project;  
(zr) words and expressions used herein but not defined in this Act and defined in any law for the 
time being in force or in the municipal laws or such other relevant laws of the appropriate 
Government shall have the same meanings respectively assigned to them in those la ws. 
  9 
 CHAPTER II  
REGISTRATION OF REAL ESTATE PROJECT AND REGISTRATION OF REAL ESTATE AGENTS  
3. Prior registration of real estate project with Re al Estate Regulatory Authority .—(1) No 
promoter shall advertise, market, book, sell or offer for sale, or invite  persons to purchase in any manner 
any plot, apartment or building, as the case may be, in any real estate project or part of it, in any planning 
area, without registering the real estate project with the Real Estate Regulatory Author ity established 
under this Act:  
Provided that projects that are ongoing on the date of commencement of this Act and for which the 
completion certificate has not been issued, the promoter shall make an application to the Authority for 
registration of the said project within a pe riod of three months from the da te of commencement of this 
Act: 
Provided further that if the Authority thinks necessary, in the interest of allottees, for projects which 
are developed beyond the planning area but with the requisite permission of the local authority, it may, by 
order, direct the promoter of such project to register with the Authority, and the provisions of this Act or 
the rules and regulations made thereunder, shall apply to such projects f rom that stage of registration.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), no registration of the real estate project  
shall be required — 
(a) where the area of land proposed to be developed does not exceed five hundred square meter s 
or the number of apartments proposed to be developed does no t exceed eight inclusive of all phases:  
Provided that, if the appropriate Government considers it necessary, it may, reduce the threshold 
below five hundred square meters or eight apartments, as the case may be, inclusive of all phases, for 
exemption fr om registration under this Act;  
(b) where the promoter has received completion certificate for a real estate project pri or to 
commencement of this Act;  
(c) for the purpose of renovation or repair or re -development which does not involve marketing, 
advertising  selling or new allotment of any apartment, plot or building, as the case may be,  under the 
real estate project.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, where the real estate project is to be developed in 
phases, every such phase shall be considered a stand alone real estate project, and the promoter shall 
obtain registration under this  Act for each phase separately.  
4. Application for regist ration of real estate projects .—(1) Every promoter shall make an 
application to the Authority for registration of the real estate project in such form, manner, within such 
time and accompanied by such fee as may be 1[prescribed] . 
(2) The promoter shall enclose the following documents along  with the application referred to in  
sub-section ( 1), namely: — 
(a) a brief details of his enterprise including its name, registered address, type of enterprise 
(proprietorship, societies, partnership, companies, competent authority), and the particulars o f 
registration, and the names a nd photographs of the promoter;  
(b) a brief detail of the projects launched by him, in the past five years, whether already 
completed or being developed, as the case may be, including the current status of the said projects, 
any delay in its completion, details of cases pending, details of typ e of land and payments pending;  
(c) an authenticated copy of the approvals and commencement certificate from the competent 
authority obtained in accordance with the laws as may be applicable for the real estate project 
mentioned in the application, and where the project is proposed to be developed in phases, an 
authenticated copy of the approvals and commencement certificate from the competent aut hority for 
each of such phases;   
                                                           
1. Subs. by the Real Estate (Regulation and Development ) Removal of Difficulties Order, 2016  [S.O. 3347 (E)] , for “specified by 
the regulations made by the Authority” (w.e.f. 28 -10-2016).  10 
 (d) the sanctioned plan, layout plan and specifications of the proposed project or the phase 
thereof, and the whole project as sanctio ned by the competent authority;  
(e) the plan of development works to be executed in the proposed project and the proposed 
facilities to be provided thereof including fire fighting facilities, drinking water facilities, emergency 
evacuation ser vices, use of renewable energy;  
(f) the location details of the project, with clear demarcation of land dedicated for the project 
along wi th its boundaries including the latitude and longitude of  the end points of the project;  
(g) proforma of the allotment letter, agreement for sale, and the conveyance deed proposed t o be 
signed with the allottees;  
(h) the number, type and the carpet area of apartments for sale in the project along with the area 
of the exclusive balcony or verandah areas and the exclusive open terrace areas appurtenant with the 
apartment , if any;  
(i) the number and area  of garage for s ale in the project;  
(j) the names and addresses of his real estate agents, if  any, for the proposed project;  
(k) the names and addresses of the contractors, architect, structural engineer, if any and other 
persons concerned with the devel opment of the proposed project;  
(l) a declaration, supported by an affidavit, which shall be signed by the promoter or any person 
author ised by the promoter, stating: — 
(A) that he has a legal title to the land on which the development is proposed along with 
legally vali d documents with authentication of such title, if such l and is owned by another person;  
(B) that the land is free from all encumbrances, or as the case may be details of the 
encumbrances on such land including any rights, title, interest or name of any par ty in or over 
such land along with details;  
(C) the time period within which he undertakes to complete the project or pha se thereof, as 
the case may be;  
(D) that seventy per cent. of the amounts realised for the real estate project from the allottees, 
from  time to time, shall be deposited in a separate account to be maintained in a scheduled bank 
to cover the cost of construction and the land cost and shall  be used only for that purpose:  
Provided that the promoter shall withdraw the amounts from the separat e account, to cover 
the cost of the project, in proportion to the percentag e of completion of the project:  
Provided further that the amounts from the separate account shall be withdrawn by the 
promoter after it is certified by an engineer, an architect and  a chartered accountant in practice 
that the withdrawal is in proportion to the percentag e of completion of the project:  
Provided also that the promoter shall get his accounts audited within six months after the end 
of every financial year by a chartered a ccountant in practice, and shall produce a statement of 
accounts duly certified and signed by such chartered accountant and it shall be verified during the 
audit that the amounts collected for a particular project have been utilised for th at project and th e 
withdrawal has been in compliance with the proportion to the percentag e of completion of the 
project.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this clause, the term “schedule d bank ” means a bank 
included in the Second Scheduled  to the R eserve Bank of India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) ; 
(E) that he shall take all the pending approvals on time, from the competent authorities;  
(F) that he has furnished such other documents as may be prescribed by the rules or 
regul ations made under this Act; and  
(m) such other information and documents as may be prescribed.  11 
 (3) The Authority shall operationalise a web based online system for submitting applications for 
registration of projects within a period of one year from the date of its establishment.  
5. Grant of registration .—(1) On receipt  of the application under sub -section ( 1) of section 4, the 
Authority shall  within a period of thirty days . 
(a) grant registration subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations made 
thereunder, and provide a registration number , including a Login Id and password to the applicant for 
accessing the website of the Authority and to create his web page and to fill therein the deta ils of the 
proposed project; or  
(b) reject the application for reasons to be recorded in writing,  if such application does not 
conform to the provisions of this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder:  
Provided that no application shall be rejected unless the applicant has been given an opportunit y 
of being heard in the matter.  
(2) If the Autho rity fails to grant the registration or reject the application, as the case may be, as 
provided under sub -section ( 1), the project shall be deemed to have been registered, and the Authority 
shall within a period of seven days of the expiry of the said peri od of thirty days specified under  
sub-section ( 1), provide a registration number and a Login Id and password to the promoter for accessing 
the website of the Authority and to create his web page and to fill therein the d etails of the proposed 
project.  
(3) The registration granted under this section shall be valid for a period declared by the promoter 
under sub -clause ( C) of clause ( l) of sub -section ( 2) of section 4 for completion of the project or pha se 
thereof, as the case may be.  
6. Extension of registr ation .—The registration granted under section 5 may be extended by the 
Authority on an application made by the promoter , due to force majeure, in such form and on payment of 
such fee as may be 1[prescribed] : 
Provided that the Authority may in reasonable circumstances, without default on the part of the 
promoter, based on the facts of each case, and for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the 
registration granted to a project for such time as it considers necessary, which shall, in aggregate, n ot 
exceed a period of one year:  
Provided further that no application for extension of registration shall be rejected unless the applicant 
has been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
 Explanation .— For the purpose of this section, the expression “force majeure ” shall mean a case of 
war, flood, drought, fire, cyclone, earthquake or any other calamity caused by nature affecting the 
regular development of the real estate project.  
7. Revocation of registration .—(1) The Authority may, on receipt of a c omplaint or suo motu  in this 
behalf or on the recommendation of the competent authority, revoke the registration granted under section  
5, after being satisfied that — 
(a) the promoter makes default in doing anything required by or under this Act or the rule s or t he 
regulations made thereunder;  
(b) the promoter violates any of the terms or conditions of the approval gi ven by the competent 
authority;  
(c) the promoter is involved in any kind of unf air practice or irregularities.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, the term “unfair practice means ” a practice which, for 
the purpose of promoting the sale or development of any real estate project adopts any unfair method or 
unfair or deceptive practice including any of the following pr actices, namely: —  
(A) the practice of making any statement, whether in writing or by  visible representation which, — 
(i) falsely represents that the services are of a particular standard or grade;   
                                                           
1.  Subs. by the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Removal of Difficulties Order, 2016  [S.O. 3347 (E)] , for “specified 
by regulations made by the Authority” (w.e.f. 28 -10-2016).  12 
 (ii) represents  that the promoter has approval or affiliation whi ch such promoter does not 
have;  
(iii) makes a false or misleading represen tation concerning the services;  
(B) the promoter permits the publication of any advertisement or prospectus whether in any 
newspaper  or otherwise of services that are n ot intended to be offered;  
(d) the promoter indulg es in any fraudulent practices.  
(2) The registration granted to the promoter under section 5 shall not be revoked unless the Authority 
has given to the promoter not less than thirty days notice, in writing, stating the grounds on which it is 
proposed to revoke the registration , and has considered any cause shown by the promoter within the 
period of that notice a gainst the proposed revocation.  
(3) The Authority may, instead  of revoking the registration under sub -section ( 1), permit it to remain 
in force subject to such further terms and conditions as it thinks fit to impose in the interest of the 
allottees, and any such terms and conditions so imposed shal l be binding upon t he promoter.  
(4) The Authority, upon the r evocation of the registration, — 
(a) shall debar the promoter from accessing its website in relation to that project and specify his 
name in the list of defaulters and display his photograph on its website and also inform the other Real 
Estate Regulatory Authority in other States and Union territories about s uch revocation or 
registration;  
(b) shall facilitate the remaining development works to be carried out in accordance wi th the 
provisions of section 8;  
(c) shall direct the bank holding the project ba nk account, specified under sub -clause  (D) of 
clause ( l) of sub -section ( 2) of section 4, to freeze the account, and thereafter take such further 
necessary actions, including consequent de -freezing of the said account,  towards facilitating the 
remaining development works in accordance wi th the provisions of section 8;  
(d) may, to protect the interest of allottees or in the public interest, issue such directions as it may 
deem necessary.  
8. Obligation of Authority conseq uent upon lapse of or on revocation of registration .—Upon 
lapse of the registration or on revocation of the registration under this Act, the Authority, may consult the 
appropriate Government to take such action as it may deem fit including the carrying out of the remaining 
development works by competent auth ority or by the association of allottees or in any other manner, as 
may be determined by the Authority:  
Provided that no direction, decision or order of the Authority under this section shall take effect until 
the expiry of the period of appeal provided un der the provisions of this Act:  
Provided further that in case of revocation of registration of a project under this Act, the association 
of allottees shall have the first right of refusal for carrying out of the remaining development works.  
9. Regi stration of real estate agents .—(1) No real estate agent shall facilitate the sale or purchase of 
or act on behalf of any person to facilitate the sale or purchase of any plot, apartment or building, as the 
case may be, in a real estate project or part of it, being the part of the real estate project registered under 
section 3, being sold by the promoter in any planning area, without obtaining registration under this 
section.  
(2) Every real estate agent shall make an application to the Authority for regist ration in such form, 
manner, within such time and accompanied by such fee and documents as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Authority shall, within such period, in such manner and upon  satisfying itself of the 
fulfilment of such co nditions, as may be prescribed — 
(a) grant a single registration to the real estate agent for the entire State or Union  territory, as the 
case may be;   13 
 (b) reject  the application for reasons to be recorded in writing, if such application does not 
conform to the provisions of the Act or th is rules or regulations made thereunder : 
Provided that no application shall be rejected unless the applicant has been given an op portunit y of 
being heard in the matter.  
(4) Whereon the completion of the period specified under sub -section ( 3), if the applicant does not 
receive any communication about the deficiencies in his application or the rejection of his application, he 
shall be  deemed to have been registered.  
(5) Every real estate agent who is registered as per the provisions of this Act or the rules and 
regulations made thereunder, shall be granted a registration number by the Authority, which shall be 
quoted by the real estate  agent in every sale fac ilitated by him under this Act.  
(6) Every registration shall be valid for such period as may be prescribed, and shall be renewable for a 
period in such manner and on payment of  such fee as may be prescribed.  
(7) Where any real estat e agent who has been granted registration under this Act commits breach of 
any of the conditions thereof or any other terms and conditions specified under this Act or any rules or 
regulations made thereunder, or where the Authority is satisfied  that such r egistration has been secured by 
the real estate agent through misrepresentation or fraud, the Authority may, without prejudice to any other 
provisions under this Act, revoke the registration or suspend the same for such period as it thinks fit:  
Provided th at no such revocation or suspension shall be made by the Authority unless an opportunity 
of being heard has been given to the real estate agent.  
10. Functions of real estate agents .—Every real estate agent re gistered under section 9 shall — 
(a) not facilitate the sale or purchase of any plot, apartment or building, as the case may be, in a 
real estate project or part of it, being sold by the promoter in any planning area, which is not 
registered with the Authority;  
(b) maintain and preserve such book s of account, records a nd documents as may be prescribed;  
(c) not involve himself in any u nfair trade practices, namely: — 
(i) the practice of making any statement, whether orally or in writing or b y visible 
representation which — 
(A) falsely  represents that the services are of a particular standard or grade;  
(B) represents that the promoter or himself has approval or affiliation which such 
promoter or himself does not have;  
(C) makes a false or misleading representation con cerning the service s; 
(ii) permitting the publication of any advertisement whether in any newspaper or otherwise of 
services that are not intended to be offered.  
(d) facilitate the possession of all the information and documents, as the allottee, is entitled to, at 
the time of booking of any plot, apartment o r building, as the case may be;  
(e) discharge such other functions as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF PROMOTER  
11. Functions and duties of promoter .—(1) The promoter shall, upon receiving his Login  Id and 
password under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) or under sub -section ( 2) of section 5, as the case may be, 
create his web page on the website of the Authority and enter all details of the proposed project as 
provided under sub -section ( 2) of section 4 , in all the fields as provided, for public viewing, includi ng— 
(a) details of the registr ation granted by the Authority;  14 
 (b) quarterly up -to-date the list of number and types of apartments or plo ts, as the case may be, 
booked;  
(c) quarterly  up-to-date the li st of number of garages booked;  
(d) quarterly up -to-date the list of approvals taken and the approvals which are pending 
subseque nt to commencement certificate;  
(e) quarterly up -to-date status of the project; and  
(f) such other informatio n and documents as may be specified by the regulations made by the 
Authorit y. 
(2) The advertisement or prospectus issued or published by the promoter shall mention prominently 
the website address of the Authority, wherein all details of the registered proj ect have been entered and 
include the registration number obtained from the Authority and such ot her matters incidental thereto.  
(3) The promoter , at the time of the booking and issue of allotment letter shall be responsible to make 
available to the allott ee, the following information, namely: — 
(a) sanctioned plans, layout plans, along with specifications, approved by the competent 
authority, by display at the site or such other place as may be specified by the regulations made by the 
Authority;  
(b) the sta ge wise time schedule of completion of the project, including the provisions for civic 
infrastructure like wat er, sanitation and electricity.  
(4) The promoter shall — 
(a) be responsible for all obligations, responsibilities  and functions under the provisions of this 
Act or the rules and regulations made thereunder or to the allottees  as per the agreement for sale, or to 
the association of allottees, as the case may be, till the conveyance of all the apartments, plots or 
buildings, as the case may be, to the allottees, or the common areas to the association of allottees or 
the competent  authority, as the case may be:  
Provided that the responsibility of the promoter, with respect to the structural defect or any other 
defect for  such period as is referred to in sub -section ( 3) of section 14, shall continue even after the 
conveyance deed of all the apartments, plots or buildings, as the case may be,  to the allottees are 
executed.  
(b) be responsible to obtain the completion certifi cate or the occupancy certificate, or both, as 
applicable, from the relevant competent authority as per local laws or other laws for the time being in 
force and to make it available to the allottees individually or to the association of  allottees, as the c ase 
may be;  
(c) be responsible to obtain the lease certificate, where the real estate project is developed on a 
leasehold land, specifying the period of lease, and certifying that all dues and charges in regard to the 
leasehold land has been paid, and to m ake the lease certificate available to the association of allottees;  
(d) be responsible for providing and maintaining the essential services, on reasonable charges, till 
the taking over of the maintenance of the project by th e association of the allottees;  
(e) enable the formation of an association or society or co -operative society, as the case may be, 
of the allottees, or a federation of the s ame, under the laws applicable:  
Provided that in the absence of local laws, the association of allottees, by whate ver name called, 
shall be formed within a period of three months of the majority of allottees having booked their plot 
or apartment or building, as t he case may be, in the project;  
(f) execute a registered conveyance deed of the apartment, plot or building , as the case may be, in 
favour of the allottee along with the undivided proportionate title in the common areas to the 
association of allottees or competent authority, as the case may be, as provided unde r section 17 of 
this Act;  15 
 (g) pay all outgoings until he transfers the physical possession of the real estate project to the 
allottee or the associations of allottees, as the case may be, which he has collected from the allottees, 
for the payment of outgoings (including land cost, gr ound rent, municipal or other local taxes, charges 
for water or electricity, maintenance charges, including mortgage loan and interest on mortgages or 
other encumbrances and such other liabilities payable to competent authorities, banks and financial 
institutions, whi ch are related to the project):  
Provided that where any promoter fails to pay all or any of the outgoings collected by him from 
the allottees or any liability, mortgage loan and interest thereon before transferring the real estate 
project to su ch allottees, or the association of the allottees, as the case may be, the promoter shall 
continue to be liable, even after the transfer of the property, to pay such outgoings and penal charges, 
if any, to the authority or person to whom they are payable a nd be liable for the cost of any legal 
proceedings which may be taken theref or by such authority or person;  
(h) after he executes an agreement for sale for any apartment, plot or building, as the case may be, 
not mortgage or create a charge on such apartme nt, plot or building, as the case may be, and if any 
such mortgage or charge is made or created then notwithstanding anything contained in any other law 
for the time being in force, it shall not affect the right and interest of the allottee who has taken o r 
agreed to take such apartment, plot o r building, as the case may be;  
(5) The promoter may cancel the allotment only in t erms of the agreement for sale:  
Provided that the allottee  may approach the Authority for relief, if he is aggrieved by such 
cancellation and such cancellation is not in accordance with the terms of the agreement for sale, unilateral 
and without any sufficient cause.  
(6) The promoter shall prepare and maintain al l such other details as may be specified, from time to 
time, by regulations made by the Authority . 
12. Obligations of promoter regarding veracity of th e advertisement or prospectus .—Where any 
person makes an advance or a deposit on the basis of the informa tion contained in the notice , 
advertisement or prospectus, or on the basis of any model apartment, plot or building, as the case may be, 
and sustains any loss or damage by reason of any incorrect, false statement included therein, he shall be 
compensated b y the promoter in the man ner as provided under this Act:  
Provided that if the person affected by such incorrect, false statement contained in the notice, 
advertisement or prospectus, or the mod el apartment, plot or building as the case may be, intends to 
withdraw from the proposed project, he shall be returned his entire investment along with interest at such 
rate as may be prescribed and the compensation in the manner provided under this Act.  
13. No deposit or advance to be taken by promoter without first entering into agreement f or 
sale. —(1) A promoter shall not accept a sum more than ten per cent . of the cost of the apartment, plot, or 
building as the case may be, as an advance payment or an application fee, from a person without first 
entering into a written agreement for sale with such person and register the said agreement for sale, under 
any l aw for the time being in force.  
(2) The agreement for sale referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form as may be prescribed 
and shall specify the particulars of development of the project including the construction of building and 
apartments, along  with specifications and internal development works and external development works, 
the dates and the manner by which payments towards the cost of the apartment, plot, or building, as the 
case may be, are to be made by the allottees and the date on which t he possession of the apartment, plot or 
building is to be handed over, the rates of interest payable by the promoter to the allottee and the allottee 
to the promoter in case of default, and such other particulars, as may be prescribed . 
14. Adherence to san ctioned plans and project s pecifications by the promoter .—(1) The 
proposed project shall be developed and completed by the promoter in accordance with the sanctioned 
plans, layout plans and specifications as approve d by the competent authorities.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law, contract or agreement, after the sanctioned plans, 
layout plans and specifications and the nature of the fixtures, fittings, amenities and common areas, of the 16 
 apartment, plot or building, as the case may be , as approved by the competent authority, are disclosed or 
furnished to the person who agree to take one or more of the said apartment, plot or building, as the case 
may be, the promoter shall not make — 
(i) any additions and alterations in the sanctioned p lans, layout plans and specifications and the 
nature of fixtures, fittings and amenities described therein in respect of the apartment, plot or 
building, as the case may be, which are agreed to be taken, without the p revious consent of that 
person:  
Provide d that the promoter may make such minor additions or alterations as may be required by the 
allottee, or such minor changes or alterations as may be necessary due to architectural and structural 
reasons duly recommended and verified by an authorised Archite ct or Engineer after proper declaration 
and intimation to the allottee.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this clause, “minor additions or alterations ” excludes structural 
change including an addition to the area or change in height, or the removal of part o f a building, or any 
change to the structure, such as the construction or removal or cutting into of any wall or a part of a wall, 
partition, column, beam, joist, floor including a mezzanine floor or other support, or a change to or 
closing of any required  means of access ingress or egress or a change to the fixtures or equipment, etc.  
(ii) any  other alterations or additions in the sanctioned plans, layout plans and specifications of 
the buildings or the common areas within the project without the previous written consent of at least 
two-thirds of the allottees, other than the promoter, who have  agreed to take apartments in such 
building.  
Explanation .—For the purpo se of this clause, the allottee , irrespective of the number of apartments or 
plots, as the case may be, booked by him or booked in the name of his family, or in the case of other 
person s such as companies or firms or any association of individuals, etc., by whatever name called, 
booked in its name or booked in the name of its associated entities or related enterprises, shall be 
considered as one allottee only.  
(3) In case any structural defect or any other defect in workmanship, quality or provision of services 
or any other obligations of the promoter as per the agreement for sale relating to such development is 
brought to the notice of the promoter within a period of five years by the al lottee from the date of handing 
over possession, it shall be the duty of the promoter to rectify such defects without further charge, within 
thirty days, and in the event of promoter's failure to rectify such defects within such time, the aggrieved 
allotte es shall be entitled to receive appropriate compensation in the manner as provided under this Act.  
15. Obligations of promoter in case of transfer of a real e state project to a third party .—(1) The 
promoter shall not transfer or assign his majority rights and liabilities in respect of a real estate project to 
a third party without obtaining prior written consent from two -third allottees, except the promoter, and 
without the prior written approv al of the Authority:  
Provided that such transfer or assignment shall not affect the allotment or sale of the apartments, plots 
or buildings as the case may be, in the real estate project made by the erstwhile promoter.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this sub-section, the allottee, irrespective of the number of 
apartments or plots, as the case may be, booked by him or booked in the name of his family, or in the case 
of other persons such as companies or firms or any association of individuals, by whatever n ame called, 
booked in its name or booked in the name of its associated entities or related enterprises, shall be 
considered as one allottee only.  
(2) On the transfer or assignment being permitted by the allottees and the Authority under  
sub-section ( 1), the intending promoter shall be required to independently comply with all the pending 
obligations under the provisions of this Act or the rules and regulations made thereunder, and the pending 
obligations as per the agreement for sale entered into by the er stwhi le promoter with the allottees:  
Provided that any transfer or assignment permitted under provisions of this section shall not result in 
extension of time to the intending promoter to complete the real estate project and he shall be required to 
comply with all the pending obligations of the erstwhile promoter, and in case of default, such intending 17 
 promoter shall be liable to the consequences of breach or delay, as the case may be, as provided under this 
Act or the rules and regulations made thereunder.   
16. Obligations of promoter regarding ins urance of real estate project .—(1) The promoter shall 
obtain all such insurances as may be notified by the appropriate Government, including but not limit ed to 
insurance in respect of — 
(i) title  of the land and building as a part of the real estate project; and  
(ii) construction of the real estate project.  
(2) The promoter shall be liable to pay the premium and charges in respect of the insurance specified 
in sub -section ( 1) and shall pay the sa me before transferring the insurance to the association of the 
allottees.  
(3) The insurance as specified under sub -section ( 1) shall stand transferred to the benefit of the 
allottee or the association of allottees, as the case may be, at the time of promot er entering into an 
agreement for sale with the allottee.  
(4) On formation of the association of the allottees, all documents relating to the insurance specified 
under sub -section ( 1) shall be handed over to the association of the allottees.  
17. Transfer o f title .—(1) The promoter shall execute a registered conveyance deed in favour of the 
allottee along with the undivided proportionate title in the common areas to the association of the allottees  
or the competent authority, as the case may be, and hand over the physical possession of the plot, 
apartment of building, as the case may be, to the allottees and the common areas to the association of the 
allottees or the competent authority, as the case  may be, in a real estate project, and the other title 
documents pertaining thereto within specified period as per sanctioned plans as  provided under the local 
laws:  
Provided that, in the absence of any local law, conveyance deed in favour of the allottee or the 
association of the allottees or the competent authority, as the case may be, under this section shall be 
carried out by the promoter within three months from date of issue of occupancy certificate.  
(2) After obtaining the occupancy certificate and h anding over physical possession to the allottees in 
terms of sub -section ( 1), it shall be the responsibility of the promoter to handover the necessary 
documents and plans, including common areas, to the association of the allottees or the competent 
authori ty, as the case  may be, as per the local laws:  
Provided that, in the absence of any local law, the promoter shall handover the necessary documents 
and plans, including common areas, to the association of the allottees or the competent authority, as the 
case may be, within thirty days after obtaining the 1[completion ] certificate.  
18. Return of amount and compensation .—(1) If the promoter fails to complete or is unable to give 
possession of a n apartment, plot or building, — 
(a) in accordance with the terms of the agreement for sale or, as the case may be, duly completed 
by the date specified therein; or  
(b) due to discontinuance of his business as a developer on account of suspension or revocation of 
the registration under this Act  or for any other rea son, 
he shall be liable on demand to the allottees, in case the allottee  wishes to withdraw from the project, 
without prejudice to any other remedy available, to return the amount received by him in respect of that 
apartment, plot, building, as the case may be, with interest at such rate as may be prescribed in this behalf 
including compensation in the man ner as provided under this Act:  
Provided that where an allottee does not intend to withdraw from the project, he shall be paid, by the 
promoter, interest for every month of delay, till the handing over of the possession, at such rate as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) The promoter shall compensate the allottees in case of any loss caused to him due to defective title 
of the land, on which the project is being developed or has been developed, in the manner as provided 
                                                           
1. Subs. by the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Removal of Difficulties Order, 2016  [S.O. 3347(E) , for “occupancy”  
(w.e.f. 28 -10-2016).  18 
 under this Act, and  the claim for compensation under this subsection shall not be barred by limitation 
provided under any law for the time being in force.  
(3) If the promoter fails to discharge any other obligations imposed on him under this Act or the rules 
or regulations m ade thereunder or in accordance with the terms and conditions of the agreement for sale, 
he shall be liable to pay such compensation to the allottees, in the manner as provided under this Act.  
CHAPTER IV  
RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF ALLOTTEES  
19. Rights and duties  of allottees .—(1) The allottee shall be entitled to obtain the information 
relating to sanctioned plans, layout plans along with the specifications, approved by the competent 
authority and such other information as provided in this Act or the rules and re gulations made thereunder 
or the agreement for  sale signed with the promoter.  
(2) The allottee  shall be entitled to know stage -wise time schedule of completion of the project, 
including the provisions for water, sanitation, electricity and other amenities and services as agreed to 
between the promoter and the allottee in accordance with the terms a nd condit ions of the agreement for 
sale. 
(3) The allottee shall be entitled to claim the possession of apartment, plot or building, as the case 
may be, and the association of allottees shall be entitled to claim the possession of the common areas, as 
per t he declaration given by the promoter under sub -clause ( C) of clause ( l) of sub -section ( 2) of  
section 4.  
(4) The allottee shall be entitled to claim the refund of amount paid along with interest at such rate as 
may be prescribed and compensation in the ma nner as provided under this Act, from the promoter, if the 
promoter fails to comply or is unable to give possession of the apartment, plot or building, as the case 
may be, in accordance with the terms of agreement for sale or due to discontinuance of his b usiness as a 
developer on account of suspension or revocation of his registration under the provisions of this Act or 
the rules or regulations made thereunder.  
(5) The allottee shall be entitled to have the necessary documents and plans, including that of 
common areas, after handing over the physical possession of the apartment or plot or building as th e case 
may be, by the promoter.  
(6) Every allottee, who has entered into an agreement for sale to take an apartment, plot or building as 
the case may be, und er section 13, shall be responsible to make necessary payments in the manner and 
within the time as specified in the said agreement for sale and shall pay at the proper time and place, the 
share of the registration charges, municipal taxes, water and elect ricity charges, maintenance charges, 
ground r ent, and other charges, if any.  
(7) The allottee shall be liable to pay interest, at such rate as may be prescribed, for any delay in 
payment towards any amount or charges to  be paid under sub -section ( 6). 
(8) The obligations of the allottee under sub -section ( 6) and the liability towards interest under  
sub-section ( 7) may be reduced when mutually agreed to between the promoter and such allottee.  
(9) Every allottee of the apartment, plot or building as the case may be, shall participate towards the 
formation of an association or society or cooperative society of the allottees, or a federation of the same.  
(10) Every allottee shall take physical possession of the apartment, plot or building as the case may 
be, wit hin a period of two months of the occupancy certificate issued for the said apartment, plot o r 
building, as the case may be.  
(11) Every allottee  shall participate towards registration of the conveyance deed of the apartment, plot 
or building, as the case may be, as provided under sub -section ( 1) of section 17 of this Act.  
  19 
 CHAPTER V  
THE REAL ESTATE  REGULATORY  AUTHORITY  
20. Establishment and incorporation of Rea l Estate Regulatory Authority .—(1) The appropriate 
Government shall, within a period of one year from the date of coming into force of this Act, by 
notification, establish an Authority to be known as the Real Estate R egulatory Authority to exercise the 
powers conferred on it and to perform the functions  assigned to it under this Act:  
Provided that the appropriate Government of two or more States or Union territories may, if it deems 
fit, establish one single Authority:  
Provided further that the appropriate Government may, if it deems fit, establish more than one 
Authority in a State or Union  territory, as the case may be:  
Provided also that until the establishment of a Regulatory Authority under this section, the 
appropriate Government shall, by order, designate any Regulatory Authority or any officer preferably the 
Secretary of the department dealing with Housing, as the Regulatory Authority f or the purposes under this 
Act: 
Provided also that after the establishme nt of the Regulatory Authority, all applications, complaints or 
cases pending with the Regulatory Authority designated, shall stand transferred to the Regulatory 
Authority so established and shall be heard from the stage such applications, compl aints or ca ses are 
transferred.  
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with the power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of 
property, both movable and immovabl e, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.  
21. Composition of Authority .—The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and not less than two 
whole time Members to be appointed by the appropriate Government.  
22. Qualifications of Chairp erson and Members of Authority .—The Chairperson and other 
Members of the Authority shall be appointed by the appropriate Government on the recommendations of 
a Selection Committee consisting of the Chief Justice of the High Court or his nominee, the Secret ary of 
the Department dealing with Housing and the Law Secretary, in such manner as may be prescribed, from 
amongst persons having adequate knowledge of an d professional experience of at -least twenty years in 
case of the Chairperson and fifteen years in th e case of the Members in urban development, housing, real 
estate development, infrastructure, economics, technical experts from relevant fields, planning, law, 
commerce, accountancy, industry, management, social service, publ ic affairs or administration:  
Provided that a person who is, or has been, in the service of the State Government shall not be 
appointed as a Chairperson unless such person has held the post of Additional Secretary to the Central 
Government or any equivalent post in the Central Governmen t or State Government:  
Provided further that a person who is, or has been, in the service of the State Government shall not be 
appointed as a member unless such person has held the post of Secretary to the State Government or any 
equivalent post in the Sta te Government or Central Government.  
23. Term of offic e of Chairperson and Members .—(1) The Chairperson and Members shall hold 
office for a term not exceeding five years from the date on which they enter upon their office, or until 
they attain the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier and shall not be eligible for re -appointment.  
(2) Before appointing any person as a Chairperson or Member, the appropriate Government shall 
satisfy itself that the person does not have any such financial or other inte rest as is likely to affect 
prejudicially his functions as such Member.  
24. Salary and allowances payab le to Chairperson and Members .—(1) The salary and allowances 
payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and other Members shall be 
such as may be prescribed and shall not be varied to their disadvantage during their tenure.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 23, the Chairperson or a 
Member, as the case may be, may, — 
(a) relin quish his office by giving in writing, to the appropriate Government, notice of  not less 
than three months; or   20 
 (b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provis ions of section 26 of this Act.  
(3) Any vacancy caused to the office of the Chairperson or any other Member shall be filled -up 
within a period of three months from the date on which such vacancy occurs.  
25. Adminis trative powers of Chairperson .—The Chairperson shall have powers of general 
superintendence and directions in the cond uct of the affairs of Authority and he shall, in addition to 
presiding over the meetings of the Authority, exercise and discharge such administrative powers and 
functions of the Authority as may be prescribed.  
26. Removal of Chairperson and Members from of fice in certain circumstances .—(1) The 
appropriate Government may, in accordance with the procedure notified, remove from office the 
Chairperson or other Members, if the Chairperson or such oth er Member, as the case may be, — 
(a) has be en adjudged as an insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence , involving moral turpitude; or  
(c) has become physically or mentally inca pable of acting as a Member; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions ; or 
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prej udicial to the public 
interest.  
(2) The Chairperson or Member shall not be removed from his office on the ground specified under 
clause ( d) or clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) exce pt by an order made by the appropriate Government after an 
inquiry made by a Judge of the High Court in which such Chairperson or Member has been informed of 
the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those char ges. 
27. Restrictions on Chairperson or Members on employ ment after cessation of office .—(1) The 
Chairperson or a Member, ceasing to hold office as such, shall not — 
(a) accept  any employment in, or connected with, the management or administration of, any 
person or organisation which has been associated with any work under this Act, from the date on 
which he ceases to hold office:  
Provided that nothing contained in this clause s hall apply to any employment under the 
appropriate Government or a local authority or in any statutory authority or any corporation 
established by or under any Central, State or provincial Act or a Government Company, as defined 
under clause ( 45) of sectio n 2 of the Companies Act, 2013  (18 of 2013) , which is not a promoter as 
per the provisions of this Act;  
(b) act, for or on behalf of any person or organisation in connection with any specific proceeding 
or transaction or negotiation or a case to which the Authority is a party and with respect to which the 
Chairperson or such Member had, before cessation of office, acted for or pro vided advice to the 
Authority;  
(c) give advice to any person using information which was obtained in his capacity as the 
Chairper son or a Member and being unavailable to or not being able to be made avai lable to the 
public;  
(d) enter into a contract of service with, or accept an appointment to a board  of directors of, or 
accept an offer of employment with, an entity with which he had direct and significant official 
dealings dur ing his term of office as such.  
(2) The Chairperson and Members shall not communicate or reveal to any person any matter which 
has been brought under his consideration or known to him while acting as such.  
28. Officers and other employees of Authority .—(1) The appropriate Government may, in 
consultation with the Authority appoint such officers and employees as it considers necessary for the 
efficient discharge of their functions under this Act who would disc harge their functions under the general 
superintendence of the Chairperson.   21 
 (2) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
officers and of the employees of the Authority appointed under sub -section ( 1) shal l be such as may be 
prescribed.  
29. Meetings of Authority .—(1) The Authority shall meet at such places and times, and shall follow 
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, (including quorum at such 
meetings), as may  be specified by the regul ations made by the Authority.  
(2) If the Chairperson for any reason, is unable to attend a meeting of the Authority, any other 
Member chosen by the Members present amongst themselves at the meeting , shall preside at the meeting.  
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided by a majority 
of votes by the Members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson or 
in his absence, the person presiding shall  have a sec ond or casting vote.  
(4) The questions which come up before the Authority shall be dealt with as expeditiously as possible 
and the Authority shall dispose of the same within a period of sixty days from the date  of receipt of the 
application:  
Provided that where any such application could not be disposed of within the said period of sixty 
days, the Authority shall record its reasons in writing for not disposing of the application within that 
period.  
30. Vacancies, etc., not to invali date proceeding of Author ity.—No act or proceeding of the 
Authority shall be invalid merely by reas on of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the con stitution of, the Authority; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting a s a Member of the Authority; or  
(c) any  irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of the case.  
31. Filing of complaints with the Authority  or the adjudicating officer .—(1) Any aggrieved 
person may file a complaint with the Authority or the adjudicating officer, as the case may be, for any 
violation or contravention of the provisions of this Act or the rules and regulations made thereunder , 
against any promoter , allottee or real e state agent, as the case may be.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this sub -section “person ” shall include the association of allottees 
or any voluntary consumer association registered under any l aw for the time being in force.  
(2) The form, manner and fees for filing complaint under sub -section ( 1) shall be such as may be 
1[prescribed ]. 
32. Functions of Authority for pro motion of real estate sector .—The Authority shall in order to 
facilitate the growth and promotion of a healthy, transparent, efficient and competitive real estate sector 
make recommendations to the appropriate Government o r the competent auth ority, as the case may be, 
on,— 
(a) protection of interest of the allottees, promoter and real estate agent;  
(b) creation of a single window system for ensuring time bound project approvals and clearances 
for ti mely completion of the project;  
(c) creation of a transparent and robust grievance redressal mechanism against acts of omission  
and commission of competent a uthorities and their officials;  
(d) measures to encourage investment in the real estate sector including measures to incre ase 
financial assistance  to affordable housing segment;  
(e) measures to encourage construction of environmentally sustainable and affordable housing, 
promoting standardisation and use of appropriate construction materials, fixtures, fittin gs and 
constructi on techniques;   
                                                           
1. Subs. by the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Removal of Difficulties Order, 2016  [S.O. 3347 (E) ], for “specified by 
regulations” (w.e.f. 28 -10-2016).  22 
 (f) measures to encourage grading of projects on various parameters of development including 
grading of promoters;  
(g) measures to facilitate amicable conciliation of disputes between the promoters and the 
allottees through dispute settleme nt forums set up by the con sumer or promoter associations;  
(h) measures to facilitate digitization of land records and system towards conclusive proper ty 
titles with title guarantee;  
(i) to render advice to the appropriate Government in matters relating to  the dev elopment of real 
estate sector;  
(j) any other issue that the Authority may think necessary for the promotion of the real estate 
sector.  
33. Adv ocacy and awareness measures .—(1) The appropriate Government may, while formulating 
a policy on real estate sector (including review of laws related to real estate sector) or any other matter, 
make a reference to the Authority for its opinion on possible effect of such policy or law on r eal estate 
sector and on the receipt of such a reference, the Authority shall within a period of sixty days of making 
such reference, give its opinion to the appropriate Government , which may thereafter  take further action 
as it deems fit.  
(2) The opinion given by the Authority under sub -section ( 1) shall not be binding upon the 
appropriate Government in f ormulating such policy or laws.  
(3) The Authority shall take suitable measures for the promotion of advocacy, creating awareness and 
imparting training ab out laws relating to real estate sector and policies.  
34. Functions of Authority .—The functions of the Authority shall include — 
(a) to register and regulate real estate projects and real estate ag ents registered under this Act;  
(b) to publish and maintain a website of records, for public viewing, of all real estate projects for 
which registration has been given, with such details as may be prescribed, including information 
provided in the application for which  registration has been granted;  
(c) to maintain a database, on its website, for public viewing, and enter the names and 
photographs of promoters as defaulters including the project details, registration for which has been 
revoked or have been penalised under this Act, with reasons therefor, for access t o the general public;  
(d) to maintain a database, on its website, for public viewing, and enter the names and 
photographs  of real estate agents who have applied and registered under this Act, with such details as 
may be prescribed, including those whose registratio n has been rejected or revoked;  
(e) to fix through regulations for each areas under its jurisdiction the standar d fees to be levied on 
the allottees or the promoter or the real es tate agent, as the case may be;  
(f) to ensure compliance of the obligations cast upon the promoters, the allottees and the real 
estate agents under this Act and the rules a nd regulations ma de thereunder;  
(g) to ensure compliance of its regulations or orders or directions made in exercis e of its powers 
under this Act;  
(h) to perform such other functions as may be entrusted to the Authority by the appropriate 
Government as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
35. Powers of Authority to call for informa tion, conduct investigations .—(1) Where the Authority 
considers it expedient to do so, on a complaint or suo motu , relating to this Act or the rules o r regulations 
made thereunder, it may, by order in writing and recording reasons therefor call upon any promoter or 
allottee or real estate agent, as the case may be, at any time to furnish in writing such information or 
explanation relating to its affairs a s the Authority may require and appoint one or more persons to make 
an inquiry in relation to the affairs of any promoter or allottee or the real estate agent, as the case may be.   23 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, while exercising 
the powers under sub -section ( 1), the Authority shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908)  while trying a suit, in respect of the following 
matters, namely: — 
(i) the discovery and production of books of account and other documents, at such place and at 
such time as may  be specified by the Authority;  
(ii) summoning and enforcing the attendance of pers ons and examining them on oath;  
(iii) issuing commissions for the examina tion of witnesses or documents;  
(iv) any other matter which may be prescribed . 
36. Power to issue interim orders .—Where during an inquiry, the Authority is satisfied that an act in 
contravention of this Act, or the rules and regulations made thereun der, has been committed and 
continues to be committed or that such act is about to be committed, the Authority may, by order, restrain 
any promoter, allottee or real estate agent from carrying on such act until the conclusion of such inquiry 
or until further orders, without giving notice to such party, where the Authority deems it necessary.  
37. Powers of  Authority to issue directions .—The Authority may, for the purpose of discharging its 
functions under the provisions of this Act or rules or re gulations made thereunder, issue such directions 
from time to time, to the promoters or allottees or real estate agents, as the case may be, as it may 
consider necessary and such directions shall be binding on all concerned.  
38. Powers of Authority .—(1) The Authority shall have powers to impose penalty or interest, in 
regard to any contravention of obligations cast upon the promoters, the allottees and the real estate agents, 
under this Act or the rules and t he regulations made thereunder.  
(2) The Authority  shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and, subject to the other 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the Authority shall have powers  to regulate its own 
procedure.  
(3) Where an issue is raised relating to agreement, action,  omissi on, practice or procedure that — 
(a) has an appreciable prevention, restriction or distortion of competition in connection with the 
developme nt of a real estate project; or  
(b) has  effect of market power of monopoly situation being abused for affecting interest of 
allottees adversely,  
then the Authority, may , suo motu , make reference in respect of such issue to the Competition 
Commission of India.  
39. Rectification of orders .—The Authority may, at any time within a period of two years from the 
date of the order made under this Act, with a view to rectifying any mistake apparent from the record, 
amend any order passed by it, and shall make such amendment, if the mistake is brough t to its notice by 
the parties:  
Provided that no such amendment shall be made in respect of any order against which an appeal has  
been preferred under this Act:  
Provided further that the Authority shall not, while rectifying any mistake apparent from record, 
amend substantive part of its order passed under the provisions of this Act . 
40. Recovery of interest or penalty or compensation and enforcement of order, et c.—(1) If a 
promoter or an allottee or a real estate agent, as the case may be, fails to pay any in terest or penalty or 
compensation imposed on him, by the adjudicating officer or the Regulatory Authority or the Appellate 
Authority, as the case may be, under this Act or the rules and regulations  made thereunder, it shall be 
recoverable from such promoter or allottee or real estate agent, in such manner as may be prescribed  as an 
arrears of land revenue.   24 
 (2) If any adjudicating officer or the Regulatory Authority or the Appellate Tribunal, as the  case may 
be, issues any order or directs any person to do any act, or refrain from doing any act, which it is 
empowered to do under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder, then in case of failure by any 
person to comply with such order or di rection, the same shall be enforced, in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
CHAPTER VI  
CENTRAL  ADVISORY  COUNCIL  
41. Establishmen t of Central Advisory Council .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, establish with effect from such date as it may spe cify in such notification, a Council to be 
known a s the Central Advisory Council.  
(2) The Minister to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry of the Central Government 
dealing with Housing shall be the ex officio  Chairperson o f the Central Advisory Council.  
(3) The Central Advisory Council shall consist of representatives of the Ministry of Finance, Ministry 
of Industry and Commerce, Ministry of Urban Development, Ministry  of Consumer Affairs, Ministry  of 
Corporate Affairs, Ministry of Law a nd Justice, Niti Aayog, National Housing Bank, Housing and Urban 
Development Corporation, five representatives of State Governments to be selected by rotation, five 
representatives of the Real Estate Regulatory Authorities to be selected by rotation, and a ny other Central 
Government department as notified.  
(4) The Central Advisory Council shall also consist of not more than ten members to represent the 
interests of real estate industry, consumers, real estate agents, construction labourers, non -governmental  
organisations and academic and research bodies in the real estate sector.  
42. Functions  of Central Advisory Council .—(1) The functions of the Central Advisory Council 
shall be to advise and recommend the Central Gove rnment, — 
(a) on all matters concerning the implementation of this Act;  
(b) on major questions of policy;  
(c) towards p rotection of consumer interest;  
(d) to foster the growth and develop ment of the real estate sector;  
(e) on any other matter as may be assigned t o it by the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Government may specify the rules to give effect to the recommendations of the 
Central Advisory Council on matters as provided under sub -section ( 1). 
CHAPTER VII  
THE REAL ESTATE  APPELLATE  TRIBUNAL  
43. Establishment of Re al Estate Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The appropriate Government shall, 
within a period of one year from the date of coming into force of this Act, by notification, establish an 
Appellat e Tribunal to be known as the — (name of the State/Union territory) Real Estate Appellate 
Tribunal.  
(2) The appropriate Government may, if it deems necessary, establish one or more benches of the 
Appellate Tribunal, for various jurisdictions, in the State or Union  territory, as the case may be.  
(3) Every bench of the Appellate Tribunal shall consis t of at least one Judicial Member and one 
Admi nistrative or Technical Member.  
(4) The appropriate Government of two or more Sta tes or Union territories may, if it deems fit, 
establish  one single Appellate Tribunal:  
Provided that, until the establishment of  an Appellate Tribunal under this section, the appropriate 
Government shall designate, by  order, any Appellate Tribunal f unctioning under any law for the time 
being in force, to be the Appellate Tribunal to hear appeal s under the Act:   25 
 Provided further tha t after the Appellate Tribunal under this section is established, all matters pending 
with the Appellate Tribunal designated to hear appeals, shall stand transferred to the Appellate Tribunal 
so established and shall be heard from the st age such appeal is transferred.  
(5) Any person aggrieved by any direction or decision or order made by the Authority or by an 
adjudicating officer under this Act may prefer an appeal before the Appellate Tribunal having jurisdiction  
over the matter:  
Provided that where a promoter files an appeal with the Appellate Tribunal, it shall not be entertained , 
without the promoter  first having deposited with the Appellate Tribunal atleast thirty per cent. of the 
penalty, or such higher percentage as may be de termined by the Appellate Tribunal, or the total amount to 
be paid to the allottee including interest and compensation imposed on him, if any, or with both, as the 
case may be, b efore the said appeal is heard.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this sub -section “person ” shall include the association of allottees 
or any voluntary consumer association registered under any law for the time being in force.  
44. Application for settlement of disputes and a ppeals to Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The 
appropriate Government or the competent authority or any person aggrieved by any direction or order or 
decision of the Authority or the adjudicating officer may prefer an ap peal to the Appellate Tribunal.  
(2) Every appeal made under sub -section ( 1) shall be preferred within a pe riod of sixty days from the 
date on which a copy of the direction or order or decision made by the Authority or the adjudicating 
officer is received by the appropriate Government or the competent authority or the aggrieved person and 
it shall be in such fo rm and accompanied by such fee, as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain any appeal after the expiry of sixty days if it is 
satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not  filling it within that period.  
(3) On receipt of a n appeal under sub -section ( 1), the Appellate Tribunal may after giving the parties 
an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders, including in terim orders, as it thinks fit.  
(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the p arties and to the 
Authority or the adjudicati ng officer, as the case may be.  
(5) The appeal preferred under sub -section ( 1), shall be dealt with by it as expeditiously as possible 
and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the appeal within a period o f sixty days from  the date of 
receipt of appeal:  
Provided that where any such appeal could not be disposed of within the said period of sixty days, the 
Appellate Tribunal shall record its reasons in writing for not disposing of the appeal within that perio d. 
(6) The Appellate Tribunal may, for the purpose of examining the legality or propriety or correctness 
of any order or decision of the Authority or the adjudicating officer, on its own motion or otherwise, call 
for the records relevant to deposing of suc h appeal and make such orders as it thinks fit.  
45. Compo sition of Appellate Tribunal .—The Appellate Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson and 
not less than two whole time Members of which one shall be a Judicial member and other shall be a 
Technical or Administrative Member, to be appointed  by the appropriate Government.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this Chapter, — 
(i) “Judicial Member ” means a Member of the Appellate Tribunal appointed as such under  
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 46;  
(ii) “Technical or Administrative Member ” means a Member of the Appellate Tribunal appointed 
as such under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 46.  
46. Qualifications for appointmen t of Chairperson and Members .—(1) A person shall not be 
qualified for appointment as the Chairperson or a Member of the  Appellate Tribunal unless he, — 
(a) in the case of Chairperson, is or has be en a Judge of a High Court; and   26 
 (b) in the case of a Judicial Member he has held a judicial office in the territory of India for at 
least fifteen years or has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and has held the post of 
Additional Secretary of that service or any equivalent post, or has been an advocate for at least twenty 
years with experience in dealing with real estate matters; and  
(c) in the case of a Technical or Administrative Member, he is a person who is well -versed in the 
field of urban development, housing, real estate devel opment, infrastructure, economics, planning, 
law, commerce, accountancy, industry, management, public affairs or administration and possesses 
experience of at least twenty years in the field or who has held the post in the Central Government or 
a State Gov ernment equivalent to the post of Additional Secretary to the Government of India or an 
equivalent post in the Central Government or an equivalen t post in the State Government.  
(2) The Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal shall be appointed by the appropr iate Government in 
consultation with the Chief Justice of High Court or his nominee . 
(3) The Judicial Members and Technical or Administrative Members of the Appellate Tribunal shall 
be appointed by the appropriate Government on the recommendations of a Sel ection Committee 
consisting of the Chief Justice of the High Court or his nominee, the Secretary of the Department 
handling Housing and the Law Secretary and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
47. Term of office of Chairperson and Members .—(1) The Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal 
or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal shall hold office, as such for a term not exceeding five years from 
the date on which he enters upon his office, but shall not be eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that i n case a person, who is or has been a Judge of a High Court, has been appointed as 
Chairperson of the Tribunal, he shall not hold office after he has attained the age of sixty -seven years:  
Provided further that no Judicial Member or Technical or Administra tive Member shall hold office 
after he has attain ed the age of sixty -five years.  
(2) Before appointing any person as Chairperson or Member, the appropriate Government shall 
satisfy itself that the person does not have any such financial or other interest, as is likely to affect 
prejudicially his functions as such member.  
48. Salary and allowances pay able to Chairperson and Members .—(1) The salary and allowances 
payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and other Members s hall be 
such as may be prescribed and shall not be varied to their di sadvantage during their tenure.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 47, the Chairperson or a 
Member, as the case may be, may: — 
(a) relinquish his  office by giving in writing to the appropriate Government a notice  of not less 
than three months;  
(b) be removed from his office in accordance wit h the provisions of section 49.  
(3) A vacancy caused to the office of the Chairperson or any other Member, as  the case may be, shall 
be filled -up within a period of three months from the date on which such vacancy occurs.  
49. Removal of Chairperson and Member from office in certain circumstances .—(1) The 
appropriate Government may, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court, remove from 
office of the Chairperson or any Judicial Member or Technical or Administrative Member of the 
Appellate Tribunal, who — 
(a) has been adjudged as an  insolvent; or  
(b) has  been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the appropriate Governme nt 
involves moral turpitude; or  
(c) has become physi cally or mentally incapable; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his fu nctions; or   27 
 (e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prej udicial to the public 
interest.  
(2) The Chairperson or Judicial Member or Technical or Administrative Member shall not be 
removed from his office except by an order made  by the appropriate Government after an inquiry made 
by the Judge of the High Court in whic h such Chairperson or Judicial M ember or Technical or 
Administrative Member has been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity 
of being heard in respect of those charges.  
(3) The appropriate Government may suspend from the office of the Chairperson or Judicial Member 
or Technical or Administrative Member in respect of whom a reference of conducting an inquiry has been 
made to the Judge of the High Court under sub -section ( 2), until the appropriate Government passes an 
order on receipt of the report of inquiry made by the Judge of th e High Court on such reference.  
(4) The appropriate Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for inquiry referred to in  
sub-section ( 2). 
50. Restrictions on Chairperson or Judicial Member or Technical or Administrative Member 
on employment after cessation of office .—(1) The Chairp erson or Judicial Member or Technical or 
Administrative Member, ceasing to hold office as such shall not: — 
(a) accept any employment in, or connected with, the management or administration of, any 
person or organisation which has been associated with any w ork under this Act, from the date on 
which he ceases to hold office:  
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply to any employment under the 
appropriate Government or a local authority or in any statutory authority or any corporation 
establi shed by or under any Central, State o r Provincial Act or a Government Company as defined 
under clause ( 45) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013  (18 of 2013) , which is not a promoter as 
per the provisions of this Act;  
(b) act, for or on behalf of any person or organisation in connection with any specific proceeding 
or transaction or negotiation or a case to which the Authority is a party and with respect to which the 
Chairperson or Judicial Member or Technical or Administ rative Member had, before cessation of 
office, acted for or pro vided advice to, the Authority;  
(c) give advice to any person using information which was obtained in his capacity as the 
Chairperson or Judicial Member or Technical or Administrative Member an d being unavailable to or 
not being able to b e made available to the public;  
(d) enter into a contract  of service with, or accept an appointment to a board of directors of, or 
accept an offer of employment with, an entity with which he had direct and signi ficant official 
dealings dur ing his term of office as such.  
(2) The Chairperson or Judicial Member or Technical or Administrative Member shall not 
communicate or reveal to any person any matter which has been brought under his consideration or 
known to him  while acting as such.  
51. Officers and other employees of Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The appropriate Government shall 
provide the Appellate Tribunal with such officers an d employees as it may deem fit.  
(2) The officers and employees of the Appellate Tribunal  shall discharge their functions under the 
general superintendence of its Chairp erson.  
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
officers and employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed.  
52. Vacancies .—If, for reason other than temporary absence, any vacancy occurs in the office of the 
Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal, the appropriate Government shall appoint another 
person in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill the vacancy and the proceedings may be 
continued before the Appellate  Tribunal from the stage at which the vacancy is filled.  28 
 53. Powers of Tribunal .—(1) The Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down 
by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908)  but shall be guided by the  principles of natural justice.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal shall have power  to regulate its own 
procedure.  
(3) The Appellate Tribunal shall also not be bound  by the rules of evidence contained in the Indian 
Evidence  Act, 1872  (1 of 1872) . 
(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purpose of discharging its functions under this Act, the 
same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Pro cedure, 1908  (5 of 1908)  in respect 
of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any pe rson and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discove ry and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) issuing commissions for the examinat ions of witnesses or documents;  
(e) reviewing it s decisions;  
(f) dismissing an application for defaul t or directing it ex parte ; and  
(g) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(5) All proceedings before the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within 
the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228 for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code   
(45 of 1860) , and the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be civil court for the purposes of sec tion 195 
and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
54. Administrative powers of Chairperson of Appellate Tribunal .—The Chairperson shall have 
powers of general superintendence and direction in the conduct of the affairs of Appellate Tribunal and he 
shall, in addition to presiding over the mee tings of the Appellate Tribunal, exercise and discharge such 
administrative powers and functions of the Appellate Tribunal as may be prescribed.  
55. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate pr oceeding of Appellate Tribunal .—No act or proceeding of 
the Appellate Tribunal shall be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution  of, the Appellate Tribunal; or 
(b) any  defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Membe r of the Appellate Tribunal; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Appellate Tribunal not affecting the merits of the case.  
56. Right to legal representation .—The applicant or appellant may either appear in person or 
authorise one or more chartered accountants or company secretaries or cost accountants or legal 
practitioners or any of its officers to present his or its case before the Appellate Tribunal or the Regulatory 
Authority or the adju dicati ng officer, as the case may be.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “chartered accountant ” means a chartered accountant as defined in clause ( b) of sub -section 
(1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949  (38 of 1949)  or any other law for the time 
being in force and who has obtained a certificate of practice under sub -sectio n (1) of section 6 of that 
Act; 
(b) “company secretary ” means a company secretary as defined in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the C ompany Secretaries Act, 1980  (56 of 1980)  or any other law for the time being in 
force and who has obtained a certificate of practice under sub -sectio n (1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(c) “cost accountant ” means a cost accountant as defined in clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959  (23 of 1959)  or any other law for the time   29 
 being in force and who has obtained a certificate of practice under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that 
Act; 
(d) “legal practitioner ” means an advocate, vakil or an attorney of any High Court, and includes a 
pleader in practice.  
57. Orders passed by Appellate Tribunal to be executable as a decree .—(1) Every order made by 
the Appellate Tribunal under this Act shall be executable by the Appel late Tribunal as a decree of civil 
court, and for this purpose, the Appellate Tribunal shall have a ll the powers of a civil court.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Appellate Tribunal may transmit any 
order made by it to a civil court having local jurisdiction and such civil court shall execute the order as if 
it were a decree made by the court.  
58. Appeal to H igh Court .—(1) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Appellate 
Tribunal, may, file an appeal to the H igh Court, within a period of sixty days from the date of 
communication of the decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal, to him, on any one or more of the 
grounds specified in section 100 of the  Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) : 
Provided that the High Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of sixty days, 
if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from  preferring the appeal in time.  
Explanation .—The expression “High Court ” means the High C ourt of a State or Union territory 
where the r eal estate project is situated.  
(2) No appeal shall lie against any decision or order made by the Appellate Tribunal with the consent 
of the parties.  
CHAPTER VIII  
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND ADJUDICATION  
59. Punish ment for nonregistration under section 3 .—(1) If any promoter contravenes the 
provisions of section 3, he shall be liable to a penalty which may extend up to ten per cent. of the 
estimated cost of the real estate project as determi ned by the Authority.  
(2) If any promoter does not comply with the orders, decisions or directions issued under sub -section 
(1) or continues to violate the provisions of section 3, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend up to three years or with fine which may extend up to a further ten per cent. of the 
estimated cost of the real estate project, or with both.  
60. Penalty for contravention of section 4 .—If any promoter provides false information or 
contravenes the provisions of section 4, he shall be liable to a penalty which may extend up to five per 
cent. of the estimated cost of the real estate project, as determined by the Authority.  
61. Penalty for con travention of other provisions of this Act .—If any promoter contravenes any 
other provisions of this Act, other than that provided under section 3 or section 4, or the rules or 
regulations made thereunder, he shall be liable to a penalty which may extend u p to five per cent. of the 
estimated cost of the real estate project as determined by the Authority.  
62. Penalty for nonregistration and contravention under sections 9 and 10 .—If any real estate 
agent fails to comply with or contravenes the provisions of s ection 9 or section 10, he shall be liable to a 
penalty of ten thousand rupees for every day during which such default continues, which may 
cumulatively extend up to five per cent. of the cost  of plot, apartment or building , as the case may be, of 
the real  estate project, for which the sale or purchase has been facilitated as determined by the Authority.  
63. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Authority by promoter .—If any promoter, who 
fails to comply with, or contravenes any of the orders or directions of the Authority, he shall be liable to a 
penalty for every day during which such default continues, which may cumulatively extend up to five per 
cent., of the estimated cost of the real estate project as determined by the Authority.  
64. Penalty  for failure to comply with orders of Appellate Tribunal by promoter .—If any 
promoter, who fails to comply with, or contravenes any of the orders, decisions or directions of the 30 
 Appellate  Tribunal , he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend up to three 
years or with fine for every day during which such default continues, which may cumulatively extend up 
to ten per cent. of the estimated cost of the real estate project, or with both.  
65. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Authority by real estate agent .—If any real estate 
agent, who fails to comply with, or contravenes any of the orders or directions of the Authority, he shall 
be liable to a penalty for every day during which such default continues, which may cumulatively e xtend 
up to five per cent., of the estimated cost of plot, apartment or building, as the case may be, of the real 
estate project, for which the sale or purchase has been facilitated and as determined by the Authority.  
66. Penalty for failure to comply with  orders of Appellate Tribunal by real estate agent .—If any 
real estate agent, who fails to comply with, or contravenes any of the orders, decisions or directions of the 
Appellate Tribunal, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may exten d up to one year 
or with fine for every day during which such default continues, which may cumulatively extend up to ten 
per cent. of the estimated cost of plot, apartment or building, as the case may be, of the real estate project, 
for which the sale or p urchase has been facilitated, or with both.  
67. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Authority by allottee .—If any allottee , who fails 
to comply with, or contravenes any of the orders, decisions or directions of the Authority he shall be 
liable to a penalty for the period during which such default continues, which may cumulatively extend up 
to five per cent. of the plot, apart ment or building cost, as the case may be, as determined by the 
Authority.  
68. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Appellate Tribunal by allottee .—If any allottee, 
who fails to comply with, or contravenes any of the orders or directions of the App ellate Tribunal, as the 
case may be, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend up to one year or 
with fine for every day during which such default continues, which may cumulatively extend up to ten per 
cent. of the plot, apartmen t or building cost, as the case may be, or with both.  
69. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an Offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time, the offence was committed was in charge of, or was responsible 
to the compa ny for the conduct of, the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section, shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment under this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he 
had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company, and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm, or other associat ion of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ” in relation  to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
70. Compounding of offences .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal  
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , if any person is punished with imprisonment under this Act, the punishment 
may, either before or after the institution of the prosecution, be compounded by the court on such terms 
and conditions and on payment of such sums as may be presc ribed:  
Provided that the sum prescribed shall not, in any case, exceed the maximum amount of the fine 
which may be imposed for the offence so compounded.  
71. Power to adjudicate .—(1) For the purpose of adjudging compensation under sections 12, 14, 18 
and section 19, the Authority shall appoint , in consultation with the appropriate Government , one or more 
judicial officer as deemed necessary, who is or has been a District Judge to be an adjudicating officer for 31 
 holding an inquiry in the prescribed manner, a fter giving any person concerned a reasonable op portunity 
of being heard:  
Provided that any person whose complaint in respect of matters covered under sections 12, 14, 18 and 
section 19 is pending before the Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum or the Consume r Disputes 
Redressal Commission or the National Consumer Redressal Commission, established under section 9 of 
the Consumer Protection Act, 1986  (68 of 1986) , on or before the commencement of this Act, he may, 
with the permission of such Forum or Commission , as the case may be, withdraw the complaint pending 
before it and file an application before the adjud icating officer under this Act.  
(2) The application for adjudging compensation under sub -section ( 1), shall be dealt with by the 
adjudicating officer as expeditiously as possible and dispose of the same within a period of sixty days 
from the date  of receipt of the application:  
Provided that where any such application could not be disposed of within the said period of sixty 
days, the adjudicating officer sh all record his reasons in writing for not disposing of the ap plication within 
that period.  
(3) While holding an inquiry the adjudicating officer shall have power to summon and enforce the 
attendance of any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances  of the case to give evidence or to 
produce any document which in the opinion of the adjudicating officer, may be useful for or relevant to 
the subject matter of the inquiry and if, on such inquiry, he is satisfied that the person has failed to comply 
with the provisions of any of the sections specified in sub -section ( 1), he may direct to pay such 
compensation or interest, as the case any be, as he thinks fit in accordance with the provisions of any of 
those sections.  
72. Factors to be taken into account b y the adjudicating officer .—While adjudging the quantum 
of compensation or interest, as the case may be, under section 71, the adjudicating officer shall have due 
regard to the following factors, namely: — 
(a) the amount of disproportionate gain or unfair a dvantage, wherever quantifiable, m ade as a 
result of the default;  
(b) the amount of loss caused as a  result of the default;  
(c) the re petitive nature of the default;  
(d) such  other factors which the adjudicating officer considers necessary to the case in furtherance 
of justice.  
CHAPTER IX  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDITS AND REPORTS  
73. Grants and loans by Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made b y Parliament in this behalf, make to the Authority grants and loans of such sums of 
money as that Government may consider necessary.  
74. Grants and loans by State Government .—The State Government may, after due appropriation 
made by State Legislature by la w in this behalf, make to the Authority, grants and loans of such sums of 
money as the State Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.  
75. Constitution of Fund .—(1) The  appropriate Government shall constitute a fund to be called the 
'Real Estate Regulatory Fund' and th ere shall be credited thereto, — 
(a) all Government gr ants received by the Authority;  
(b) the fees received under this Act;  
(c) the interest accrued on the amounts ref erred to in clauses ( a) to ( b). 
  32 
 (2) The Fun d shall be applied for meeting — 
(a) the salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and other Members, the adjudicating 
officer and the administrative expenses including the salaries and allowa nces payable to the officers 
and other employees of the Author ity and the Appellate Tribunal;  
(b) the other expenses of the Authority in connection with the discharge of its functions and f or 
the purposes  of this Act.  
(3) The Fund shall be administered by a committee of such Members of the Authority as may be  
determined by the Chairperson.  
(4) The committee appointed under sub -section ( 3) shall spend monies out of the Fund for carrying 
out the objects for which the Fund has been constituted.  
76. Crediting s ums realised by way of penalties to Consolidated Fund of India or State 
account .—(1) All sums realised, by way of penalties, imposed by the Appellate Tribunal or the 
Authority, in the Union territories , shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India.  
(2) All sums realised, by way o f penalties, imposed by the App ellate Tribunal or the Authority, in a 
State, shall be credited to such account as the State Government may specify.  
77. Budget, accounts and audit .—(1) The Authority shall prepare a budget, mai ntain proper 
accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be 
prescribed by the appropriate Government in consultation with the Comptroll er and Auditor  General of 
India.  
(2) The accounts of the Authorit y shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor  General of India at 
such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroll er and Auditor  General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General and any person appointed by him in connection with the 
audit of the accounts of the Authority under this Act shall have the same rights and privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor  General generally has in 
connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular shall have the right to demand and 
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers, and to inspect any o f 
the offices of t he Authority.  
(4) The accounts of the Authority, as certified by the  Comptroller  and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the appropriate Government by the Authority and the appropriate Government shall cause the 
audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament or, as the 
case may be, before the State Legislature or the Union territory Legislature, where it consists of two 
Houses, or where such legislature consists of one House, b efore that House.  
78. Annual report .—(1) The Authority shall prepare once in every year, in such form and at such 
time as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government, — 
(a) a description of all the activities of the A uthority for the previous year;  
(b) the annual acco unts for the previous year; and  
(c) the programm es of work for the coming year.  
(2) A copy of the report received under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
received, before each House of Parliament or, as the case ma y be, before the State Legislature or the 
Union Territory Legislature, where it consists of two Houses, or where such legislature consists of one 
House, before that House.  
  33 
 CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
79. Bar of jurisdiction .—No civil court shall have jurisdi ction to entertain any suit or proceeding in 
respect of any matter which the Authority or the adjudicating officer or the Appellate Tribunal is 
empowered by or under this Act to determine and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other 
authority i n respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under 
this Act.  
80. Cognizance of offences .—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder save on a complaint in writing made by the Authority 
or by any officer of the Authority duly authorised by it for this purpose.  
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
shall try any offence punishab le under this Act.  
81. Delegation .—The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to any member, 
officer of the Authority or any other person subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the 
order, such of its powers and functions under this Act (except the power to make regulations under 
section 85 ), as it may deem necessary.  
82. Power of appropriate Government to supersede Authority .—(1) If, at any time, the 
appropriate  Government is of the opinion, — 
(a) that, on account  of circumstances beyond the control of the Authority, it is unable to discharge 
the functions or perform the duties imposed on it by or under  the provisions of this Act; or  
(b) that the Authority has persistently defaulted in complying with any direction given by the 
appropriate Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions or performance of the 
duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act and as a result of such default the financial 
position of the Authority or the adminis tration of  the Authority has suffered; or  
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary i n the public interest so to do,  
the appropriate Government may, by notification, supersede the Authority for such period, not exceeding 
six months, as may be specified in the notification and appoint a person or persons as the President or the 
Governor, as the case may be, may direct to exercise powers and discharge functions under this Act:  
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the appropriate Go vernment shall give a 
reasonable opportunity to the Authority to make representations against the proposed supersession and 
shall consider the representat ions, if any, of the Authority.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section (1) super seding the Authority, — 
(a) the Chairperson and other Members shall, as from the date of supersession , vacate their 
offices as such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be 
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Authority shall, until the Authority is reconstituted  
under sub -section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by the pers on or persons refe rred to in  
sub-section ( 1); and  
(c) all properties owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until the Authority is reconstituted 
under sub -section ( 3), vest  in the appropriate Government.  
(3) On or before the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under 
sub-section ( 1), the appropriate Government shall reconstitute the Authority by a fresh appointment of its 
Chairperson and other members and in such case any person who had vacated his office under  clause ( a) 
of sub -section ( 2) shall not be deemed to be d isqualified for re -appointment.  
(4) The appropriate Government shall cause a copy of the notification issued under sub -section ( 1) 
and a full report of any action taken under this section and the ci rcumstances leading to such action to be 
laid before each House of Parliament or, as the case may be, before the State Legislature, or the Union 34 
 Territory Legislature, as the case may be, where it consists of two Houses, or where such legislature 
consists of one House, before that House.  
83. Powers of appropriate Government to issue directions to Authority and obtain reports and 
returns. —(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Authority shall, in exercise of 
its powers and in perf ormance of its functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of 
policy, as the appropriate Government may give in w riting to it from time to time:  
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to exp ress its views 
before any direction is give n under this sub -section.  
(2) If any dispute arises between the appropriate Government and the Authority as to whether a 
question is or is not a question of policy, the decision of the appropriate Government thereon shall be 
final.  
(3) The Authority shall furnish to the appropriate Government such returns or other information with 
respect to its activities as the appropriate Government may, from time to time, require.  
84. Power of appropriate Government to make rules .—(1) The appropriate Government shall, 
within a period of six months of the commencement of this Act, by notification, make rules for carrying 
out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore going power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
1[(a) the form, time and manner of making application and fees payable therewith under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 4 ; 
(ab) information and documents for application to the Authority for registration under clause ( m) 
of sub -section ( 2) of section 4;  
(ac) the form of application and the fees for extension of registration under section 6;]  
(b) the form and manner of making application and fee and documents to be accompanied  with 
such application as unde r sub -section ( 2) of section 9;  
(c) the period, manner and conditions under which the registration is to be granted unde r  
sub-section ( 3) of section 9;  
(d) the validity of the period of registration and the manner and fee for  renewal unde r  
sub-section ( 6) of section 9;  
(e) the maintenance and preservation of books of account, records and documents under  
clause ( b) of section 10;  
(f) the discharge of other functions by the real estate agent under clause ( e) of section 10;  
(g) the rate of int erest payable under section 12;  
(h) the form and particulars of agreement for sale under  sub-section ( 2) of section 13;  
(i) the rate of interest payable under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section  18; 
(j) the rate of interest payable under  sub-section ( 4) of section 19;  
(k) the rate of interest payable under  sub-section ( 7) of section 19;  
(l) the manner of selection of Chairperson and Members  of Authority under section 22;  
(m) the salaries and allowances payab le to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
Chairperson and other Members of the Authority under  sub-section ( 1) of section 24;  
(n) the administrative powers of the  Chairpersons under section 25;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Removal of Difficulties Order, 2016  [S.O. 3347(E)] , for clause ( a) 
(w.e.f. 28 -10-2016).  35 
 (o) the salaries and allowances payable to,  and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
officers and other employees of the Authority under  sub-section ( 2) of section 28;  
1[(oa) the form, manner and fees for filing of a complaint under sub -section ( 2) of section 31;]  
(p) the details to be  published on the website as under clause ( b) and under clause ( d) of  
section 34;  
(q) the additional functions which may be performed by the Authority under clause ( iv) of  
sub-section ( 2) of section 35;  
(r) the  manner of recovery of interest, penalty and compensation under  sub-section ( 1) of  
section 40;  
(s) the manner of implementation of the order, direction or decisions of the adjudicating officer, 
the Authority or the Appellate Tribunal under sub -section ( 2) of section 40;  
(t) recommendations received from the Central Advisory Council under  sub-section ( 2) of  
section 42;  
(u) the form and manner and fee for filing of appeal under  sub-section ( 2) of section 44;  
(v) the manner of selection of Members of the Tribunal under  sub-section ( 3) of section 46;  
(w) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
Chairperson and other Members of the Appellate Tribunal under  sub-section  (1) of section 48;  
(x) the procedure for inquiry of the charges against the Chairperson or Judicial Member of the 
Tribunal under  sub-section ( 4) of section 49;  
(y) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, t he 
officers and employees of the Appellate Tribunal under  sub-section ( 3) of section 51;  
(z) any other powers of the Tribunal under clause (g) of sub-section ( 4) of section 53;  
(za) the powers of the Chairperson of the Appel late Tribunal under section 54;  
(zb) the terms and conditions and the payment of such sum for compounding of  the offences 
under section 70;  
(zc) the manner of inquiry under  sub-section ( 1) of section 71;  
(zd) the form to be specified in which the Authority shall prepare a budget, maintai n proper 
accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 77;  
(ze) the form in which and time at which the Authority shall prepare an annual report under   
sub-section ( 1) of section 78;  
(zf) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to 
be made, by rules.  
85. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Authority shall, within a period of three months of its 
establishment, by notification, make regulation s, consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to 
carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely :— 
2*   *   *   *  * 
(c) such other information and documents required under clause ( f) of sub-section ( 1) of  
section 11;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Removal of Difficulties Order, 2016  [S.O. 3347(E)] ,  
(w.e.f. 28-10-2016).  
2. Omitted by ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -10-2016).  36 
 (d) display  of sanctioned plans, layout plans along with specifications, approved by the competent 
authority, for display under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 3) of section 11;  
(e) preparation and maintenance of other details under  sub-section ( 6) of section 11;  
(f) time , places and the procedure in regard to transaction of business at the meetings of the 
Authority under sub -section ( 1) of section 29;  
1*   *   *   *  * 
(h) standard fees to be levied on the promoter, the allottees or the real estate agent under  
clause ( e) of section 34;  
(i) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulation or in respect of 
which provision is to be made by regulations.  
86. Laying of rules . —(1) Every rule made by the Central Government, every regulation made by the 
Authority under the Union territory  of Delhi and the Union territories without Legislature and every 
notification issued by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as so on as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately foll owing the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule o r regulation or in the notification, as the case may be, or both Houses agree that 
the rule or regulation or the notification should not be ma de, the rule or regulation or notification, as the 
case may be, shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule or regulation or notification, as the case m ay be.  
(2) Every rule made by a State Government or the Union territory Government, as the case may be, 
every regulation made by the Authority under the State Governmen t or the Union territory Government of 
Puducherry, as the case may be, and every notification issued by the State Government or the Union 
territory Government of Puducherry, as the case may be, under this Act, shall be laid as soon as may be, 
after it is m ade, before the State Legislature, or the Union territory Legislature, as the case may be, where 
it consists of two Houses, or where such legislature consists of one House, before that House.  
87. Members, etc., to be public servants .—The Chairperson, Membe rs and other officers and 
employees of the Authority, and the Appellate Tribunal and the adjudicating officer shall be deemed to be 
public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
88. Application of other laws not ba rred .—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.  
89. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.  
90. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie again st the appropriate Government or the Authority or any officer of the appropriate Government or 
any member, officer or other employees of the Authority for anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regulation s made thereunder.  
91. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provis ions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the date o f 
the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
92. Repeal . —The Maharashtra Housing (Regulation and Development) Act, 2012  (Maharashtra Act 
No. II of 2014)  is hereby repealed.  
                                                           
1. Omitted by the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Removal of Difficulties Order, 2016  [S.O. 3347 (E)] ,  
(w.e.f. 28 -10-2016).  
--------------------------The Regional Centre for Biotechnology Act, 2016--------------------------
1 THE REGIONAL CENTRE FOR BIOTECHNOLOGY ACT, 2016  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Establishment and incorporation of Regional Centre for Biotechnology . 
4. Declaration of Regional Centre for Biotechnology as an institution of national  importance . 
5. Effect of establishment of Regional Centre.  
6. Jurisdiction.  
7. Objectives of Regional Centre.  
8. Functions of Regional Centre.  
9. Regional Centre to work in collaboration with other ins titutions of UNESCO.  
10. Powers of Regional Centre.  
11. Regional Centre open to all castes, creed, race or class.  
12. Privileges and immunities of Regional Centre.  
13. Authorities of Regional Centre.  
14. Board of Governors.  
15. Powers and functions of Board.  
16. Powers and functions of Chairperson.  
17. Programme Advisory Committee.  
18. Executive Committee.  
19. Finance Committee.  
20. Other authorities of Regional Centre.  
21. Board of Studies.  
22. Officers of Regional Centre.  
23. Executive Director.  
24. Deans and Sub -Deans.  
25. Associate Director (Administration).  
26. Registrar.  
27. Finance officer.  
28. Other officers.  
29. Grants and loans to Regional Centre.  
30. Fund of Regional Centre.  
31. Annual report.  
32. Annual accounts.  2 SECTIONS  
33. Returns and inf ormation.  
34. Review of functioning of Regional Centre.  
35. Appointment and conditions of service of employees of Regional Centre.  
36. Meetings.  
37. Filling of casual vacancies.  
38. Proceedings of authorities not invalidated by vacancies.   
39. Protection o f action taken in good faith.  
40. Arbitration.  
41. Power to make Statutes.  
42. Power to make Ordinances.  
43. Regulations.  
44. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before 
Parliament.  
45. Power to make Statutes or Ordinances or Regulations retrospectively.  
46. Power to remove difficulties.  3 THE REGIONAL CENTRE FOR BIOTECHNOLOGY ACT, 2016  
ACT NO. 36 OF 2016  
[29th July , 2016 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of an institution of national importance to be known 
as Regional Centre for Biotechnology and to provide for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  an agreement for the establishment and operation of the Regional Centre for 
Biotechnology Training and Education in India was entered into between the Government of India and 
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation on the 14th  day of July, 2006;  
AND WHEREAS in pursuance of the said agreement, the Central Government through an executive 
order dated the 20th April, 2009, established the Regional Centre for Biotechnology Training and 
Education at Faridabad, Haryana;  
AND WHEREAS it is expedient to make provisions for strengthening and to make the Regional Centre 
for Biotechnology an institution of national importance for imparting education, training and conducting 
research in the areas of Biotechnology and related multi disciplinar y areas.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: -- 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Regional Centre for 
Biotechnology Act, 2016.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “academic staff ” means Assistant Professors, Associate Professors, Professors, Deans, Sub -
Deans, Executive Director and such other persons, including Visiting Professors, Professors of 
Eminence, Honorary Professors, Adjunct Professors and Emeritus Professors, as may be ap pointed or 
engaged for imparting education, training or conducting research in the Regional Centre for 
Biotechnology;  
(b) “Board” means the Board of Governors constituted under section 14;  
(c) “Board of Studies ” means the Board of Studies of the Regional C entre referred to in       
section 21;  
(d) “Chairperson ” means the Chairperson of the Board;  
(e) “employee ” means any person appointed by the Regional Centre and includes officers, 
academic and other staff of the Regional Centre;  
(f) “Executive Committee ” means the Executive Committee of the Regional Centre constituted 
under section 18;  
(g) “Executive Director ” means the Executive Director of the Regional Centre appointed under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 23;  
(h) “existing Regional Centre ” means the Regional  Centre for Biotechnology Training and 
Education at National Capital Region, Faridabad;  
(i) “hall” means a unit of residence, by whatever name called, for the students of the Regional 
Centre, maintained or recognised by it;  
(j) “institution ” includes autonomous organisations within or outside India, for imparting 
education, training and conducting research in the areas of Biotechnology and supported by the 
Government of India or industry or universities or other organisations;  
                                                           
1. 1st March , 2017 , vide notification No. S.O. 642 (E), dated 28th February , 2017 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,           
Part II, sec. 3( i).  4 (k) “Ordinances ” means the Ordinances framed by the Programme Advisory Committee under 
section 42;  
(l) “Programme Advisory Committee ” means the Programme Advisory Committee of the 
Regional Centre constituted under section 17;  
(m) “region” means the region comprising the territories of South Asian Association for Regional 
Co-operation (SAARC) States and generally the Asia region;  
(n) “Regional Centre ” means the Regional Centre for Biotechnology established under section 3;  
(o) “Regulations ” means the Regulations made by an y authority of the Regional Centre under 
section 43;  
(p) “Statutes” means the Statutes framed by the Board under section 41;  
(q) “UNESCO ” means the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation.  
3. Establishment and incorporation of Regional Centre for Biotechnology .—(1) The Regional 
Centre for Biotechnology Training and Education at National Capital Region, Faridabad, Haryana 
functioning under the Department of Biotechnology, Ministry of Science and Technology is hereby 
established as a body corporate by the name of "Regional Centre for Biotechnology" having perpetual 
succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to contract and shall, by 
the said name, sue or be sued.  
(2) The Regional Centre shall consist of a Board of Governors and authorities specified in section 13.  
(3) The headquarters of the Regional Centre shall be at its campus in the National Capital Region, 
Faridabad.  
4. Declaration of Regional Centre for  Biotechnology as an institution of national                 
importance .—Whereas the objects of the institution known as the Regional Centre for Biotechnology are 
such as to make the institution one of national importance, it is hereby declared that the ins titution known 
as the Regional Centre for Biotechnology is an institution of national importance.  
5. Effect of establishment of Regional Centre .—(1) On and from the date of commencement of this 
Act,— 
(a) any reference to the existing Regional Centre in any  law, other than this Act, or in any 
contract or other instrument, shall be deemed as a reference to the Regional Centre;  
(b) all properties and assets, movable and immovable, of, or belonging to the existing Regional 
Centre shall vest in the Regional Cent re; 
(c) all rights and liabilities of the existing Regional Centre shall be transferred to, and be the 
rights and liabilities of, the Regional Centre;  
(d) without prejudice to the provisions of clause ( c), all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, 
all contracts entered into and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for, the existing 
Regional Centre immediately before the said date, for or in connection with the purposes of the said 
Regional Centre shall be deemed to have incurred, ent ered into or engaged to be done by, with or for, 
the Regional Centre;  
(e) all sums of money due to the existing Regional Centre immediately before that date shall be 
deemed to be due to the Regional Centre;  
(f) all suits and other legal proceedings institu ted or which could have been instituted by or 
against the existing Regional Centre immediately before that date may be continued or may be 
instituted by or against the Regional Centre;  
(g) every employee (including those appointed for imparting instruction  or giving training or 
conducting research in the existing Regional Centre), holding any office under the existing Regional 
Centre or teaching therein immediately before the commencement of this Act shall hold his office in 
the Regional Centre or continue teaching therein by the same tenure and upon the same terms and 5 conditions of service as respects remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement and other terminal 
benefits as he would have held such office if this Act had not been enacted and shall conti nue to do so 
as an employee of the Regional Centre or until the expiry of the period of six months from that date if 
such employee opts not to be the employee of the Regional Centre within such period . 
(2) Notwithstanding anything in the Industrial Dispute s Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) or in any other law for 
the time being in force, absorption of any employee by the Regional Centre in its regular service under 
this section shall not entitle such employee to any compensation under that Act or any other law and no  
such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
6. Jurisdiction .—The jurisdiction of the Regional Centre shall extend to whole of India and to such 
centres and specialised laboratories or other units for research, development and instruction, established 
by the Regional Centre within or outside India . 
7. Objectives of Regional Centre .—The objectives o f the Regional Centre shall be — 
(a) to disseminate and to advance knowledge by providing instructional and research facilities in  
such branches of biotechnology and related fields as it may deem fit including technology policy 
development ; 
(b) to provide capacity -building through education, training, research and development in 
biotechnology and related academic fields for sustainab le development objectives through regional 
and international cooperation;  
(c) to facilitate transfer of knowledge and technology relating to biotechnology at the regional 
level;  
(d) to create a hub of biotechnology expertise and to address human resources needs in the 
countries in the region;  
(e) to promote and strengthen international co -operation to improve the social and economic 
conditions and welfare of the people;  
(f) to promote and facilitate a network of satellite centres in the region as well as within India.  
8. Functions of Regional Centre .—The functions of  the Regional Centre, shall be — 
(a) to establish infrastructure and technology platforms which are directly relevant to 
biotechnology education, training and research;  
(b) to execute educationa l and training activities including grant of degrees in education and 
research in biotechnology and related fields;  
(c) to produce human resource tailored to drive innovation in biotechnology, particularly in areas 
of new opportunities and to fill talent g ap in deficient areas;  
(d) to undertake research and development and scientific investigations in collaboration with 
relevant research centre ’s in the region;  
(e) to hold scientific symposia and conferences within India or in the region or outside the region 
and to conduct short -term and long -term training courses and workshops in all areas of 
biotechnology;  
(f) to collect universally available information with a view to setting up data banks for bio -
information;  
(g) to collect and disseminate, through networking, the relevant local knowledge in the field of 
biotechnology, ensuring protection of intellectual property rights of local stakeholder communities;  
(h) to develop and implement a policy for intellectual property rights which is equitable and just  
to the stakeholders involved in research in the Regional Centre;  
(i) to disseminate the outcome of research activities in different countries through the publication 
of books and articles;  6 (j) to promote collaborative research and development networking p rogramme in specific areas of 
biotechnology with national, regional and international networks and promote exchange of scientists, 
at the regional level having regard to issues pertaining to intellectual property rights of collaborating 
institutions promot ing equitable sharing of benefits with collaborating institutions.  
9. Regional Centre to work in collaboration with other institutions of UNESCO .—The Regional 
Centre shall pursue its objects and discharge its functions in close collaboration with other nat ional, 
regional and international institutions of the UNESCO.  
10. Powers of Regional Centre .—(1) The Regional Centre shall have  the following powers, 
namely:— 
(a) to provide for masters degree (including integrated programmes leading to masters degree), 
post-graduate diploma and doctoral degrees in biotechnology and related subjects at the interface of 
varied disciplines including physical, chemical, biological, medical, agricultural and engineering and 
other relevant sciences, as may be determined by the  Regional Centre, from time to time;  
(b) to provide for short -term and long -term training courses in biotechnology on specific issues 
related to the development, extension, implementation and regulation of biotechnology and related 
areas, as may be specifi ed by Statutes, from time to time;  
(c) to organise and undertake extramural studies, training and extension services in 
biotechnology;  
(d) to confer honorary degrees or other academic distinctions referred to in clause ( a), in the 
manner specified by the S tatutes;  
(e) to institute Professorships, Associate Professorships, Assistant Professorships and other 
academic positions required by the Regional Centre and to appoint persons to such Professorships, 
Associate Professorships, Assistant Professorships or o ther academic positions;  
(f) to recognise an institution of higher learning within India for the purposes of this Act and to 
withdraw such recognition in accordance with the norms laid down in the Statutes;  
(g) to appoint persons working in any other insti tution, including those located outside the 
country, as academic staff of the Regional Centre for such period as may be specified by the Statutes;  
(h) to create administrative, technical and other posts and to make appointments thereto, as may 
be specified  by Statutes;  
(i) to co -operate or collaborate or associate with any institution, including those located outside 
the country, in such manner as may be specified and for such purposes as may be determined or 
agreed upon by the Regional Centre;  
(j) to estab lish and maintain centres and specialised laboratories or other units for research, 
development and instruction in India or outside India, as may be determined by the Statutes from time 
to time;  
(k) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, student ships, medals and prizes as may be 
specified by the Statutes;  
(l) to make provision for research and advisory services and for that purpose to enter into such 
agreements with other institutions, industrial or other organisations, including those located ou tside 
the country as may be specified by the Statutes;  
(m) to organise and conduct refresher courses, workshops, seminars and other programmes for 
teachers, evaluators and other stakeholders;  
(n) to appoint visiting Professors, Professors of Eminence, Hono rary Professors, Adjunct 
Professors, Emeritus Professors, Consultants and such other persons who may contribute to the 
advancement and objects of the Regional Centre;  
(o) to determine standards of admission to the Regional Centre, including examination, 
evaluation or any other method of testing;  7 (p) to fix, demand and receive payment of fees and other charges;  
(q) to establish, recognise, maintain and manage halls or residences of students of the Regional 
Centre and other accommodation for students and to w ithdraw any such recognition;  
(r) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, including their code of 
conduct;  
(s) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the employees, and to take such 
disciplinary measures in this  regard as may be deemed by the Regional Centre to be necessary;  
(t) to make arrangements for promoting the health and general welfare of the students and 
employees of the Regional Centre;  
(u) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, ho ld and manage, and dispose of, 
with the prior approval of the Central Government, any property, movable or immovable, including 
trust and endowment properties, for the purposes or objectives of the Regional Centre;  
(v) to borrow money, with the prior appro val of the Central Government on the security of the 
property of the Regional Centre; and  
(w) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary in furtherance of the objects specified 
in section 7.  
(2) In exercising its powers under sub -section ( 1), it shall be the endeavour of the Regional Centre to 
maintain high standards of education, training and research and the Regional Centre shall, among other 
measures which may be necessary for the said purpose, take, in particular, t he following measures, 
namely:— 
(a) conduct innovative courses and programmes of studies with a provision for periodic review 
and restructuring; and  
(b) promote e -governance with an effective management information system.  
11. Regional Centre open to all castes, creed, race or class .—The Regional Centre or any 
institution recognised by it shall be open to persons of either sex and whatever caste, creed, race, 
ethnicity, nationality or class, and it shall not be lawful for the R egional Centre or such institution to 
adopt or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him 
to be appointed as a member of the academic staff of the Regional Centre or such institution or to hold 
any o ther office therein or to be admitted as a student in the Regional Centre or such institution or to 
enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof.  
12. Privileges and immunities of Regional Centre .—The Regional Centre or persons attending the 
meetings of the Regi onal Centre shall enjoy such privileges and immunities as the Central Government 
may grant, pursuant to agreement entered into between the UNESCO and the Government of India from 
time to time concerning the Regional Centre.  
13. Authorities of Regional Cent re.—The following shall be the authorities o f the Regional Centre, 
namely:— 
(i) the Board of Governors;  
(ii) the Programme Advisory Committee;  
(iii) the Executive Committee;  
(iv) the Finance Committee;  
(v) the Board of Studies; and  
(vi) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the Regional 
Centre.  
14. Board of Governors .—(1) There shall be a Board of Governors which shall be responsible for 
the governance of the Regional Centre.  8 (2) The Board shall be the ap ex body of the Regional Centre and shall consist of the following 
members, namely: — 
(a) Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Science and Technolog y, Department 
of Biotechnology —ex officio  Chairperson;  
(b) three eminent scientists in the relevant field not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the 
Government of India or equivalent, out of whom at least one shall be a woman, to be nominated by 
the Central Government —ex officio  members;  
(c) a representative of the Director -General of UNESCO;  
(d) two representatives from amongst the other member States of UNESCO, who substantially 
contribute resources to the running of the Regional Centre, in such manner as ma y be specified by the 
Statutes—members.  
(3) The Chairperson of the Programme Advisory Committee shall be a permanent invitee of the 
Board.  
(4) The Executive Director of the Regional Centre shall be the Convenor of the meetings of the 
Board.  
(5) The Chairperson shall ordinarily preside over the meetings of the Board.  
(6) The Board shall meet  at least once in a year and at such times as the Chairperson may decide in 
such manner as may be specified by the Statutes.  
(7) The term of office of the members of the Board, other than ex officio  members, shall be such as 
may be specified by the Statute s. 
(8) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes and the Ordinances made thereunder, the 
Board may regulate its own procedure (including quorum) for the conduct of meetings and transacting 
business.  
15. Powers and functions of Board .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board shall have the 
following  powers and functions, namely: — 
(a) to approve the annual plan and budget of the Regional Centre;  
(b) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of the Regional Centre, a nd 
to suggest measures for the improvement and development of the Regional Centre;  
(c) to consider the annual report and the annual accounts of the Regional Centre and the audit 
report on such accounts;  
(d) to study and approve the internal procedures, inc luding financial procedure and staff 
regulations of the Regional Centre;  
(e) to approve the organisational structure and number of academic staff and other employees at 
the Regional Centre;  
(f) to convene special consultative sessions of its members, to wh ich it may invite representatives 
of other interested countries and international organisations in order to obtain proposals for 
strengthening the scope of services of the Regional Centre;  
(g) to carry out projects and activities relevant to the Regional C entre, and to expand the fund -
raising strategy and capabilities; and  
(h) to frame the Statutes.  
16. Powers and functions of Chairperson .—(1) The Chairperson shall exercise such powers and 
discharge such functions as may be delegated to him by the Board or as may be specified by the Statutes.  
(2) If for any reason, the Chairperson is unable to attend any meeting of the Board, any member of 
the Board nominated by the Chairperson shall preside over the meeting . 9 17. Programme Advisory Committee .—(1) The Programme Advisory Committee shall be the 
principal academic body of the Regional Centre and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, advice 
planning, execution, review and monitoring of the scientific and academic programmes of the Regional 
Centre . 
(2) The Programme Advisory Committee shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) a Chairperson of the Programme Advisory Committee to be nominated by the Board;  
(b) two members to be nominated by the UNESCO;  
(c) three members to be nominated by rot ation, from amongst the member States of UNESCO 
which provide maximum financial assistance;  
(d) two members having expertise and experience in biotechnology policy and legal matters to be 
nominated by the Central Government;  
(e) six members from amongst th e persons being renowned scientist or academician, to be 
nominated by the Board.  
(3) The Executive Director shall be the Member -Secretary, ex officio , to the Programme Advisory 
Committee.  
(4) The Programme Advisory Comm ittee shall be responsible for — 
(a) making recommendations on matters of planning and coordinating of the education, training 
and research activities;  
(b) recommending modifications or revision of education, training and research programmes of 
the Regional Centre and submitting reports thereon;  
(c) reviewing annually the programmes of the Regional Centre, evaluating its progress and 
submitting the reports thereon;  
(d) publishing reports on any matter concerning scientific and technical issues referred to it by the 
Board or by the Executi ve Director;  
(e) performing all such duties and to do all such acts as may be necessary for furtherance of 
education, training and research under this Act;  
(f) framing the Ordinances; and  
(g) performing such other functions as may be specified by the Statu tes. 
(5) The fees and allowances payable to members of the Programme Advisory Committee and their 
term of office shall be such as may be specified by the Statutes.  
(6) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes and Ordinances made thereunder, t he 
Programme Advisory Committee may regulate its own procedure (including quorum) for the conduct of 
meetings and transacting of its business:  
Provided that the Programme Advisory Committee shall place the minutes of its meetings before the 
Board of Governors.  
18. Executive Committee .—(1) The Executive Committee shall be responsible for management of 
the Regional Centre and implementation of policies and decisions of the Board relating to management.  
(2) The constitution, powers and functions of the E xecutive Committee and the term of office of its 
members shall be such as may be specified by the Statutes.  
19. Finance Committee .—(1) The Finance Committee shall review finances, consider the annual 
budget estimates, the statements of accounts and the aud it reports and make recommendations thereon, to 
the Board.  
(2) The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee and the term of office of its 
members shall be such as may be specified by the Statutes.  10 20. Other authorities of Regional Centre .—The constitution, powers and functions of other 
authorities referred to in clause ( vi) of section 13, and the term of office of its members shall be such as 
may be specified by the Statutes.  
21. Board of Studies .—The constitution, powers and functions of  the Board of Studies and the term 
of office of its members shall be such as may be specified by the Statutes . 
22. Officers of Regional Centre .—The following shall be the officers o f the Regional Centre, 
namely:— 
(i) Executive Director;  
(ii) Deans;  
(iii) Sub-Deans;  
(iv) Associate Director (Administration);  
(v) Registrar;  
(vi) Finance Officer; and  
(vii) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be the officers of the Regional 
Centre.  
23. Executive Director .—(1) The Executive Director shall b e appointed on the recommendation of 
the Board in such manner and on such terms and conditions of service, as may be specified by the 
Statutes.  
(2) The Executive Director shall — 
(a) be the principal executive and academic officer of the Regional Centre;  
(b) direct the work of the Regional Centre in conformity with the programmes and directives 
established by the Board;  
(c) propose the draft work plan and budget to be submitted to the Board;  
(d) prepare the agenda for the sessions of the Board;  
(e) prepare r eports on the Regional Centre's activities for submission to the Board; and  
(f) exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be specified by the 
Statutes.  
(3) The financial powers delegated to the Executive Director by the Board shall  be such as may be 
specified by the Statutes.  
(4) The Executive Director may, if he is of the opinion that immediate action is necessary on any 
matter, exercise any power conferred on any authority of the Regional Centre by or under this Act and 
shall repo rt to such authority at its next meeting the action taken by him on such matter . 
24. Deans and Sub -Deans .—The Deans and Sub -Deans shall be appointed in such manner and on 
such terms and conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such  duties, as may be 
specified by the Statutes . 
25. Associate Director (Administration) .—(1) The Associate Director (Administration) shall be 
appointed in such manner, and on such terms and conditions of service, as may be specified by the 
Statutes.  
(2) The Associate Director (Administration) shall have the power to enter into agreements, sign 
documents and authenticate records on behalf of the Regional Centre and shall exercise such powers and 
perform such duties, as may be specified by the Statutes . 
26. Registrar .—The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and conditions of 
service and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be specified by the Statutes.  11 27. Finance officer .—The Finance officer shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and 
conditions of service and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be specified by the 
Statutes.  
28. Other officers .—The manner of appointment and powers and duties and terms and conditions of 
service of other officers of the Regional Centre, referred to in clause ( vii) of section 22, shall be such as 
may be specified by the Statutes.  
29. Grants and loans to Regional Centre .—The Central Government may, after due appropriation 
made by Parliament by law, in this behalf, make to the Regional Centre grants and loans of such sums of 
money and in such manner as that Government may consider necessary for being utilised for the 
fulfilment of the objects and purposes of this Act.  
30. Fund of Regional Centre .—(1) The  Regional Centre shall maintain a F und to which shall be 
credited— 
(a) all moneys provided by the Central Government;  
(b) all fees and other charges received by the Regional Centre;  
(c) all moneys received by the Regional Centre by way of grants, gifts, do nations, benefactions, 
bequests or transfers; and  
(d) all moneys received by the Regional Centre in any other manner or from any other source.  
(2) All moneys credited to the Fund shall be deposited in such banks or invested in such manner as 
the Regional C entre may, with the approval of the Central Government, decide.  
(3) The fun d shall be applied for meeting — 
(a) the fees and allowances payable to the Chairperson and members of the Board or Chairperson 
of the Programme Advisory Committee and members of the  other committees and the salaries, 
allowances and other remunerations payable to the academic staff, officers and other employees of 
the Regional Centre;  
(b) the expenses of the Regional Centre in the discharge of its functions and for the fulfilment of 
its objects and for purposes as envisaged under this Act.  
31. Annual report .—(1) The annual report of the Regional Centre shall be prepared under the 
directions of the Executive Director, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the 
Regional Centre towards the fulfilment of its objectives and shall be submitted to the Board on or before 
such date as may be specified by the Statutes and the Board shall consider the report in its annual 
meeting.  
(2) A copy of the annual report, as prepared  under sub -section ( 1), shall be submitted to the Central 
Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.  
32. Annual accounts .—(1) The annual accounts and the balance sheet of the Regional Centre shall 
be prepared under the directions of the Board and shall, once at least every year, and at intervals of not 
more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) A copy of the accounts together with the audit report  shall be submitted to the Central 
Government along with the observations, if any, of the Board.  
(3) A copy of the annual report and annual accounts together with the audit report, shall be submitted 
to the Central Government which shall, as soon as may be , cause the same to be laid before each House of 
Parliament.  
(4) The audited annual accounts, after having been laid before both Houses of Parliament, shall be 
published in the Official Gazette.  
33. Returns and information .—The Regional Centre shall furnis h to the Central Government such 
returns or other information with respect to its property or activities as the Central Government may, from 
time to time, require, within such period as may be specified by the Central Government . 12 34. Review of functioning of Regional Centre .—(1) There shall be a review of the functioning of 
the Regional Centre once in every four years by persons of eminence to be appointed by the Central 
Government.  
(2) The Regional Centre shall meet the expenses for conducting the review under sub -section ( 1) and 
upon receipt of the report of such review, the Board may take appropriate action.  
(3) In addition to the review under sub -section ( 1), the Board may conduct review of functioning of 
administrative and academic wings of the Regiona l Centre, in such manner and at such intervals, as may 
be specified by the Statutes . 
35. Appointment and conditions of service of employees of Regional Centre .—(1) All 
appointments of employees of the Regional Centre shall be made in accordance with the pr ocedur e laid 
down in the Statutes, by — 
(a) the Board of Governors for the Executive Director, Deans and Sub -Deans;  
(b) the Executive Director, in any other case.  
(2) The terms and conditions of service of the employees of the Regional Centre, other than the 
officers referred to in clause ( vii) of section 22, shall be such as may be specified by the Statutes.  
(3) The terms and conditions of service of the academic staff shall be consistent with such staff 
engaged in higher education and research at Central  Universities . 
36. Meetings .—The meetings of the Board, Programme Advisory Committee, Executive Committee 
or other committees constituted by the Regional Centre may be held using contemporary tools of 
information and communication technologies (including v ideo conferencing) without the members 
necessarily having to be physically present . 
37. Filling of casual vacancies .—All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio  
members) of the authorities under section 13 shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the person or body who 
appoints, elects or co -opts the member whose place has become vacant and the person appointed, elected 
or co -opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority for the residue of the term for which 
the person whose place he fills would have been a member.  
38. Proceedings of authorities not invalidated by vacancies .—No act or proceedings of any 
authority of the Regional Centre shall be invalid merely by reason of the existence of a vacancy or 
vacancies among its membe rs. 
39. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
any officer or employee of the Regional Centre for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act or the Statutes, Ordinances or the Regulations made 
thereunder.  
40. Arbitration .—Any dispute arising between the Regional Centre and any of its employees shall, 
at the first instance, be resolved through such grievance redressal mechanism as may b e specified by the 
Statutes.  
41. Power to make Statutes .—(1) The Statutes of the Regional Centre shall be framed by the Board 
of Governors.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the Executive Committee may 
make recommendatio ns for framing of Statutes to the Board . 
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, na mely:— 
(a) to provide for short -term and long -term training courses in biotechnology on specific issues 
related to the development, extension, implementation and regulation of biotechnology and related 
areas, from time to time under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(b) the manner of conferring honorary degrees or other distinctions under clause ( d) of                    
sub-section ( 1) of section 10;  13 (c) the norms for recognition of an institution of higher learning within India and to withdraw such 
recognition under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(d) period for appointment of persons working in any other institution, including those located 
outside the country, as academic staff of the Regional Centre under clause ( g) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 10;  
(e) to create administrative, technical and other posts under clause ( h) of s ub-section ( 1) of              
section 10;  
(f) the manner and purposes of co -operation or collaboration or association with any institution, 
including those located outside the country, under clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(g) to establish an d maintain centres and specialised laboratories or other units for research, 
development and instruction in India or outside India, clause ( j) of sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(h) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes, under            
clause ( k) of sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(i) the manner of entering into agreements with other institutions, industrial or other organisations, 
including those located outside the country, for research and advisory services und er clause ( l) of             
sub-section ( 1) of section 10;  
(j) to declare other authorities to be the authorities of the Regional Centre under clause ( vi) of 
section 13;  
(k) the manner of appointment of representatives from amongst the member States of UNESCO, 
under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 2) of section 14;  
(l) the time and manner in which the Board shall meet under sub -section ( 5) of section 14;  
(m) the term of office of the members of the Board, under sub -section ( 6) of section 14;  
(n) such other po wers and functions of the Chairperson under sub -section ( 1) of section 16;  
(o) such other functions of the Programme Advisory Committee under clause ( g) of sub -section ( 4) 
of section 17;  
(p) the fees and allowances payable to members of the Programme Advis ory Committee and their 
term of office under sub -section ( 5) of section 17;  
(q) the constitution, powers and functions and the term of office of members of the Executive 
Committee under sub -section ( 2) of section 18;  
(r) the constitution, powers and functi ons and term of office of members of the Finance Committee 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 19;  
(s) the constitution, powers and functions and term of office of members of other authorities under 
section 20;  
(t) the constitution, powers and functions and t erm of office of members of the Board of Studies 
under section 21;  
(u) the other officers as may be declared to be the officers of the Regional Centre under clause ( vii) 
of section 22;  
(v) the manner of appointment and terms and conditions of service of th e Executive Director under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 23;  
(w) the other powers and functions of the Executive Director under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 23;  
(x) the financial powers to be delegated to the Executive Director by the Board under                     
sub-section ( 3) of section 23;  14 (y) the manner of appointment, terms and conditions of service and powers and duties of the Deans 
and Sub -Deans under section 24;  
(z) the manner of appointment and terms and conditions of service of the As sociate Director 
(Administration) under sub -section ( 1) and powers and duties to be performed by him under               
sub-section ( 2) of section 25;  
(za) the manner of appointment, terms and conditions of service and powers and duties of the 
Registrar under section 26;  
(zb) the manner of appointment, terms and conditions of service and powers and duties of the 
Finance officer under section 27;  
(zc) the manner of appointment, powers and duties and terms and conditions of service of other 
officers of the Regional Centre under section 28;  
(zd) the time for submission of the annual report of the Regional Centre to the Board under            
sub-section ( 1) of section 31;  
(ze) the manner and frequency of conducting review of the functioning of administrative and 
academic wings of the Regional Centre by the Board under sub -section ( 3) of section 34;  
(zf) the procedure for appointment of employees of the Regional Centre under sub -section ( 1) and 
their terms and conditions of service under sub -section ( 2) of sect ion 35;  
(zg) the grievance redressal mechanism for resolution of disputes arising between the Regional 
Centre and any of its employees under section 40;  
(zh) the manner of making regulations by the authorities of the Regional Centre under section 43; 
and 
(zi) any other matter which may be required or necessary for the purposes of this Act.  
42. Power to make Ordinances .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the Ordinances of the 
Regional Centre shall be made by the Programme Advisory Committee.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes made thereunder, the Ordinances of the 
Regional Centre may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) admission of students from within India and from the region to the Regional Ce ntre and their 
enrolment as such;  
(b) the course of study ; 
(c) the conditions under which students shall be admitted to the examinations of the Regional 
Centre and shall be eligible for degrees, diplomas and certificates;  
(d) the conditions for award of fe llowships, scholarships, medals and prizes;  
(e) the conditions and manner of appointment, term and duties of examining bodies, examiners 
and moderators;  
(f) the conduct of examinations;  
(g) the conditions of residence of students of the Regional Centre;  
(h) the maintenance of discipline among the employees and students;  
(i) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of the Regional 
Centre including the medium of instruction and examination;  
(j) the award of degrees and o ther academic distinctions, and the manner of granting and 
obtaining of the same;  
(k) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions;  15 (l) the fees to be charged for courses of study and for admission to examinations, degr ees and 
diplomas of the Regional Centre;  
(m) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence and teaching of 
women students and prescribing of special courses of studies for them;  
(n) the establishment, management, recognition and abo lition of centres of studies, schools, 
departments, specialised laboratories, halls and institutions; and  
(o) any other matter which by this Act or the Statutes, is to be, or may be, provided for by the 
Ordinances.  
43. Regulations .—The authorities of the Regional Centre may make Regulations, consistent with the 
provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business and that of 
the Committees, if any, appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the 
Ordinances, in the manner specified by the Statutes.  
44. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid 
before Parliament .—(1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be published 
in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute or Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the Statute or Ordinance or Regulation or bo th Houses agree that the Statute 
or Ordinance or Regulation should not be made, the Statute or Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification o r annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that Statute or Ordinance or Regulation.  
45. Power to make Statutes or Ordinances or Regulations retrospectively .—The power to make 
Statutes or Ordinances or Regulatio ns under section 41 or section 42 or section 43, as the case may be, 
shall include the power to give retrospective effect, from a date not earlier than the date of 
commencement of this Act, to the Statutes or Ordinances or Regulations or any of them but no  
retrospective effect shall be given to any Statutes or Ordinances or Regulations so as to prejudicially 
affect the interests of any person to whom such Statutes or Ordinances or Regulations may be applicable.  
46. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any d ifficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient f or removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each  
House of Parliament . 
--------------------------The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016--------------------------
1 
 THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES ACT, 2016  
____________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
 
CHAPTER II  
RIGHTS AND ENTITLEMENTS  
3. Equality and non -discrimination . 
4. Women and children with disabilities . 
5. Community life . 
6. Protection from cruelty and inhuman treatment . 
7. Protection from abuse, violence and exploitation . 
8. Protection and safety . 
9. Home and family . 
10. Reproductive rights . 
11. Accessibility in voting . 
12. Access to justice . 
13. Legal capacity.  
14. Provision for guardianship . 
15. Designation of authorities to support . 
 
CHAPTER III  
EDUCATION  
16. Duty of educational institutions . 
17. Specific measures to promote and facilitate inclusive education . 
18. Adult education . 
 
CHAPTER IV  
SKILL DEVELOPMENT AND EMPLOYMENT  
19. Vocational training and self -employment . 
20. Non-discrimination in employment . 
21. Equal opportunity policy . 
22. Maintenance of records . 
23. Appointment of Grievance Redressal Officer . 
 
CHAPTER V  
SOCIAL SECURITY, HEALTH, REHABILITATION AND RECREATION  
24. Social security . 
25. Healthcare . 
26. Insurance schemes . 2 
 SECTIONS  
27. Rehabilitation . 
28. Research and development . 
29. Culture and recreation . 
30. Sporting activities . 
 
CHAPTER VI  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR PERSONS WITH BENCHMARK DISABILIT IES 
31. Free education for children with benchmark disabilities . 
32. Reservation in higher educational institutions . 
33. Identification of posts for reservation . 
34. Reservation . 
35. Incentives to employers in private sector . 
36. Special employment exchange . 
37. Special schemes and development programmes . 
 
CHAPTER VII  
SPECIAL PRO VISIONS FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES WITH HIGH SUPPORT NEEDS  
38. Special provisions for persons with disabilities with high support . 
 
CHAPTER VIII  
DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF APPROPRIATE GOVERNMENTS  
39. Awareness campaigns . 
40. Accessibility . 
41. Access to transport . 
42. Access to information and communication technology . 
43. Consumer goods . 
44. Mandatory observance of accessibility norms . 
45. Time limit for making existing infrastructure and premises accessible and action for that purpose . 
46. Time limit for accessibility by service prov iders . 
47. Human resource development . 
48. Social audit . 
 
CHAPTER IX  
REGISTRATION OF INSTITUTIONS FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES AND GRANTS TO SUCH  
INSTITUTIONS  
49. Competent authority . 
50. Registration . 
51. Application and grant of certificate of registration . 
52. Revocation of registration . 
53. Appeal . 
54. Act not to apply to institutions established or maintained by Central or State Government . 
55. Assistance to registered institutions . 
 
CHAPTER X  
CERTIFICATION OF SPECIFIED DISABILITIES  
56. Guidelines for assessment of specified disabilities . 3 
 SECTIONS  
57. Designation of certifying authorities . 
58. Procedure for certification . 
59. Appeal against a decision of certifying authority . 
 
CHAPTER XI  
CENTRAL AND STATE  ADVISORY  BOARDS  ON DISABILITY AND DISTRICT  LEVEL  COMMITTEE  
60. Constitution of Central Advisory Board on Disability . 
61. Terms and conditions of service of members . 
62. Disqualifications . 
63. Vacation of seats by Members . 
64. Meetings of the Central Advisory Board on disability . 
65. Functions of Central Advisory Board on disability . 
66. State Advisory Board on disability . 
67. Terms a nd conditions of service of Members . 
68. Disqualification . 
69.  Vacation of seats . 
70. Meetings of State Advisory Board on disability . 
71. Functions of State Advisory Board on disability . 
72. District -level Committee on disability . 
73. Vacancies not to invalidate proceedings . 
 
CHAPTER XII  
CHIEF COMMISSIONER AND STATE  COMMISSIONER FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES  
74. Appointment of Chief Commissioner and Commissioners . 
75. Functions of Chief Commissioner . 
76. Action of appropriate authorities on recommendation of Chief Commissioner . 
77. Powers of C hief Commissioner . 
78. Annual and special reports by Chief Commissioner . 
79. Appointment of State Commissioner in States . 
80. Functions of State Commissioner . 
81. Action by appropriate authorities on recommendation of State Commissioner . 
82. Powers of State Commissioner . 
83. Annual and special reports by State Commissioner . 
 
CHAPTER XIII  
SPECIAL  COURT  
84. Special Court . 
85. Special Public Prosecutor . 
 
CHAPTER XIV  
NATIONAL FUND FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES  
86. National Fund for persons with disabilities . 
87. Accounts and audit . 
 
CHAPTER XV  
STATE FUND FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES  
88. State Fund for persons with disabilities . 4 
  
CHAPTER  XVI 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
SECTIONS  
89. Punishment for contravention of provisions of Act or rules or regulations made thereunder . 
90. Offences by companies . 
91. Punishment for fraudulently availing any benefit meant for persons with benchmark disabilities . 
92. Punishment for offences of atrocities . 
93. Punishment for failure to furnish information . 
94. Previous sanction of appropriate Government . 
95. Alternative punishments . 
 
CHAPTER XVII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
96. Application of other laws not barred . 
97. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
98. Power to remove difficulties . 
99. Power to amend Schedule . 
100. Power of Central Government to make rules . 
101. Power of State Government to make rules . 
102. Repeal and savings . 
THE SCHEDULE.  
  5 
 THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES ACT, 2016  
ACT NO. 49 OF 2016  
[27th December , 2016]  
An Act to give effect to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  the United Nations General Assembly adopted its Convention on the Rights of Persons 
with Disabilities on the 13th day of December, 2006 . 
AND WHEREAS the aforesaid Convention lays down the following principles for empowerment  of 
persons with disabilities, — 
(a) respect for inherent dignity, individual autonomy including the freedom to make one's own 
choices, and independence of persons;  
(b) non -discrimination;  
(c) full and effective participation and inclusion in society;  
(d) respect for difference and acceptance of persons with disabilities as part of human diversity 
and humanity;  
(e) equality of opportunity;  
(f) accessibility;  
(g) equality between men and women;  
(h) respect for the evolving capacities of children with disabili ties and respect for the right of 
children with disabilities to preserve their identities;  
AND WHEREAS  India is a signatory to the said Convention;  
AND WHEREAS  India ratified the said Convention on the 1st day of October, 2007;  
AND WHEREAS  it is considered necessary to implement the Convention aforesaid.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities Act, 2016.  
(2) It shall come into force on such 1date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appellate authority ” means an authority notified under sub -section ( 3) of section 14 or  
sub-section ( 1) of section 53 or designated under sub -section ( 1) of section 59, as the case may be;  
(b) “appropriate Government ” means, — 
(i) in relation to the Central Government or any establishment wholly or substantially 
financed by that Government, or a Cantonment Board constituted under the Cantonments Act, 
2006  (41 of 2006) , the Central Government;  
(ii) in relation to a State Government or any establishment, wholly or substantially financed 
by that Government, or any local authority, other than a Cantonment Board, the State 
Government.  
(c) “barrier ” means any factor including communicational, cultural, economic, environmental, 
institutional, political, social, attitudinal or structur al factors which hampers the full and effective 
participation of persons with disabilities in society;   
                                                           
1. 19th April, 2017 vide notification no. S.O. 1215 (E) dated 19th April, 2017 see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,  Section 
3 (ii) .    6 
 (d) “care-giver ” means any person including parents and other family Members who with or 
without payment provides care, support or assistance to a perso n with disability;  
(e) “certifying authority ” means an authority designated under sub -section ( 1) of section 57;  
(f) “communication ” includes means and formats of communication, languages, display of text, 
Braille, tactile communication, signs, large print, accessible multimedia, written, audio, video, visual 
displays, sign language, plain -language, human -reader, augmentative and alter native modes and 
accessible information and communication technology;  
(g) “competent authority ” means an authority appointed under section 49;  
(h) “discrimination ” in relation to disability, means any distinction, exclusion, restriction on the 
basis of dis ability which is the purpose or effect of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment 
or exercise on an equal basis with others of all human rights and fundamental freedoms in the 
political, economic, social, cultural, civil or any other field and i ncludes all forms of discrimination 
and denial of reasonable accommodation ; 
(i) “establishment ” includes a Government establishment and private establishment;  
(j) “Fund ” means the National Fund constituted under section 86;  
(k) “Government establishment ” means a corporation established by or under a Central Act or 
State Act or an authority or a body owned or controlled or aided by the Government or a local 
authority or a Government company as defined in  section 2  of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013) 
and includes a Department of the Government;  
(l) “high support ” means an intensive support, physical, psychological and otherwise, which may 
be required by a person with benchmark disability for daily activities, to take independent and 
informed decision to access facilities and participating in all areas of life incl uding education, 
employment, family and community life and treatment and therapy;  
(m) “inclusive education ” means a system of education wherein students with and without 
disability learn together and the system of teaching and learning is suitably adapted to meet the 
learning needs of different types of students with disabilities;  
(n) “information and communication technology ” includes all services and innovations relating to 
information and communication, including telecom services, web based services, ele ctronic and print 
services, digital and virtual services;  
(o) “institution ” means an institution for the reception, care, protection, education, training, 
rehabilitation and any other activities for persons with disabilities ; 
(p) “local authority ” means a Municipality or a Panchayat, as defined in clause ( e) and clause ( f) 
of article 243P  of the Constitution; a Cantonment Board constituted under the Cantonments Act, 2006 
(41 of 2006); and any other authority established under an Act of Parliament or a State Legislature to 
administer the civic affairs;  
(q) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression 
“notify ” or “notified ” shall be construed accordingly;  
(r) “person with benchmark disability ” means a person with not less than forty per cent. of a 
specified disability where specified disability has not been defined in measurable terms and includes a 
person with disability where specified disability has been de fined in measurable terms, as certified by 
the certifying authority;  
(s) “person with disability ” means a person with long term physical, mental, intellectual or 
sensory impairment which, in interaction with barriers, hinders his full and effective partici pation in 
society equally with others;  
(t) “person with disability having high support needs ” means a person with benchmark disability 
certified under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 58 who needs high support;  
(u) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;   7 
 (v) “private establishment ” means a company, firm, cooperative or other society, associations, 
trust, agency, institution, organisation, union, factory or such other establishment as the appropriate 
Governme nt may, by notification, specify;  
(w) “public building ” means a Government or private building, used or accessed by the public at 
large, including a building used for educational or vocational purposes, workplace, commercial 
activities, public utilities, r eligious, cultural, leisure or recreational activities, medical or health 
services, law enforcement agencies, reformatories or judicial foras, railway stations or platforms, 
roadways bus stands or terminus, airports or waterways;  
(x) “public facilities and  services ” includes all forms of delivery of services to the public at large, 
including housing, educational and vocational trainings, employment and career advancement, 
shopping or marketing, religious, cultural, leisure or recreational, medical, health a nd rehabilitation, 
banking, finance and insurance, communication, postal and information, access to justice, public 
utilities, transportation;  
(y) “reasonable accommodation ” means necessary and appropriate modification and adjustments, 
without imposing a disproportionate or undue burden in a particular case, to ensure to persons with 
disabilities the enjoyment or exercise of rights equally with others;  
(z) “registered organisation ” means an association of persons with disabilities or a disabled 
person organisation, association of parents of persons with disabilities, association of persons with 
disabilities and family members, or a voluntary or non -governmental or chari table organisation or 
trust, society, or non -profit company working for the welfare of the persons with disabilities, duly 
registered under an Act of Parliament or a State Legislature;  
(za) “rehabilitation ” refers to a process aimed at enabling persons wit h disabilities to attain and 
maintain optimal, physical, sensory, intellectual, psychological environmental or social function 
levels;  
(zb) “Special Employment Exchange ” means any office or place established and maintained by 
the Government for the collect ion and furnishing of information, either by keeping of registers or 
otherwise, regarding — 
(i) persons who seek to engage employees from amongst the persons with disabilities;  
(ii) persons with benchmark disability who seek employment;  
(iii) vacancies to w hich persons with benchmark disabilities seeking employment may be 
appointed;  
(zc) “specified disability ” means the disabilities as specified in the Schedule;  
(zd) “transportation systems ” includes road transport, rail transport, air transport, water trans port, 
para transit systems for the last mile connectivity, road and street infras tructure, etc ; 
(ze) “universal design ” means the design of products, environments, programmes and services to 
be usable by all people to the greatest extent possible, without the need for adaptation or specialised 
design and shall apply to assistive devices including advanced technologies for particular group of 
persons with disabilities.  
CHAPTER II  
RIGHTS AND ENTITLEMENTS  
3. Equality and non -discrimination .—(1) The appropriate  Government shall ensure that the persons 
with disabilities enjoy the right to equality, life with dignity and respect for his or her integrity equally 
with others.  
(2) The appropriate Government shall take steps to utilise the capacity of persons with dis abilities by 
providing appropriate environment.  
(3) No person with disability shall be discriminated on the ground of disability, unless it is shown that 
the impugned act or omission is a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim.  
(4) No person shall be deprived of his or her personal liberty only on the ground of disability.  8 
 (5) The appropriate Government shall take necessary steps to ensure reasonable accommodation for 
persons with disabilities.  
4. Women and children with disabilities .—(1) The appropriate Government and the local 
authorities shall take measures to ensure that the women and children with disabilities enjoy their rights 
equally with others.  
(2) The appropriate Government and local authorities shall ensure that all children with disabilities 
shall have right on an equal basis to freely express their views on all matters affecting them and provide 
them appropriate support keeping in view their age and disability. ”. 
5. Community life .—(1) The persons with disabilities shall have the  right to live in the community.  
(2) The appropriate Government shall endeavour that the persons with disabilities are, — 
(a) not obliged to live in any particular living arrangement; and  
(b) given access to a range of in -house, residential and other commun ity support services, 
including personal assistance necessary to support living with due regard to age and gender.  
6. Protection from cruelty and inhuman treatment .—(1) The  appropriate Government shall take 
measures to protect persons with disabilities from being subjected to torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading 
treatment.  
(2) No person with disability shall be a su bject of any research without, — 
(i) his or her free and info rmed consent obtained through accessible modes, means and formats of 
communication; and  
(ii) prior permission of a Committee for Research on Disability constituted in the prescribed 
manner for the purpose by the appropriate Government in which not less tha n half of the Members 
shall themselves be either persons with disabilities or Members of the registered organisation as 
defined under clause ( z) of section 2.  
7. Protection from abuse, violence and exploitation .—(1) The  appropriate Government shall take 
measures to protect persons with disabilities from all forms of abuse, violence and exploitation and to 
prevent the same, shall — 
(a) take cognizance of incidents of abuse, violence and exploitation and provide legal remed ies 
available against such incidents;  
(b) take steps for avoiding such incidents and prescribe the procedure for its reporting;  
(c) take steps to rescue, protect and rehabilitate victims of such incidents; and  
(d) create  awareness and make available information among the public.  
(2) Any person or registered organisation who or which has reason to believe that an act of abuse, 
violence or exploitation has been, or is being, or is likely to be committed against any person w ith 
disability, may give information about it to the Executive Magistrate within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction such incidents occur.  
(3) The Executive Magistrate on receipt of such information, shall take immediate steps to stop or 
prevent its occ urrence, as the case may be, or pass such order as he deems fit for the protection of such 
person with d isability including an order — 
(a) to rescue the victim of such act, authorising the police or any organisation working for 
persons with disabilities to provide for the safe custody or rehabilitation of such person, or both, as 
the case may be;  
(b) for providing protective custody to the person with disability, if such person so desires;  
(c) to provide maintenance to such person with disability.  
  9 
 (4) Any police officer who receives a complaint or otherwise comes to know of abuse, violence or 
exploitation towards any person with disability shall inform the aggrieved person of — 
(a) his or her right to apply for protection under sub -section ( 2) and the partic ulars of the 
Executive Magistrate having jurisdiction to provide assistance;  
(b) the particulars of the nearest organisation or institution working for the rehabilitation of 
persons with disabilities;  
(c) the right to free legal aid; and  
(d) the right to f ile a complaint under the provisions of this Act or any other law dealing with 
such offence:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be construed in any manner as to relieve the police officer 
from his duty to proceed in accordance with law upon receip t of information as to the commission of a 
cognizable offence.  
(5) If the Executive Magistrate finds that the alleged act or behaviour  constitutes an offence under the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or under any other law for the time being in force, he may forward the 
complaint to that effect to the Judicial or Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be, having jurisdiction 
in the mat ter. 
8. Protection and safety .—(1) The persons with disabilities shall have equal protection and safety in 
situations of risk, armed conflict, humanitarian emergencies and natural disasters.  
(2) The National Disaster Management Authority and the State Disa ster Management Authority shall 
take appropriate measures to ensure inclusion of persons with disabilities in its disaster management 
activities as defined under clause ( e) of section 2  of the Dis aster Management Act, 2005 (53 of 2005)  for 
the safety and protection of persons with disabilities.  
(3) The District Disaster Management Authority constituted under  section 25  of the Disaster 
Management Act, 2005 (53 of 2005) shall maintain record of details of persons with disabilities in the 
district and take suitable measures to inform such persons of any situations of risk so as to enhance 
disaster preparedness.  
(4) The authorities engaged in reconstruction activities subsequent to any situation of risk, armed 
conflict or natural disasters shall undertake such activities, in consultation with the concerned State 
Commissioner, in accordance with the accessibility requirements of persons with disabilities . 
9. Home and family .—(1) No child with disability shall be separated from his or her parents on the 
ground of disability except on an order of competent court, if required, in the best interest of the child.  
(2) Where the parents are unable to  take care of a child with disability, the competent court shall place 
such child with his or her near relations, and failing that within the community in a family setting or in 
exceptional cases in shelter home run by the appropriate Government or non -governmental organisation, 
as may be required.  
10. Reproductive rights .—(1) The appropriate Government shall ensure that persons with 
disabilities have access to appropriate information regarding reproductive and family planning.  
(2) No person with disability  shall be subject to any medical procedure which leads to infertility 
without his or her free and informed consent.  
11. Accessibility in voting .—The Election Commission of India and the State Election Commissions 
shall ensure that all polling stations are accessible to persons with disabilities and all materials related to 
the electoral process are easily understandable by and accessible to them.  
12. Access to justice .—(1) The appropriate Government shall ensure that persons with disabilities are 
able to ex ercise the right to access any court, tribunal, authority, commission or any other body having 
judicial or quasi -judicial or investigative powers without discrimination on the basis of disability.   10 
 (2) The appropriate Government shall take steps to put in place suitable support measures for persons 
with disabilities specially those living outside family and those disabled requiring high support for 
exercising legal rights.  
(3) The National Legal Services Authority and the State Legal Services Authorities co nstituted under 
the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 (39 of 1987) shall make provisions including reasonable 
accommodation to ensure that persons with disabilities have access to any scheme, programme, facility or 
service offered by them equally with o thers.  
(4) The appropriate Government shall take steps to — 
(a) ensure that all their public documents are in accessible formats;  
(b) ensure that the filing departments, registry or any other office of records are supplied with 
necessary equipment to enable  filing, storing and referring to the documents and evidence in 
accessible formats; and  
(c) make available all necessary facilities and equipment to facilitate recording of testimonies, 
arguments or opinion given by persons with disabilities in their prefe rred language and means of 
communication.  
13. Legal capacity .—(1) The appropriate Government shall ensure that the persons with disabilities 
have right, equally with others, to own or inherit property, movable or immovable, control their financial 
affairs and have access to bank loans, mortgages and other forms of financial credit.  
(2) The appropriate Government shall ensure that the persons with disabilities enjoy legal capacity on 
an equal basis with others in all aspects of life and have the right to equ al recognition everywhere as any 
other person before the law.  
(3) When a conflict of interest arises between a person providing support and a person with disability 
in a particular financial, property or other economic transaction, then such supporting per son shall abstain 
from providing support to the person with disability in that transaction:  
Provided that there shall not be a presumption of conflict of interest just on the basis that the 
supporting person is related to the person with disability by bloo d, affinity or adoption.  
(4) A person with disability may alter, modify or dismantle any support arrangement and seek the 
support of another:  
Provided that such alteration, modification or dismantling shall be prospective in nature and shall not 
nullify an y third party transaction entered into by the person with disability with the aforesaid support 
arrangement.  
(5) Any person providing support to the person with disability shall not exercise undue influence and 
shall respect his or her autonomy, dignity an d privacy.  
14. Provision for guardianship .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, on and from the date of commencement of this Act, where a district court or any 
designated authority, as notified by the State Government, finds that a person with disability, who had 
been provided adequate and appropriate support but is unable to take legally binding decisions, may be 
provided further support of a limited guardian to take legally binding decisions on his behalf i n 
consultation with such person, in such manner, as may be prescribed by the State Government:  
Provided that the District Court or the designated authority, as the case may be, may grant total 
support to the person with disability requiring such support or  where the limited guardianship is to be 
granted repeatedly, in which case, the decision regarding the support to be provided shall be reviewed by 
the Court or the designated authority, as the case may be, to determine the nature and manner of support 
to be provided.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, “limited guardianship ” means a system of joint 
decision which operates on mutual understanding and trust between the guardian and the person with 
disability, which shall be limited to a specific period and for specific decision and situation and shall 
operate in accordance to t he will of the person with disability .  11 
 (2) On and from the date of commencement of this Act, every guardian appointed under any 
provision of any other law for the time being in force, for a person with disability shall be deemed to 
function as a limited g uardian.  
(3) Any person with disability aggrieved by the decision of the designated authority appointing a legal 
guardian may prefer an appeal to such appellate authority, as may be notified by the State Government for 
the purpose.  
15. Designation of autho rities to support .—(1) The appropriate Government shall designate one or 
more authorities to mobilise the community and create social awareness to support persons with 
disabilities in exercise of their legal capacity.  
(2) The authority designated under sub -section ( 1) shall take measures for setting up suitable support 
arrangements to exercise legal capacity by persons with disabilities living in institutions and those with 
high support needs and any other measures as may be required.  
CHAPTER III  
EDUCATION  
16. Duty of educational institutions .—The appropriate Government and the local authorities shall 
endeavour that all educational institutions funded or recognised by them provide inclusive education to 
the children with disabilit ies and towards that end sha ll— 
(i) admit them without discrimination and provide education and opportunities for sports and 
recreation activities equally with others;  
(ii) make building, campus and various facilities accessible;  
(iii) provide reasonable accommodation according to th e individual's requirements;  
(iv) provide necessary support individualised or otherwise in environments that maximise 
academic and social development consistent with the goal of full inclusion;  
(v) ensure that the education to persons who are blind or deaf  or both is imparted in the most 
appropriate languages and modes and means of communication;  
(vi) detect specific learning disabilities in children at the earliest and take suitable pedagogical 
and other measures to overcome them;  
(vii) monitor participati on, progress in terms of attainment levels and completion of education in 
respect of every student with disability;  
(viii) provide  transportation facilities to the children with disabilities and also the attendant of the 
children with disabilities having high support needs.  
17. Specific measures to promote and facilitate inclusive education .—The appropriate 
Government and the local authorities shall take the following measures for the purpose of section 16, 
namely: — 
(a) to conduct survey of school going children in every five years for identifying children with 
disabilities, ascertaining their sp ecial needs and the extent to which these are being met:  
Provided that the first survey shall be conducted within a period of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act;  
(b) to establish adequate number of teacher training institutions;  
(c) to tra in and employ teachers, including teachers with disability who are qualified in sign 
language and Braille and also teachers who are trained in teaching children with intellectual 
disability;  
(d) to train professionals and staff to support inclusive education at all levels of school education;  
(e) to establish adequate number of resource centres to support educational institutions at all 
levels of school education;  
(f) to promote the use of appropria te augmentative and alternative modes including means and 
formats of communication, Braille and sign language to supplement the use of one ’s own speech to 12 
 fulfil  the daily communication needs of persons with speech, communication or language disabilities 
and enables them to participate and contribute to their community and society;  
(g) to provide books, other learning materials and appropriate assistive devices to students with 
benchmark disabilities free of cost up to the age of eighteen years;  
(h) to prov ide scholarships in appropriate cases to students with benchmark disability;  
(i) to make suitable modifications in the curriculum and examination system to meet the needs of 
students with disabilities such as extra time for completion of examination paper,  facility of scribe or 
amanuensis, exemption from second and third language courses;  
(j) to promote research to improve learning; and  
(k) any other measures, as may be required.  
18. Adult education .—The appropriate Government and the local authorities shall take measures to 
promote, protect and ensure participation of persons with disabilities in adult education and continuing 
education programmes equally with others.  
CHAPTER IV  
SKILL DEVELOPMENT AND EMP LOYMENT  
19. Vocational training and self -employment .—(1) The appropriate Government shall formulate 
schemes and programmes including provision of loans at concessional rates to facilitate and support 
employment of persons with disabilities especially for their vocational training and self -employment.  
(2) The schemes and programmes referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall provide for — 
(a) inclusion of person with disability in all mainstream formal and non -formal vocational and 
skill training schemes and programmes;  
(b) to ensure that a person with disability has adequate support and facilities to avail specific 
training;  
(c) exclusive skill training programmes for persons with disabilities with active links with the 
market, for those with developmental, i ntellectual, multiple disabilities and autism;  
(d) loans at concessional rates including that of microcredit;  
(e) marketing the products made by persons with disabilities; and  
(f) maintenance of disaggregated data on the progress made in the skill training  and self -
employment, including persons with disabilities . 
20. Non-discrimination in employment .—(1) No Government establishment shall discriminate 
against any person with disability in any matter relating to employment:  
Provided that the appropriate Government may, having regard to the type of work carried on in any 
establishment, by notification and subject to such conditions, if any, exempt any establishment from the 
provisions of this section.  
(2) Every Government establishment shall provide reason able accommodation and appropriate barrier 
free and conducive environment to employees with disability.  
(3) No promotion shall be denied to a person merely on the ground of disability.  
(4) No Government establishment shall dispense with or reduce in rank, an employee who acquires a 
disability during his or her service : 
Provided that, if an employee after acquiring disability is not suitable for the post he was holding, 
shall be shifted to some other post with the same pay scale and service benefits:  
Provide d further that if it is not possible to adjust the employee against any post, he may be kept on a 
supernumerary post until a suitable post is available or he attains the age of superannuation, whichever is 
earlier.  
(5) The appropriate Government may frame policies for posting and transfer of employees with 
disabilities.  13 
  
21. Equal opportunity policy .—(1) Every establishment shall notify equal opportunity policy 
detailing measures proposed to be taken by it in pursuance of the provisions of this Chapter in t he manner 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) Every establishment shall register a copy of the said policy with the Chief Commissioner or the 
State Commissioner, as the case may be.  
22. Maintenance of records .—(1) Every establishment shall maintain records of the persons with 
disabilities in relation to the matter of employment, facilities provided and other necessary information in 
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the 
Central Gov ernment.  
(2) Every employment exchange shall maintain records of persons with disabilities seeking 
employment.  
(3) The records maintained under sub -section ( 1) shall be open to inspection at all reasonable hours 
by such persons as may be authorised  in their behalf by the appropriate Government.  
23. Appointment of Grievance Redressal Officer .—(1) Every Government establishment shall 
appoint a Grievance Redressal Officer for the purpose of section 19 and shall inform the Chief 
Commissioner or the Stat e Commissioner, as the case may be, about the appointment of such officer.  
(2) Any person aggrieved with the non -compliance of the provisions of section 20, may file a 
complaint with the Grievance Redressal Officer, who shall investigate it and shall take up the matter with 
the establishment for corrective action.  
(3) The Grievance Redressal Officer shall maintain a register of complaints in the manner as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government, and every complaint shall be inquired within two weeks of its 
registration.  
(4) If the aggrieved person is not satisfied with the action taken on his or her complaint, he or she may 
approach the District -Level Committee on disability.  
CHAPTER V  
SOCIAL SECURITY, HEALTH, REHABILITATION AND RECREATION  
24. Social security .—(1) The appropriate Government shall within the limit of its economic capacity 
and development formulate necessary schemes and programmes to safeguard and promote the right of 
persons with disabilities for adequate standard of living to enable th em to live independently or in the 
community:  
Provided that the quantum of assistance to the persons with disabilities under such schemes and 
programmes shall be at least twenty -five per cent. higher than the similar schemes applicable to others.  
(2) The a ppropriate Government while devising these schemes and programmes shall give due 
consideration to the diversity of disability, gender, age, and socio -economic status.  
(3) The schemes under sub -section ( 1) shall provide for, — 
(a) community centres with good  living conditions in terms of safety, sanitation, health care and 
counselling;  
(b) facilities for persons including children with disabilities who have no family or have been 
abandoned, or are without shelter or livelihood;  
(c) support  during natural or man -made disasters and in areas of conflict;  
(d) support to women with disability for livelihood and for upbringing of their children;  
(e) access to safe drinking water and appropriate and accessible sanitation facilities especially in 
urban slums and rural areas;  
(f) provisions of aids and appliances, medicine and diagnostic services and corrective surgery free 
of cost to persons with disabilities with such income ceiling as may be notified;   14 
 (g) disability pension to persons with disabi lities subject to such income ceiling as may be 
notified;  
(h) unemployment allowance to persons with disabilities registered with Special Employment 
Exchange for more than two years and who could not be placed in any gainful occupation;  
(i) care -giver allowance to persons with disabilities with high support needs;  
(j) comprehensive insurance scheme for persons with disability, not covered under the Employees 
State Insurance Schemes, or any other statutory or Government -sponsored insurance schemes;  
(k) any other matter which the appropriate Government may think fit.  
25. Healthcare .—(1) The appropriate Government and the local authorities shall take necessary 
measures for the persons  with disabilities to provide ,— 
(a) free healthcare in the vicinity specia lly in rural area subject to such family income as may be 
notified;  
(b) barrier -free access in all parts of Government and private hospitals and other healthcare 
institutions and centres;  
(c) priority in attendance and treatment.  
(2) The appropriate Government and the local authorities shall take measures and make schemes or 
programmes to promote healthcare and prevent the occurrence of disabilities and for the said purpose 
shall — 
(a) undertake or cause to be undertaken surveys, inve stigations and research concerning the cause 
of occurrence of disabilities;  
(b) promote various methods for preventing disabilities;  
(c) screen all the children at least once in a year for the purpose of identifying “at-risk” cases;  
(d) provide facilities for training to the staff at the primary health centres;  
(e) sponsor or cause to be sponsored awareness campaigns and disseminate or cause to be 
disseminated information for general hygiene, health and sanitation;  
(f) take measures for pre -natal, perinatal  and post -natal care of mother and child;  
(g) educate the public through the pre -schools, schools, primary health centres, village level 
workers and anganwadi workers;  
(h) create awareness amongst the masses through television, radio and other mass media o n the 
causes of disabilities and the preventive measures to be adopted;  
(i) healthcare during the time of natural disasters and other situations of risk;  
(j) essential medical facilities for life saving emergency treatment and procedures; and  
(k) sexual  and reproductive healthcare especially for women with disability . 
26. Insurance schemes .—The appropriate Government shall, by notification, make insurance 
schemes for their employees with disabilities . 
27. Rehabilitation .—(1) The appropriate Government and the local authorities shall within their 
economic capacity and development, undertake or cause to be undertaken services and programmes of 
rehabilitation , particularly in the areas of health, education and employment for al l persons with 
disabilities.   
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the appropriate Government and the local authorities may 
grant financial assistance to non -Governmental Organisations.   15 
 (3) The appropriate Government and the local authorities, while f ormulating rehabilitation policies 
shall consult the non -Governmental Organisations working for the cause of persons with disabilities.  
28. Research and development .—The appropriate Government shall initiate or cause to be initiated 
research and developmen t through individuals and institutions on issues which shall enhance habilitation 
and rehabilitation and on such other issues which are necessary for the empowerment of persons with 
disabilities.  
29. Culture and recreation .—The appropriate Government and the local authorities shall take 
measures to promote and protect the rights of all persons with disabilities to have a cultural life and to 
participate in recreational activities equa lly with others which include, — 
(a) facilitie s, support and sponsorships to artists and writers with disability to pursue their 
interests and talents;  
(b) establishment of a disability history museum which chronicles and interprets the historical 
experiences of persons with disabilities;  
(c) making a rt accessible to persons with disabilities;  
(d) promoting recreation centres, and other associational activities;  
(e) facilitating participation in scouting, dancing, art classes, outdoor camps and adventure 
activities;  
(f) redesigning courses in cultural and arts subjects to enable participation and access for persons 
with disabilities;  
(g) developing technology, assistive devices and equipments to facilitate access and inclusion for 
persons with disabilities in recreational activities; and  
(h) ensuring th at persons with hearing impairment can have access to television programmes with 
sign language interpretation or sub -titles.  
30. Sporting activities .—(1) The  appropriate Government shall take measures to ensure effective 
participation in sporting activities of the persons with disabilities.  
(2) The sports authorities shall accord due recognition to the right of persons with disabilities to 
participate in sport s and shall make due provisions for the inclusion of persons with disabilities in their 
schemes and programmes for the promotion and development of sporting talents.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), the appropr iate 
Government and the sports autho rities shall take measures to, — 
(a) restructure courses and programmes to ensure access, inclusion and participation of persons 
with disabilities in all sporting activities;  
(b) redesign and support infrastructure facili ties of all sporting activities for persons with 
disabilities;  
(c) develop technology to enhance potential, talent, capacity and ability in sporting activities of 
all persons with disabilities;  
(d) provide multi -sensory essentials and features in all sport ing activities to ensure effective 
participation of all persons with disabilities;  
(e) allocate funds for development of state of art sport facilities for training of persons with 
disabilities;  
(f) promote and organise disability specific sporting events f or persons with disabilities and also 
facilitate awards to the winners and other participants of such sporting events.   16 
 CHAPTER VI  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR PERSONS WITH BENCHMARK DISABILITES  
31. Free education for children with benchmark disabilities .—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Rights of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 (35 of 2009), every 
child with benchmark disability between the age of six to eighteen years shall have the right to free 
education in a neighbourhood  school, or in a special school, of his choice.  
(2) The appropriate Government and local authorities shall ensure that every child with benchmark 
disability has access to free education in an appropriate environment till he attains the age of eighteen 
years. 
32. Reservation in higher educational institutions .—(1) All Government institutions of higher 
education and other higher education institutions receiving aid from the Government shall reserve not less 
than five per cent. seats for persons with benchmark  disabilities.  
(2) The persons with benchmark disabilities shall be given an upper age relaxation of five years for 
admission in institutions of higher education.  
33. Identification of posts for reservation .—The appropriate Government shall — 
(i) identify  posts in the establishments which can be held by respective category of persons with 
benchmark disabilities in respect of the vacancies reserved in accordance with the provisions of 
section 34;  
(ii) constitute an expert committee with representation of pe rsons with benchmark disabilities for 
identification of such posts; and  
(iii) undertake periodic review of the identified posts at an interval not exceeding three years.  
34. Reservation .—(1) Every appropriate Government shall appoint in every Government 
establishment, not less than four per cent. of the total number of vacancies in the cadre strength in each 
group of posts meant to be filled with persons with benchmark disabilities of which, one per cent. each 
shall be reserved for persons with benchmark di sabilities under clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) and one per cent. 
for persons with benchmark disabilities under clauses ( d) and ( e), namely: — 
(a) blindness and low vision;  
(b) deaf and hard of hearing;  
(c) locomotor  disability including cerebral palsy, leprosy cured, dwarfism, acid attack victims and 
muscular dystrophy;  
(d) autism, intellectual disability, specific learning disability and mental illness;  
(e) multiple disabilities from amongst persons under clauses ( a) to ( d) including deaf -blindness in 
the posts identified for each disabilities:  
Provided that the reservation in promotion shall be in accordance with such instructions as are issued 
by the appropriate Government from time to time:  
Provided further that the appropriate Government, in consultation with the Chief Commissioner or the 
State Commissioner, as the case may be, may, having regard to the type of work carried out in any 
Government establishment, by notification and subject to such conditions, if an y, as may be specified in 
such notifications exempt any Government establishment from the provisions of this section.  
(2) Where in any recruitment year any vacancy cannot be filled up due to non -availability of a 
suitable person with benchmark disability o r for any other sufficient reasons, such vacancy shall be 
carried forward in the succeeding recruitment year and if in the succeeding recruitment year also suitable 
person with benchmark disability is not available, it may first be filled by interchange am ong the five 
categories and only when there is no person with disability available for the post in that year, the 
employer shall fill up the vacancy by appointment of a person, other than a person with disability:  
Provided that if the nature of vacancies i n an establishment is such that a given category of person 
cannot be employed, the vacancies may be interchanged among the five categories with the prior approval 
of the appropriate Government.   17 
 (3) The appropriate Government may, by notification, provide for such relaxation of upper age limit 
for employment of persons with benchmark disability, as it thinks fit.  
35. Incentives to employers in private sector .—The appropriate Government and the local 
authorities shall, within the limit of their economic capacity and development, provide incentives to 
employer in private sector to ensure that at least five per cent. of their work force is composed of persons 
with be nchmark disability.  
36. Special employment exchange .—The appropriate Government may, by notification, require that 
from such date, the employer in every establishment shall furnish such information or return as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government i n relation to vacancies appointed for persons with benchmark 
disability that have occurred or are about to occur in that establishment to such special employment 
exchange as may be notified by the Central Government and the establishment shall thereupon co mply 
with such requisition.  
37. Special schemes and development programmes .—The appropriate Government and the local 
authorities shall, by notification, make schemes in favour of persons with bench mark disabilities, to 
provide, — 
(a) five per cent. reservat ion in allotment of agricultural land and housing in all relevant schemes 
and development programmes, with appropriate priority to women with benchmark disabilities;  
(b) five per cent. reservation in all poverty alleviation and various developmental scheme s with 
priority to women with benchmark disabilities;  
(c) five per cent. reservation in allotment of land on concessional rate, where such land is to be 
used for the purpose of promoting housing, shelter, setting up of occupation, business, enterprise, 
recreation centres and production centres.  
CHAPTER VII  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES WITH HIGH SUPPORT NEEDS  
38. Special provisions for persons with disabilities with high support .—(1) Any person with 
benchmark disability, who considers himself to be in need of high support, or any person or organisation 
on his or her behalf, may apply to an authority, to be notified by the appropriate Government, requesting 
to provide high support.  
(2) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the authority shall refer it to an Assessment 
Board consisting of such Members as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(3) The Assessment Board shall assess the case referred to it under sub -section ( 1) in such manner as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government, and shall send a report to the authority certifying the need 
of high support and its nature.  
(4) On receipt of a report under sub -section ( 3), the authority shall take steps to provide  support in 
accordance with the report and subject to relevant schemes and orders of the appropriate Government in 
this behalf.  
CHAPTER VIII  
DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF APPROPRIATE GOVERNMENTS  
39. Awareness campaigns .—(1) The appropriate Government, in consultation with the Chief 
Commissioner or the State Commissioner, as the case may be, shall conduct, encourage, support or 
promote awareness campaigns and sensitisation programmes to ensure that the rights of the persons with 
disabilities provided under this Act are protected.  
(2) The programmes and campaigns specified und er sub -section ( 1) shall also, — 
(a) promote values of inclusion, tolerance, empathy and respect for diversity;  
(b) advance  recognition of the skills, merits and abilities of persons with disabilities and of their 
contributions to the workforce, labour market and professional fee;  
(c) foster respect for the decisions made by persons with disabilities on all matters related to 
family life, relationships, bearing and raising children;  
(d) provide orientation and sensitisation at the school, college, University and professional 
training level on the human condition of disability and the rights of persons with disabilities;   18 
 (e) provide orientation and sensitisation on disabling conditions and rights of persons with 
disabilities to employers, administrators and co -workers;  
(f) ensure that the rights of persons with disabilities are included in the curriculum in Universities, 
college s and schools.  
40. Accessibility .—The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Chief Commissioner, 
formulate rules for persons with disabilities laying down the standards of accessibility for the physical 
environment, transportation, information and communications, including appropriate technologies and 
systems, and other facilities and services provided to the public in urban and rural areas.  
41. Access to transport .—(1) The appropriate Government shall take  suitable measures to  
provide, — 
(a) facilities for persons with disabilities at bus stops, railway stations and airports conforming to 
the accessibility standards relating to parking spaces, toilets, ticketing counters and ticketing 
machines;  
(b) access to all modes of transport that conform t he design standards, including retrofitting old 
modes of transport, wherever technically feasible and safe for persons with disabilities, economically 
viable and without entailing major structural changes in design;  
(c) accessible  roads to address mobility necessary for persons with disabilities.  
(2) The appropriate Government shall develop schemes programmes to promote the personal mobility 
of persons with disabilities at a ffordable cost to provide for, — 
(a) incentives  and concessions;  
(b) retrofitting of vehicles; and  
(c) personal mobility assistance . 
42. Access to information and communication technology .—The appropriate Government shall  
take measures to ensure that, — 
(i) all contents available in audio, print and electronic media are in accessible format;  
(ii) persons with disabilities have access to electronic media by providing audio description, sign 
language interpretation and close captioning;  
(iii) electronic goods and equipment which are meant for every day use are available in universal 
design.  
43. Consumer goods .—The appropriate Government shall take measures to promote development, 
production and distribution of universally designed consumer products and accessories for general use for 
persons with disabilities.  
44. Mandatory observance of accessibility norms .—(1) No establishment shall be granted 
permission to build any structure if the building plan does not adhere to the rules formulated by the 
Central Government u nder section 40.  
(2) No establishment shall be issued a certificate of completion or allowed to take occupation of a 
building unless it has adhered to the rules formulated by the Central Government.  
45. Time limit for making existing infrastructure and pre mises accessible and action for that 
purpose .—(1) All existing public buildings shall be made accessible in accordance with the rules 
formulated by the Central Government within a period not exceeding five years from the date of 
notification of such rules:  
Provided that the Central Government may grant extension of time to the States on a case to case 
basis for adherence to this provision depending on their state of preparedness and other related 
parameters.   19 
 (2) The appropriate Government and the local aut horities shall formulate and publish an action plan 
based on prioritisation, for providing accessibility in all their buildings and spaces providing essential 
services such as all primary health centres, civil hospitals, schools, railway stations and bus s tops.  
46. Time limit for accessibility by service providers .—The service providers whether Government 
or private shall provide services in accordance with the rules on accessibility formulated by the Central 
Government under section 40 within a period of t wo years from the date of notification of such rules:  
Provided that the Central Government in consultation with the Chief Commissioner may grant 
extension of time for providing certain category of services in accordance with the said rules.  
47. Human resource development .—(1) Without prejudice to any function and power of 
Rehabilitation Council of India constituted under the Rehabilitation Council of India Act, 1992  
(34 of 1992), the appropriate Government shall endeavour to develop human resource for  the purposes of 
this Act and to that end shall, — 
(a) mandate training on disability rights in all courses for the training of Panchayati Raj 
Members, legislators, administrators, police officials, judges and lawyers;  
(b) induct disability as a component for all education courses for schools, colleges and University 
teachers, doctors, nurses, para -medical personnel, social welfare officers, rural development officers, 
asha workers, anganwadi workers, engineers, architects , other professionals and community workers;  
(c) initiate capacity building programmes including training in independent living and community 
relationships for families, members of community and other stakeholders and care providers on care 
giving and supp ort; 
(d) ensure independence training for persons with disabilities to build community relationships on 
mutual contribution and respect;  
(e) conduct training programmes for sports teachers with focus on sports, games, adventure 
activities;  
(f) any  other capacity development measures as may be required.  
(2) All Universities shall promote teaching and research in disability studies including establishment 
of study centres for such studies.  
(3) In order to fulfil the obligation stated in sub -section ( 1), the appropriate Government shall in every 
five years undertake a need based analysis and formulate plans for the recruitment, induction, 
sensitisation, orientation and training of suitable personnel to undertake the various responsibilities under 
this Act. 
48. Social audit .—The appropriate Government shall undertake social audit of all general schemes 
and programmes involving the persons with disabilities to ensure that the scheme and programmes do not 
have an adverse impact upon the persons with disabi lities and need the requirements and concerns of 
persons with disabilities.  
CHAPTER IX  
REGISTRATION OF INSTITUTIONS FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES AND GRANTS TO SUCH  
INSTITUTIONS  
49. Competent authority .—The State Government shall appoint an authority as it deems fit to be a 
competent authority for the purposes of this Chapter.  
50. Registration .—Save as otherwise provided under this Act, no person shall establish or maintain 
any institution for persons with disabilities except in accordance with a certific ate of registration issued in 
this behalf by the competent authority:  
Provided that an institution for care of mentally ill persons, which holds a valid licence under   
section 8  of the Mental Heal th Act, 1987 (14 of 1987) or any other Act for the time being in force, shall 
not be required to be registered under this Act.  
51. Application and grant of certificate of registration .—(1) Every  application for a certificate of 
registration shall be made to the competent authority in such form and in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the State Government.   20 
 (2) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the competent authority shall mak e such 
enquiries as it may deem fit and on being satisfied that the applicant has complied with the requirements 
of this Act and the rules made thereunder, it shall grant a certificate of registration to the applicant within 
a period of ninety days of rece ipt of application and if not satisfied, the competent authority shall, by 
order, refuse to grant the certificate applied for:  
Provided that before making any order refusing to grant a certificate, the competent authority shall 
give the applicant a reasona ble opportunity of being heard and every order of refusal to grant a certificate 
shall be communicated to the applicant in writing.  
(3) No certificate of registration shall be granted under sub -section ( 2) unless the institution with 
respect to which an ap plication has been made is in a position to provide such facilities and meet such 
standards as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
(4) The certificate of registration granted under sub -section ( 2),— 
(a) shall, unless revoked under section 52 remain in force for such period as may be prescribed by 
the State Government;  
(b) may be renewed from time to time for a like period; and  
(c) shall be in such form and shall be subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the State 
Government.  
(5) An application for renewal of a certificate of registration shall be made not less than sixty days 
before the expiry of the period of validity.  
(6) A copy of the certificate of registration shall be displayed by the institution in a conspicuous 
place.  
(7) Eve ry application made under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 5) shall be disposed of by the 
competent authority within such period as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
52. Revocation of registration .—(1) The competent authority may, if it has reason to believe that the 
holder of a certificate of registration granted under sub -section ( 2) of section 51 has, — 
(a) made a statement in relation to any application for the issue or renewal of the certificate which 
is incorrect or false in material particular s; or 
(b) committed or has caused to be committed any breach of rules or any conditions subject to 
which the certificate was granted,  
it may, after making such inquiry, as it deems fit, by order, revoke the certificate:  
Provided that no such order shall be  made until an opportunity is given to the holder of the certificate 
to show cause as to why the certificate of registration shall not be revoked.  
(2) Where a certificate of registration in respect of an institution has been revoked under  
sub-section ( 1), such institution shall cease to function from the date of such revocation:  
Provided that where an appeal lies under section 53 against the order of revocation, such instit ution 
shall cease to function, — 
(a) where no appeal has been preferred immediately o n the expiry of the period prescribed for the 
filing of such appeal; or  
(b) where such appeal has been preferred, but the order of revocation has been upheld, from the 
date of the order of appeal.  
(3) On the revocation of a certificate of registration in r espect of an institution, the competent 
authority may direct that any person with disability who is an inmate of such institution on the date of 
such revocation, shall be — 
(a) restored to the custody of his or her parent, spouse or lawful guardian, as the case may be; or  
(b) transferred to any other institution specified by the competent authority.   21 
 (4) Every institution which holds a certificate of registration which is revoked under this section shall, 
immediately after such revocation, surrender such cer tificate to the competent authority.  
53. Appeal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by the order of the competent authority refusing to grant a 
certificate of registration or revoking a certificate of registration may, within such period as may be 
prescribed by the State Government, prefer an appeal to such appellate authority, as may be notified by 
the State Government against such refusal or revocation.  
(2) The order of the appellate authority on such appeal shall be final.  
54. Act not to apply to institutions established or maintained by Central or State 
Government .—Nothing contained in this Chapter shall apply to an institution for persons with 
disabilities established or maintained by the Central Government or a State Government.  
55. Assistance to registered institutions .—The appropriate Government may within the limits of 
their economic capacity and development, grant financial assistance to registered institutions to provide 
services and to implement the schemes and programmes in pursuance of the provisions of this Act.  
CHAPTER X  
CERTIFICATION OF SPECIFIED DISABILITIES  
56. Guidelines for assessment of specified disabilities .—The Central Government shall notify 
guidelines for the purpose of assessing the extent of specified disability in a person.  
57. Designat ion of certifying authorities .—(1) The appropriate Government shall designate persons, 
having requisite qualifications and experience, as certifying authorities, who shall be competent to issue 
the certificate of disability.  
(2) The appropriate Government shall also notify the jurisdiction within which and the terms and 
conditions subject to which, the certifying authority shall perform its certification functions.  
58. Procedure for certification .—(1) Any person with specified disability, may apply, in such  
manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government, to a certifying authority having jurisdiction, for 
issuing of a certificate of disability.  
(2) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the certifying authority shall assess the 
disability of the concerned person in accordance with relevant guidelines notified under section 56, and 
shall, after such a ssessment, as the case may be, — 
(a) issue a certificate of disability to such person, in such form as may be prescribed by the 
Central Governme nt; 
(b) inform him in writing that he has no specified disability.  
(3) The certificate of disability issued under this section shall be valid across the country.  
59. Appeal against a decision of certifying authority .—(1) Any person aggrieved with decision of 
the certifying authority, may appeal against such decision, within such time and in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the State Government, to such appellate authority as the State Government may designate 
for the purpose.  
(2) On receipt of an appeal,  the appellate authority shall decide the appeal in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the State Government.  
CHAPTER XI  
CENTRAL AND STATE  ADVISORY  BOARDS  ON DISABILITY AND  DISTRICT  LEVEL  COMMITTEE  
60. Constitution of Central Advisory Board on Disability .—(1) The Central Government shall, by 
notification, constitute a body to be known as the Central Advisory Board on Disability to exercise the 
powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act.  
(2) The Central Ad visory Board shall consist of, — 
(a) the Minister in  charge of Department of Disability Affairs in the Central Government, 
Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(b) the Minister of State in charge dealing with Department of Disability Affairs in the Ministry 
in the Central Governmen t, Vice Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(c) three Members of Parliament, of whom two shall be elected by Lok Sabha and one by the 
Rajya Sabha, Members, ex officio ;  22 
 (d) the  Ministers in charge of Disability Affairs of all States and Administrators or Lieutenant 
Governors of the Union territories, Members, ex officio ; 
(e) Secretaries to the Government of India in charge of the Ministries or Departments of 
Disability Affairs, Social Justice and Empowerment, School Education and Literacy, and Higher 
Education, Women and Child Development, Expenditure, Personnel and Training, Administrative 
Reforms and Public Grievances, Health and Family Welfare, Rural Development, Panchayati Ra j, 
Industrial Policy and Promotion, Urban Development, Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, 
Science and Technology, Communications and Information Technology, Legal Affairs, Public 
Enterprises, Youth Affairs and Sports, Road Transport and Highways and Ci vil Aviation, Members, 
ex officio ; 
(f) Secretary, National Institute of Transforming India (NITI) Aayog, Member, ex officio ; 
(g) Chairperson, Rehabilitation Council of India, Member, ex officio ; 
(h) Chairperson, National Trust for the Welfare of Persons wi th Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental 
Retardation and Multiple Disabilities, Member, ex officio ; 
(i) Chairman -cum-Managing Director, National Handicapped Finance Development Corporation, 
Member, ex officio ; 
(j) Chairman -cum-Managing Director, Artificial Limbs Manufacturing Corporation, Member,  
ex officio ; 
(k) Chairman, Railway Board, Member, ex officio ; 
(l) Director -General, Employment and Training, Ministry of Labour and Employment, Member, 
ex officio ; 
(m) Director, National Council for Educational Research a nd Training, Member, ex officio ; 
(n) Chairperson, National Council of Teacher Education, Member, ex officio ; 
(o) Chairperson, University Grants Commission, Member, ex officio ; 
(p) Chairperson, Medical Council of India, Member, ex officio ; 
(q) Director s of the following Institutes: — 
(i) National Institute for the Visually Handicapped, Dehradun;  
(ii) National Institute for the Mentally Handicapped, Secunderabad;  
(iii) Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhyay Institute for the Physically Handicapped, New Delhi;  
(iv) Ali Yavar Jung National Institute for the Hearing Handicapped, Mumbai;  
(v) National Institute for the Orthopaedically Handicapped, Kolkata;  
(vi) National Institute of Rehabilitation Training and Research, Cuttack;  
(vii) National Institute for Empowerment of Pe rsons with Multiple Disabilities, Chennai;  
(viii) National Institute for Mental Health and Sciences, Bangalore;  
(ix) Indian Sign Language Research and Training Centre, New Delhi, Members, ex officio ; 
(r) Members to be nomina ted by the Central Government, — 
(i) five Members who are experts in the field of disability and rehabilitation;  
(ii) ten Members, as far as practicable, being persons with disabilities, to represent  
non-Governmental Organisations concerned with disabilities or disabled persons organisat ions:  
Provided that out of the ten Members nominated, at least, five Members shall be women and 
at least one person each shall be from the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes;   23 
 (iii) up to three representatives of national level chambers of commerce and industry;  
(s) Joint Secretary to the Government of India dealing with the subject of disability policy, 
Member -Secretary, ex officio . 
61. Terms and conditions of Service of members .—(1) Save as otherwise provided under this Act, 
a Member of the Central  Advisory Board nominated under clause ( r) of sub -section ( 2) of section 60 shall 
hold office for a term of three years from the date of his nomination:  
Provided that such a Member shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term, continue to hold office 
until his successor enters upon his office.  
(2) The Central Government may, if it thinks fit, remove any Member nominated under clause ( r) of 
sub-section ( 2) of section 60, before the expiry of his term of office after giving him a reasonable 
opportunity o f showing cause against the same.  
(3) A Member nominated under clause ( r) of sub -section ( 2) of section 60 may at any time resign his 
office by writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government and the seat of the said Member 
shall thereupon becom es vacant.  
(4) A casual vacancy in the Central Advisory Board shall be filled by a fresh nomination and the 
person nominated to fill the vacancy shall hold office only for the remainder of the term for which the 
Member in whose place he was so nominated.  
(5) A Member nominated under sub -clause ( i) or sub -clause ( iii) of clause ( r) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 60 shall be eligible for renomination.  
(6) The Members nominated under sub -clause ( i) and sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( r) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section  60 shall receive such allowances as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
62. Disqualifications .—(1) No person shall be a Member of t he Central Advisory Board, who — 
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudged insolvent or has suspended payment of his  debts or has 
compounded with his creditors, or  
(b) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court, or  
(c) is, or has been, convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, 
involves moral turpitude, or  
(d) is, or at any time has been, convicted of an offence under this Act, or  
(e) has so abused his position in the opinion of the Central Government as a Member so as to 
render his continuance in the office is prejudicial interests of the general public.  
(2) No order of removal shall be made by the Central Government under this section unless the 
Member concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the same.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 5) of sectio n 61, a Member 
who has been removed under this section shall not be eligible for renomination as a Member.  
63. Vacation of seats by Members .—If a Member of the Central Advisory Board becomes subject to 
any of the disqualifications specified in section 62, his seat shall become vacant.  
64. Meetings of the Central Advisory Board on disability .—The Central Advisory Board shall 
meet at least once in every six months and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the 
transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed.  
65. Functions of Central Advisory Board on disability .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Advisory Board on disability shall be the national -level consultative and advisory body on 
disability matters, and shall facilitate the continuous evolution of a comprehensive policy for the 
empowerment of persons with disabilities and the full enjoyment of rights.  
  24 
 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Central 
Advi sory Board on disability shall perform th e following functions, namely: — 
(a) advise the Central Government and the State Governments on policies, programmes, 
legislation and projects with respect to disability;  
(b) develop  a national policy to address issues concerning persons with disabilities;  
(c) review and coordinate the activities of all Departments of the Government and other 
Governmental and non -Governmental Organisations which are dealing with matters relating to 
persons with disabilities;  
(d) take up the cause of persons with disabilities with the concerned authorities and the 
international organisations with a view to provide for schemes and projects for the persons with 
disabilities in the national plans;  
(e) reco mmend steps to ensure accessibility, reasonable accommodation, non -discrimination for  
persons with disabilities vis-a-vis information, services and the built environment and their 
participation in social life;  
(f) monitor  and evaluate the impact of laws, policies and programmes to achieve full participation 
of persons with disabilities; and  
(g) such other functions as may be assigned from time to time by the Central Government.  
66. State Advisory Board on disability .—(1) Every State Government shall, by notification, 
constitute a body to be known as the State Advisory Board on disability to exercise the powers conferred 
on, and to perform the function assigned to it, under this Act.  
(2) The State Advisory Board  shall consis t of— 
(a) the Minister in charge of the Department in the State Government dealing with disability 
matters, Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(b) the  Minister of State or the Deputy Minister in charge of the Department in the State 
Government dealing with disability matters, if any, Vice -Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(c) secretaries to the State Government in charge of the Departments of Disability Affairs,  School 
Education, Literacy and Higher Education, Women and Child Development, Finance, Personnel and 
Training, Health and Family Welfare, Rural Development, Panchayati Raj, Industrial Policy and 
Promotion, Labour and Employment, Urban Development, Housing  and Urban Poverty Alleviation, 
Science and Technology, Information Technology, Public Enterprises, Youth Affairs and Sports, 
Road Transport and any other Department, which the State Government considers necessary, 
Members, ex officio ; 
(d) three Members of  the State Legislature of whom two shall be elected by the Legislative 
Assembly and one by the Legislative Council, if any, and where there is no Legislative Council, three 
Members shall be elected by the Legislative Assembly, Members, ex officio ; 
(e) Memb ers to be nominated by the State Government: — 
(i) five Members who are experts in the field of disability and rehabilitation;  
(ii) five Members to be nominated by the State Government by rotation to represent the 
districts in such manner as may be prescrib ed: 
Provided that no nomination under this sub -clause shall be made except on the 
recommendation of the district administration concerned;  
(iii) ten persons as far as practicable, being persons with disabilities, to represent  
non-Governmental Organisations or associations which are concerned with disabilities:  
Provided that out of the ten persons nominated under this clause, at least, five shall be women 
and at least one person each shall be from the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes;   25 
 (iv) not more than three representatives of the State Chamber of Commerce and Industry;  
(f) officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary in the Department dealing with disability matters 
in the State Government, Member -Secretary, ex officio . 
67. Terms and  conditions of service of Members .—(1) Save as otherwise provided under this Act, 
a Member of the State Advisory Board nominated under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2) of section 66, shall 
hold office for a term of three years from the date of his nomination:  
Provided that such a Member shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term, continue to hold office 
until his successor enters upon his office.  
(2) The State Government may, if it thinks fit, remove any Member nominated under clause ( e) of 
sub-section (2) of section 66, before the expiry of his term of office after giving him a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against the same.  
(3) A Member nominated under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2) of section 66 may at any time resign his 
office by writing under his hand addressed to the State Government and the seat of the said Member shall 
thereupon become vacant.  
(4) A casual vacancy in the State Advisory Board shall be filled by a fresh nomination and the person 
nominated to fill the vacancy shall hold o ffice only for the remainder of the term for which the Member in 
whose place he was so nominated.  
(5) A Member nominated under sub -clause ( i) or sub -clause ( iii) of clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 66 shall be eligible for renomination.  
(6) The Mem bers nominated under sub -clause ( i) and sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 66 shall receive such allowances as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
68. Disqualification .—(1) No person shall be a Member of the State Advisory Board, who — 
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudged insolvent or has suspended payment of his debts or has 
compounded with his creditors, or  
(b) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court, or  
(c) is, or has been, convicted of an offen ce which, in the opinion of the State Government, 
involves moral turpitude, or  
(d) is, or at any time has been, convicted of an offence under this Act, or  
(e) has so abused in the opinion of the State Government his position as a Member as to render 
his co ntinuance in the State Advisory Board detrimental to the interests of the general public.  
(2) No order of removal shall be made by the State Government under this section unless the Member 
concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the same.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 5) of section 67, a Member 
who has been removed under this section shall not be eligible for renomination as a Member.  
69. Vacation of seats .—If a Member of the Sta te Advisory Board becomes subject to any of the 
disqualifications specified in section 68 his seat shall become vacant.  
70. Meetings of State Advisory Board on disability .—The State Advisory Board shall meet at least 
once in every six months and shall obse rve such rules or procedure in regard to the transaction of business 
at its meetings as may be pres cribed by the State Government.  
71. Functions of State Advisory Board on disability .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the 
State Advisory Board shall be the State -level consultative and advisory body on disability matters, and 
shall facilitate the continuous evolution of a comprehensive policy for the empowerment of persons with 
disabilities and the full enjoyment of rights.  
  26 
 (2) In particular an d without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the State 
Advisory Board on disability shall perform th e following functions, namely: — 
(a) advise the State Government on policies, programmes, legislation and projects with respect to 
disability;  
(b) develop a State policy to address issues concerning persons with disabilities;  
(c) review and coordinate the activities of all Departments of the State Government and other 
Governmental and non -Governmental Organisations in the State which are dealing with matters 
relating to persons with disabilities;  
(d) take up the cause of persons with disabilities with the concerned authorities and the 
international organisations with a view to provide for schemes and projects for the persons with 
disabilit ies in the State plans;  
(e) recommend steps to ensure accessibility, reasonable accommodation, non -discrimination for 
persons with disabilities, services and the built environment and their participation in social life on an 
equal basis with others;  
(f) monitor and evaluate the impact of laws, policies and programmes designed to achieve full 
participation of persons with disabilities; and  
(g) such other functions as may be assigned from time to time by the State Government.  
72. District -level Committee on  disability .—The State Government shall constitute District -level 
Committee on disability to perform such functions as may be prescribed by it.  
73. Vacancies not to invalidate proceedings .—No act or proceeding of the Central Advisory Board 
on disability, a  State Advisory Board on disability, or a District -level Committee on disability shall be 
called in question on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in or any defect in the 
constitution of such Board or Committee, as the case may be.  
CHAPTER X II 
CHIEF COMMISSIONER  AND STATE  COMMISSIONER FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES  
74. Appointment of Chief Commissioner and Commissioners .—(1) The Central Government may, 
by notification, appoint a Chief Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities (hereinafter referred to as the 
“Chief Commissioner ”) for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Central Government may, by notification appoint two Commis sioners to assist the Chief 
Commissioner, of which one Commissioner shall be a persons with disability.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chief Commissioner or Commissioner 
unless he has special knowledge or practical experience in  respect of matters relating to rehabilitation.  
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service (including 
pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of the Chief Commissioner and Commissioners shall be 
such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(5) The Central Government shall determine the nature and categories of officers and other 
employees required to assist the Chief Commissioner in the discharge of his functions and provide the 
Chief Commissioner wit h such officers and other employees as it thinks fit.  
(6) The officers and employees provided to the Chief Commissioner shall discharge their functions 
under the general superintendence and control of the Chief Commissioner.  
(7) The salaries and allowances  and other conditions of service of officers and employees shall be 
such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(8) The Chief Commissioner shall be assisted by an advisory committee comprising of not more than 
eleven members drawn from the experts  from different disabilities in such manner as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government.  
  27 
 75. Functions of Chief Commissioner .—(1) The Chief Commissioner shall — 
(a) identify, suo motu  or otherwise, the provisions of any law or policy, programme and 
procedures, which are inconsistent with this Act and recommend necessary corrective steps;  
(b) inquire, suo motu  or otherwise, deprivation of rights of persons with disabilities and 
safeguar ds available to them in respect of matters for which the Central Government is the 
appropriate Government and take up the matter with appropriate authorities for corrective action;  
(c) review the safeguards provided by or under this Act or any other law fo r the time being in 
force for the protection of rights of persons with disabilities and recommend measures for their 
effective implementation;  
(d) review the factors that inhibit the enjoyment of rights of persons with disabilities and 
recommend appropriat e remedial measures;  
(e) study treaties and other international instruments on the rights of persons with disabilities and 
make recommendations for their effective implementation;  
(f) undertake and promote research in the field of the rights of persons wit h disabilities;  
(g) promote awareness of the rights of persons with disabilities and the safeguards available for 
their protection;  
(h) monitor implementation of the provisions of this Act and schemes, programmes meant for 
persons with disabilities;  
(i) mo nitor utilisation of funds disbursed by the Central Government for the benefit of persons 
with disabilities; and  
(j) perform such other functions as the Central Government may assign.  
(2) The Chief Commissioner shall consult the Commissioners on any matter  while discharging its 
functions under this Act.  
76. Action of appropriate authorities on recommendation of Chief Commissioner .—Whenever 
the Chief Commissioner makes a recommendation to an authority in pursuance of clause ( b) of  
section 75, that authority  shall take necessary action on it, and inform the Chief Commissioner of the 
action taken within three months from the date of receipt of the recommendation:  
Provided that where an authority does not accept a recommendation, it shall convey reasons for non -
acceptance to the Chief Commissioner within a period of three months, and shall also inform the 
aggrieved person.  
77. Powers of Chief Commissioner .—(1) The Chief Commissioner shall, for the purpose of 
discharging his functions under this Act, have the sam e powers of a civil court as are vested in a court 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while trying a suit, in respect of the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses;  
(b) requiring the discovery a nd production of any documents;  
(c) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;  
(d) receiving evidence on affidavits; and  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents.  
(2) Every proceeding before the Chief Commissioner shall be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of  sections 193  and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the  Chief Commissioner shall 
be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of  section 195  and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
 28 
 78. Annual and special reports by Chie f Commissioner .—(1) The Chief Commissioner shall 
submit an annual report to the Central Government and may at any time submit special reports on any 
matter, which, in his opinion, is of such urgency or importance that it shall not be deferred till submissi on 
of the annual report.  
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual and the special reports of the Chief Commissioner 
to be laid before each House of Parliament, along with a memorandum of action taken or proposed to be 
taken on his recommendations and the reasons for non -acceptance the recommendations, if any.  
(3) The annual and special reports shall be prepared in such form, manner and contain such details as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
79. Appointment of State Commissioner in Stat es.—(1) The State Government may, by 
notification, appoint a State Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities (hereinafter referred to as the 
“State Commissioner ”) for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Sta te Commissioner unless he has special 
knowledge or practical experience in respect of matters relating to rehabilitation.  
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service (including 
pension, gratuity and other retirement b enefits) of the State Commissioner shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the State Government.  
(4) The State Government shall determine the nature and categories of officers and other employees 
required to assist the State Commissioner in the discharge of his functions and provide the State 
Commissioner with such officers and other employees as it thinks fit.  
(5) The officers and employees provided to the State Commissioner shall discharge his functions 
under the general superintendence and control of the S tate Commissioner.  
(6) The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of officers and employees shall be 
such as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
(7) The State Commissioner shall be assisted by an advisory committee comprising of not  more than 
five members drawn from the experts in the disability sector in such manner as may be prescribed by the 
State Government.  
80. Functions of State Commissioner .—The State Commissioner shall — 
(a) identify, suo motu  or otherwise, provision of any law or policy, programme and procedures, 
which are in consistent with this Act, and recommend necessary corrective steps;  
(b) inquire, suo motu  or otherwise deprivation of rights of persons with disabilities and safeguards 
available to them in respect of matters for which the State Government is the appropriate Government 
and take up the matter with appropriate authorities for corrective action;  
(c) review  the safeguards provided by or under this Act or any other law for the time being in 
force for the protection of rights of persons with disabilities and recommend measures for their 
effective implementation;  
(d) review  the factors that inhibit the enjoyment of rights of persons with disabilities and 
recommend appropriate remedial measures;  
(e) undertake and promote research in the field of the rights of persons with disabilities;  
(f) promote awareness of the rights of p ersons with disabilities and the safeguards available for 
their protection;  
(g) monitor implementation of the provisions of this Act and schemes, programmes meant for 
persons with disabilities;  
(h) monitor utilisation of funds disbursed by the State Govern ment for the benefits of persons 
with disabilities; and  
(i) perform such other functions as the State Government may assign.  29 
  
81. Action by appropriate authorities on recommendation of State Commissioner .—Whenever 
the State Commissioner makes a recommendat ion to an authority in pursuance of clause ( b) of section 80, 
that authority shall take necessary action on it, and inform the State Commissioner of the action taken 
within three months from the date of receipt of the recommendation:  
Provided that where an  authority does not accept a recommendation, it shall convey reasons for non -
acceptance to the State Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities within the period of three months, and 
shall also inform the aggrieved person.  
82. Powers of State Commissioner .—(1) The State Commissioner shall, for the purpose of 
discharging their functions under this Act, have the same powers of a civil court as are vested in a court 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while trying a suit, in respect of the foll owing 
matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any documents;  
(c) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;  
(d) receiving  evidence on affidavits; and  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents.  
(2) Every proceeding before the State Commissioner shall be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of  sections 193  and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the State Commissioners 
shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of  section 195  and Chapter XXVI of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
83. Annual and special reports by State Commissioner .—(1) The State Commissioner shall submit 
an annual report to the State Government and may at any time submit special reports on any matter, 
which, in its opinion, is of such urgency or importance that it shall not be deferred till submission of the 
annual report.  
(2) The State Government shall cause the annual and the special reports of the State Commissioner 
for persons with disabilities to be laid before each House of State Legislature where it consists of two 
Houses or where such Legislature consist of one House, before that House along with a memorandum of 
action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommenda tion of the State Commissioner and the reasons 
for non -acceptance the recommendations, if any.  
(3) The annual and special reports shall be prepared in such form, manner and contain such details as 
may be prescribed by the State Government.  
CHAPTER XIII  
SPECIAL  COURT  
84. Special Court .—For the purpose of providing speedy trial, the State Government shall, with the 
concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court, by notification, specify for each district, a Court of 
Session to be a Special Court to try the offences under this Act.  
85. Special Public Prosecutor .—(1) For every Special Court, the State Government may, by 
notification, specify a Public Prosecutor or appoint an advocate, who has been in practice as an advocate 
for not less than seven years, as a Special Public Prosecutor for the purpose of conducting cases in that 
Court.  
(2) The Special Public Prosecutor appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall be entitled to receive such 
fees or remuneration as may be prescribed by the State Government . 
  30 
 CHAPT ER XIV  
NATIONAL FUND FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES  
86. National Fund for persons with disabilities .—(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called 
the National Fund for persons with disabilities and t here shall be credited thereto — 
(a) all sums available under the Fund for people with disabilities, constituted vide notification No. 
S.O. 573 ( E), dated the 11th August, 1983 and the Trust Fund for Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities, constituted vide notification No. 30 -03/2004 -DDII, dat ed the 21st November, 2006, 
under the Charitable Endowment Act, 1890 (6 of 1890).  
(b) all sums payable by banks, corporations, financial institutions in pursuance of judgment dated 
the 16th April, 2004 of the Hon ’ble Supreme Court in Civil Appeal Nos. 4655  and 5218 of 2000;  
(c) all sums received by way of grant, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests or transfers;  
(d) all sums received from the Central Government including grants -in-aid; 
(e) all sums from such other sources as may be decided by the Centra l Government.  
(2) The Fund for persons with disabilities shall be utilised and managed in such manner as may be 
prescribed . 
87. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Central Government shall maintain proper accounts and other 
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts of the Fund including the income and 
expenditure accounts in such form as may be prescribed in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Fund shall be audited by the Comptroller and Audito r-General of India at 
such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such 
audit shall be payable from the Fund to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of Ind ia and any other person appointed by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Fund shall have the same rights, privileges and authority 
in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India generally has in 
connection  with the audit of the Government accounts, and in particular, shall have the right to demand 
production of books of account, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any 
of the offices of the Fund.  
(4) The accounts of the Fund as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be laid before 
each House of Parliament by the Central Government . 
CHAPTER XV  
STATE  FUND FOR PERSON S WITH DISABILITIES  
88. State Fund for persons with disabilities .—(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the 
State Fund for persons with disabilities by a State Government in such manner as may be prescribed by 
the State Government.  
(2) The State Fund for persons with disabilities shall be utilised and managed in such manner as may 
be prescribed by the State Government.  
(3) Every State Government shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records of the State 
Fund for persons with disa bilities including the income and expenditure accounts in such form as may be 
prescribed by the State Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(4) The accounts of the State Fund for persons with disabilities shall be au dited by the Comptroller 
and Auditor -General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred 
by him in connection with such audit shall be payable from the State Fund to the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General of India.  
(5) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the State Fund for persons with disabilities shall have the same rights, 
privileges and authority in connection with such audit as t he Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
generally has in connection with the audit of the Government accounts, and in particular, shall have right 
to demand production of books of accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to 
inspe ct any of the offices of the State Fund.  31 
 (6) The accounts of the State Fund for persons with disabilities as certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit 
report thereo n shall be laid before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses or 
where such Legislature consists of one House before that House.  
CHAPTER XVI  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
89. Punishment for contravention of provisions of Act or rules or regulations made 
thereunder .—Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, or of any rule made 
thereunder shall for first contravention be punishable with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees 
and for any subsequent contravention with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but 
which may extend to five lakh rupees.  
90. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed, w as in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that not hing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such of fence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on t he part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanat ion.—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
91. Punishment for fraudulently availing any benefit meant for persons with benchmark 
disabilities .—Whoever, fraudulently avails or attempts to avail any benefit meant for persons with 
benchmark disabilities, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years 
or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both.  
92. Punishment for offences of atrocities .—Whoever, — 
(a) intentionally insults or intimidates with intent to humiliate a person with disability in any 
place within public view;  
(b) assaults  or uses force to any person with disability with intent to dishonour him or outrage the 
modesty of a woman with disability;  
(c) having the actual charge or control over a person with disability voluntarily or knowingly 
denies food or fluids to him or her;  
(d) being in a position to dominate the will of a child or woman with disability and uses that 
position to exploit her sexually;  
(e) voluntarily injures, damages or interferes with the use of any limb or sense or any supporting 
device of a person with dis ability;  
(f) performs, conducts or directs any medical procedure to be performed on a woman with 
disability which leads to or is likely to lead to termination of pregnancy without her express consent 
except in cases where medical procedure for termination of pregnancy is done in severe cases of 
disability and with the opinion of a registered medical practitioner and also with the consent of the 
guardian of the woman with disability,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less t han six months but which may 
extend to five years and with fine . 32 
 93. Punishment for failure to furnish information .—Whoever, fails to produce any book, account 
or other documents or to furnish any statement, information or particulars which, under this Act  or any 
order, or direction made or given there under, is duty bound to produce or furnish or to answer any 
question put in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or of any order, or direction made or given 
thereunder, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to twenty -five thousand rupees in respect of 
each offence, and in case of continued failure or refusal, with further fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees for each day, of continued failure or refusal after the date of original order impo sing 
punishment of fine.  
94. Previous sanction of appropriate Government .—No Court shall take cognizance of an offence 
alleged to have been committed by an employee of the appropriate Government under this Chapter, 
except with the previous sanction of the appropriate Government or a complaint is filed by an officer 
authorised by it in this behalf.  
95. Alternative punishments .—Where an act or omission constitutes an offence punishable under 
this Act and also under any other Central or State Act, then, notwit hstanding anything contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, the offender found guilty of such offence shall be liable to 
punishment only under such Act as provides for punishment which is greater in degree.  
CHAPTER XVII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
96. Application of other laws not barred .—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.  
97. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other leg al proceeding shall 
lie against the appropriate Government or any officer of the appropriate Government or any officer or 
employee of the Chief Commissioner or the State Commissioner for anything which is in good faith done 
or intended to be done under thi s Act or the rules made thereunder.  
98. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
or give such di rections, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be 
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of the period of two 
years from the date  of commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be, after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
99. Power to amend Schedule .—(1) On the recommendations made by the appropriate Government 
or otherwise, if the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by 
notification, amend the Schedule and any such notification being issued, the Schedule shall be deemed to 
have been amended accordingly.  
(2) Every such notification shall, as soon as possible after it is issued, shall be laid before each House 
of Parliament.  
100. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, subject to 
the condition of previous publication, by notification, ma ke rules for carrying out the provisions of this 
Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of constituting the Committee for Research on Disability under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 6;  
(b) the manner of notifying the equal opportunity policy under sub -section ( 1) of section 21;  
(c) the form and manner of maintaining records by every establishment under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 22;  33 
 (d) the manner of maintenance of register of complaints by grievance redressal officer under  
sub-section ( 3) of section 23;  
(e) the manner of furnishing in formation and return by establishment to the Special Employment 
Exchange under section 36;  
(f) the composition of the Assessment Board under sub -section ( 2) and manner of assessment to 
be made by the Assessment Board under sub -section ( 3) of section 38;  
(g) rules for person with disabilities laying down the standards of accessibility under section 40;  
(h) the manner of application for issuance of certificate of disability under sub -section ( 1) and 
form of certificate of disability under sub -section ( 2) of s ection 58;  
(i) the allowances to be paid to nominated Members of the Central Advisory Board under  
sub-section ( 6) of section 61;  
(j) the rules of procedure for transaction of business in the meetings of the Central Advisory 
Board under section 64;  
(k) the  salaries and allowances and other conditions of services of  Chief Commissioner and 
Commissioners under sub -section ( 4) of section 74;  
(l) the salaries and allowances and conditions of services of officers and staff of the Chief 
Commissioner under sub -section (7) of section 74;  
(m) the composition and manner of appointment of experts in the advisory committee under  
sub-section ( 8) of section 74;  
(n) the form, manner and content of annual report to be prepared and submitted by the Chief 
Commissioner under s ub-section ( 3) of section 78;  
(o) the procedure, manner of utilisation and management of the Fund under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 86; and  
(p) the form for preparation of accounts of Fund under sub -section ( 1) of section 87.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the s ession immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
101. Power of State Government to make rules .—(1) The State Government may,  subject to the 
condition of previous publication, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act, 
not later than six months from the date of commencement of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of foregoing powers, such rules may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of constituting the Committee for Research on Disability under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 5; 
(b) the manner of providing support of a limited guardian under sub -section ( 1) of section 14;  
(c) the form and manner of making an application for certificate of registration under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 51;  
(d) the facilities to be provided and s tandards to be met by institutions for grant of certificate of 
registration under sub -section ( 3) of section 51;  
(e) the validity of certificate of registration, the form of, and conditions attached to, certificate of 
registration under sub -section ( 4) of section 51;  
(f) the period of disposal of application for certificate of registration under sub -section ( 7) of 
section 51;  
(g) the period within which an appeal to be made under sub -section ( 1) of section 53;  
(h) the time and manner of appealing against th e order of certifying authority under  
sub-section ( 1) and manner of disposal of such appeal under sub -section ( 2) of section 59;  34 
 (i) the allowances to be paid to nominated Members of the State Advisory Board under  
sub-section ( 6) of section 67;  
(j) the r ules of procedure for transaction of business in the meetings of the State Advisory Board 
under section 70;  
(k) the composition and functions of District Level Committee under section 72 ; 
(l) salaries , allowances and other conditions of services of the State Commissioner under  
sub-section ( 3) of section 79;  
(m) the salaries, allowances and conditions of services of officers and staff of the State 
Commissioner under sub -section ( 3) of section 79;  
(n) the composition and manner of appointment of experts in the advisory committee under  
sub-section ( 7) of section 79;  
(o) the form, manner and content of annual and special reports to be prepared and submitted by 
the State Commissioner under sub -section ( 3) of section 83;  
(p) the fee or remuneration to be paid to the Special Public Prosecutor under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 85;  
(q) the manner of constitution of State Fund for persons with disabilities under sub -section ( 1), 
and the manner of utilisation and management of State Fund under sub -section ( 2) of section 88;  
(r) the form for preparation of accounts of the State Fund for persons with disabilities under  
sub-section ( 3) of section 88.  
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be  laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such State 
Legislature consists of one House, before that House.  
102. Repeal and savings .—(1) The Persons with Disabilities (Equ al Opportunity Protection of 
Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 (1 of 1996) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the said Act, anything done or any action taken under the said Act, 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the  corresponding provisions of this Act.   35 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See clause ( zc) of section 2]  
SPECIFIED DISABILITY  
1. Physical disability. — 
A. Locomotor disability (a person ’s inability to execute distinctive activities associated with 
movement of self and objects r esulting from affliction of musculoskeletal or nerv ous system or both), 
including — 
(a) “leprosy cured person ” means a person who has been cured of leprosy but is suffering 
from — 
(i) loss of sensation in hands or feet as well as loss of sensation and paresi s in the eye and 
eye-lid but with no manifest deformity;  
(ii) manifest deformity and paresis but having sufficient mobility in their hands and feet 
to enable them to enga ge in normal economic activity;  
(iii) extreme physical deformity as well as advanced a ge which prevents him/her from 
undertaking any gainful occupation, and the expression “leprosy cured ” shall construed 
accordingly;  
(b) “cerebral palsy ” means a Group of non -progressive neurological condition affecting body 
movements and muscle coordination, caused by damage to one or more specific areas of the 
brain, usually occurring before,  during or shortly after birth;  
(c) “dwarfism ” means a medical or genetic condition resulting in an adult height of 4 feet 10 
inches (147 centimeters) or less;  
(d) “muscular dystrophy ” means a group of hereditary genetic muscle disease that weakens 
the muscles that move the human body and persons with multiple dystrophy have incorrect and 
missing information in their genes, which prevents them from making the proteins they need for 
healthy muscles. It is characterised by progressive skeletal muscle weakness, defects in muscle 
proteins, and the death of muscle cells and tissue;  
(e) “acid attack victims ” means a person disfigured due to violent assaults by throwing of 
acid or similar corro sive substance.  
B. Visual impairment — 
(a) “blindness ” means a condition where a person has any of the following conditions, after 
best correcti on— 
(i) total absence of sight; or  
(ii) visual acuity less than 3/60 or less than 10/200 (Snellen) in the better eye wi th best 
possible correction; or  
(iii) limitation of the field of vision subtending a n angle of less than 10 degree.  
(b) “low-vision ” means a condition where a person has any of th e following conditons, 
namely: — 
(i) visual acuity not exceeding 6/18 or  less than 20/60 upto 3/60 or upto 10/200 (Snellen) 
in the better eye with best possible corrections; or  
(ii) limitation of the field of vision subtending an angle of less than 40 degree up to 10 
degree.  
C. Hearing impairment — 
(a) “deaf” means persons having 70 DB hearing loss in speech frequencies in both ears;   36 
 (b) “hard of hearing ” means person having 60 DB to 70 DB hearing loss in speech 
frequencies in both ears;  
D. “speech and language disability ” means a permanent disability arising out of conditions such 
as laryngectomy or aphasia affecting one or more components of speech and language due to organic 
or neurological causes.  
2. Intellectual disability, a condition characterised by significant limi tation both in intellectual 
functioning (rasoning, learning, problem solving) and in adaptive behaviour which covers a range of 
every day, social a nd practical skills, including — 
(a) “specific learning disabilities ” means a heterogeneous group of condition s wherein there is a 
deficit in processing language, spoken or written, that may manifest itself as a difficulty to 
comprehend, speak, read, write, spell, or to do mathematical calculations and includes such 
conditions as perceptual disabilities, dyslexia,  dysgraphia, dyscalculia, dyspr axia and developmental 
aphasia;  
(b) “autism spectrum disorder ” means a neuro -developmental condition typically appearing in the 
first three years of life that significantly affects a person's ability to communicate, understan d 
relationships and relate to others, and is frequently associated with unusal or stere otypical rituals or 
behaviours.  
3. Mental behaviour, — 
“mental illness ” means a substantial disorder of thinking, mood, perception, orientation or 
memory that grossly imp airs judgment, behaviour, capacity to recognise reality or ability to meet the 
ordinary demands of life, but does not include retardation which is a conditon of arrested or 
incomplete development of mind of a person, specially characterised by subnormality  of intelligence.  
4. Disability caused due to — 
(a) chronic ne urological conditions, such as — 
(i) “multiple sclerosis ” means an inflammatory, nervous system disease in which the myelin 
sheaths around the axons of nerve cells of the brain and spinal cord are  damaged, leading to 
demyelination and affecting the ability of nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord to communicate 
with each other;  
(ii) “parkinson's disease ” means a progressive disease of the nervous system marked by 
tremor, muscular rigidity, and s low, imprecise movement, chiefly affecting middle -aged and 
elderly people associated with degeneration of the basal ganglia of the brain and a deficiency of  
the neurotransmitter dopamine.  
(b) Blood d isorder — 
(i) “haemophilia ” means an inheritable disease, usually affecting only male but transmitted by 
women to their male children, characterised by loss or impairment of the normal clotting ability 
of blood so that a minor would may result in fatal blee ding;  
(ii) “thalassemia ” means a group of inherited disorders characterised by reduced or  absent 
amounts of haemoglobin.  
(iii) “sickle cell disease ” means a hemolytic disorder characterised by chronic anemia, painful 
events, and various complications due to associated tissue and or gan damage; “hemolytic ” refers 
to the destruction of the cell membrane of red blood cells resulting in the release of hemoglobin.  
5. Multiple Disabilities (more than one of the above specified disabilities) including deaf blindness 
which means a condition in which a person may have combination of hearing and visual impairments 
causing severe communication, developme ntal, and educational problems.  
6. Any other category as may be notified by the Central Government.  
 
