--------------------------The Admiralty (Jurisdiction and Settlement of Maritime Claims)Act, 2017--------------------------
1 THE ADMIRALTY (JURISDICTION AND SETTLEMENT OF MARITIME CLAIMS) 
ACT, 2017 
___________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
__________ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
SECTIONS
1.Short title, application and commencement. 
2.Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
ADMIRALTY JURISDICTION AND MARITIME CLAIMS
3.Admiralty jurisdiction. 
4.Maritime claim. 
5.Arrest of vessel in rem. 
6.Admiralty jurisdiction inpersonam.
7.Restrictions on actions in personam in certain cases. 
8.Vesting of rights on sale of vessels. 
9.Inter se  priority on maritime lien. 
10.Order of priority of maritime claims. 
11.Protection of owner, demise charterer, manager or operator or crew of vessel arrested. 
CHAPTER III 
PROCEDURE AND APPEALS
12.Application of Code of Civil Procedure. 
13.Assistance of assessors. 
14.Appeal. 
15.Transfer of proceedings by Supreme Court. 
CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANEOUS
16.Power to make rules. 
17.Repeal and savings. 
18.Power to remove difficulties. 2 THE ADMIRALTY (JURISDICTION AND SETTLEMENT OF MARITIME CLAIMS)         
ACT, 2017 
ACT NO 22 OF2017 
[9th August, 2017.] 
An Act to consolidate the laws relating to admiralty jurisdiction, legal proceedings in connection with 
vessels, their arrest, detention, sale and other matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, application and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Admiralty 
(Jurisdiction and Settlement of Maritime Claims) Act, 2017. 
(2) It shall apply to every vessel, irrespective of the place of residence or domicile of the owner: 
Provided that this Act shall not apply to an inland vessel defined in clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Inland Vessels Act, 1917 (1 of 1917), or a vessel under construction  
that has not been launched unless it is notified by the Central Government to be a vessel for the purposes 
of this Act: 
Provided further that this Act shall not apply to a warship, naval auxiliary or other vessel owned or 
operated by the Central or a State Government and used for any non-commercial purpose, and, shall also 
not apply to a foreign vessel which is used for any non-commercial purpose as may be notified by the 
Central Government. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint. 
2. Definitions. —(1) In this Act,— 
(a) “admiralty jurisdiction” means the jurisdiction exercisable by a High Court under section 3, in 
respect of maritime claims specified under this Act; 
(b) “admiralty proceeding” means any proceeding before a High Court, exercising admiralty 
jurisdiction; 
(c) “arrest” means detention or restriction for removal of a vessel by order of a High Court to 
secure a maritime claim including seizure of a vessel in execution or satisfaction of a judgment or 
order; 
(d) “goods” means any property including live animals, containers, pallets or such other articles of 
transport or packaging or luggage irrespective of the fact whether such property is carried, on or under 
the deck of a vessel; 
(e) “High Court”, in relation to an admiralty proceeding, means any of the High Court of Calcutta, 
High Court of Bombay, High Court of Madras, High Court of Karnataka, High Court of Gujarat, High 
Court of Orissa, High Court of Kerala, High Court of Judicature at Hyderabad for the State of 
Telangana and the State of Andhra Pradesh or any other High Court, as may be notified by the Central 
Government for the purposes of this Act; 
(f)“maritime claim” means a claim referred to in section 4; 
(g) “maritime lien” means a maritime claim against the owner, demise charterer, manager or 
operator of the vessel referred to in clauses ( a) to ( e) of sub-section ( 1) of section 9, which shall 
continue to exist under sub-section ( 2) of that section; 
(h) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette; 
(i) “port” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the Indian Ports Act, 1908 (15 of 1908); 
(j) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government under this Act; 
(k) “territorial waters” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the Territorial Waters, 
Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and Other Maritime Zones Act, 1976 (80 of 1976); and 
(l) “vessel” includes any ship, boat, sailing vessel or other description of vessel used or constructed 
for use in navigation by water, whether it is propelled or not, and includes a barge, lighter or other 
floating vessel, a hovercraft, an off-shore industry mobile unit, a vessel that has sunk or is stranded or 
abandoned and the remains of such a vessel. 
Explanation. —A vessel shall not be deemed to be a vessel for the purposes of this clause, when it 
is broken up to such an extent that it cannot be put into use for navigation, as certified by a surveyor. 3 (2) The words and expressions used herein but not defined and defined in the Merchant Shipping Act, 
1958  (44 of 1958) shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act. 
CHAPTER II 
ADMIRALTY JURISDICTION AND MARITIME CLAIMS
3.  Admiralty jurisdiction .—Subject to the provisions of sections 4 and 5, the jurisdiction in respect 
of all maritime claims under this Act shall vest in the respective High Courts and be exercisable over the 
waters up to and including the territorial waters of their respective jurisdictions in accordance with the 
provisions contained in this Act: 
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, extend the jurisdiction of the High Court 
up to the limit as defined in section 2 of the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic 
Zone and Other Maritime Zones Act, 1976 (80 of 1976). 
4. Maritime claim. —(1) The High Court may exercise jurisdiction to hear and determine any question 
on a maritime claim, against any vessel, arising out of any— 
(a) dispute regarding the possession or ownership of a vessel or the ownership of any share 
therein; 
 (b) dispute between the co-owners of a vessel as to the employment or earnings of the vessel; 
 (c) mortgage or a charge of the same nature on a vessel; 
(d) loss or damage caused by the operation of a vessel; 
(e) loss of life or personal injury occurring whether on land or on water, in direct connection 
with the operation of a vessel; 
(f) loss or damage to or in connection with any goods; 
(g) agreement relating to the carriage of goods or passengers on board a vessel, whether 
contained in a charter party or otherwise; 
(h) agreement relating to the use or hire of the vessel, whether contained in a charter party or 
otherwise; 
(i) salvage services, including, if applicable, special compensation relating to salvage services in 
respect of a vessel which by itself or its cargo threatens damage to the environment; 
(j) towage; 
(k) pilotage; 
(l) goods, materials, perishable or non-perishable provisions, bunker fuel, equipment (including 
containers), supplied or services rendered to the vessel for its operation, management, preservation 
or maintenance including any fee payable or leviable; 
(m) construction, reconstruction, repair, converting or equipping of the vessel; 
(n) dues in connection with any port, harbour, canal, dock or light tolls, other tolls, waterway or 
any charges of similar kind chargeable under any law for the time being in force; 
(o) claim by a master or member of the crew of a vessel or their heirs and dependents for wages or 
any sum due out of wages or adjudged to be due which may be recoverable as wages or cost of 
repatriation or social insurance contribution payable on their behalf or any amount an employer is 
under an obligation to pay to a person as an employee, whether the obligation arose out of a contract 
of employment or by operation of a law (including operation of a law of any country) for the time 
being in force, and includes any claim arising under a manning and crew agreement relating to a 
vessel, notwithstanding anything contained in the provisions of sections 150 and 151 of the Merchant 
Shipping Act, 1958 (44 of 1958); 
(p) disbursements incurred on behalf of the vessel or its owners; 
(q) particular average or general average; 4 (r) dispute arising out of a contract for the sale of the vessel; 
(s) insurance premium (including mutual insurance calls) in respect of the vessel, payable by or 
on behalf of the vessel owners or demise charterers; 
(t) commission, brokerage or agency fees payable in respect of the vessel by or on behalf of the 
vessel owner or demise charterer; 
(u) damage or threat of damage caused by the vessel to the environment, coastline or related 
interests; measures taken to prevent, minimise, or remove such damage; compensation for such 
damage; costs of reasonable measures for the restoration of the environment actually undertaken or to 
be undertaken; loss incurred or likely to be incurred by third parties in connection with such damage; or 
any other damage, costs, or loss of a similar nature to those identified in this clause; 
(v) costs or expenses relating to raising, removal, recovery, destruction or the rendering harmless of 
a vessel which is sunk, wrecked, stranded or abandoned, including anything that is or has been on board 
such vessel, and costs or expenses relating to the preservation of an abandoned vessel and maintenance 
of its crew; and 
          ( w) maritime lien. 
Explanation. —For the purposes of clause ( q), the expressions “particular average” and “general 
average” shall have the same meanings as assigned to them in sub-section ( 1) of section 64 and                  
sub-section ( 2) of section 66 respectively of the Marine Insurance Act, 1963 (11 of 1963). 
(2) While exercising jurisdiction under sub-section ( 1), the High Court may settle any account outstanding 
and unsettled between the parties in relation to a vessel, and direct that the vessel, or any share thereof, shall 
be sold, or make such other order as it may think fit. 
(3) Where the High Court orders any vessel to be sold, it may hear and determine any question arising 
as to the title to the proceeds of the sale. 
(4) Any vessel ordered to be arrested or any proceeds of a vessel on sale under this Act shall be held as 
security against any claim pending final outcome of the admiralty proceeding. 
5. Arrest of vessel in rem.—(1) The High Court may order arrest of any vessel which is within its 
jurisdiction for the purpose of providing security against a maritime claim which is the subject of an 
admiralty proceeding, where the court has reason to believe that— 
(a) the person who owned the vessel at the time when the maritime claim arose is liable for the claim 
and is the owner of the vessel when the arrest is effected; or 
(b) the demise charterer of the vessel at the time when the maritime claim arose is liable for the 
claim and is the demise charterer or the owner of the vessel when the arrest is effected; or 
(c) the claim is based on a mortgage or a charge of the similar nature on the vessel; or 
(d) the claim relates to the ownership or possession of the vessel; or 
(e) the claim is against the owner, demise charterer, manager or operator of the vessel and is 
secured by a maritime lien as provided in section 9. 
(2) The High Court may also order arrest of any other vessel for the purpose of providing security 
against a maritime claim, in lieu of the vessel against which a maritime claim has been made under this 
Act, subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 1): 
Provided that no vessel shall be arrested under this sub-section in respect of a maritime claim under 
clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) of section 4. 
6.  Admiralty jurisdiction inpersonam .—Subject to section 7, the High Court may exercise 
admiralty jurisdiction by action in personam  in respect of any maritime claim referred to in clauses ( a) to 
(w) of sub-section ( 1) of section 4. 
7.  Restrictions on actions in personam  in certain cases.— (1) Where any maritime claim arising in 
respect of a damage or loss of life or personal injury arising out of any—
(i) collision between vessels, 
(ii) the carrying out of or omission to carry out, a manoeuvre in the case of one or more vessels, 5 (iii) non-compliance, on the part of one or more vessels, with the collision regulations made in 
pursuance of section 285 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (44 of 1958),  
the High Court shall not entertain any action under this section against any defendant unless— 
(a) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises in India; or 
(b) the defendant, at the time of commencement of the action by the High Court, actually and 
voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain in India: 
Provided that an action may be entertained in a case, where there are more defendants than one and 
where one of the defendants who does not actually and voluntarily reside or carry on business or 
personally work for gain in India is made a party to such action either with the leave of the court, or 
each of the defendants acquiesces in such action. 
(2) The High Court shall not entertain any action in personam  to enforce a claim to which this section 
applies until any proceedings previously brought by the plaintiff in any court outside India against the 
same defendant in respect of the same incident or series of incidents have been discontinued or have 
otherwise come to an end. 
(3) The provisions of sub-section ( 2) shall apply to counter-claims as they apply to actions except 
counter-claims in proceedings arising out of the same incident or series of incidents. 
(4) A reference to the plaintiff and the defendant for the purpose of sub-section ( 3) shall be construed 
as reference to the plaintiff in the counter-claim and the defendant in the counter-claim respectively. 
(5) The provisions of sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3) shall not apply to any action or counter-claim if the 
defendant submits or agrees to submit to the jurisdiction of the High Court. 
(6) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 2), the High Court shall have jurisdiction to entertain an 
action in personam to enforce a claim to which this section applies whenever any of the conditions 
specified, in clauses ( a) and ( b) of sub-section ( 1) is satisfied and any law for the time being in force relating 
to the service of process outside the jurisdiction shall apply. 
8. Vesting of rights on sale of vessels .—On the sale of a vessel under this Act by the High Court in 
exercise of its admiralty jurisdiction, the vessel shall vest in the purchaser free from all encumbrances, 
liens, attachments, registered mortgages and charges of the same nature on the vessel. 
9. Inter se  priority on maritime lien.— (1) Every maritime lien shall have the following order of inter se 
priority, namely 
(a) claims for wages and other sums due to the master, officers and other members of the vessel's 
complement in respect of their employment on the vessel, including costs of repatriation and social insurance 
contributions payable on their behalf; 
(b) claims in respect of loss of life or personal injury occurring, whether on land or on water, in 
direct connection with the operation of the vessel; 
 (c) claims for reward for salvage services including special compensation relating thereto; 
(d) claims for port, canal, and other waterway dues and pilotage dues and any other statutory dues 
related to the vessel; 
(e) claims based on tort arising out of loss or damage caused by the operation of the vessel other than 
loss or damage to cargo and containers carried on the vessel. 
(2) The maritime lien specified in sub-section (1) shall continue to exist on the vessel notwithstanding any 
change of ownership or of registration or of flag and shall be extinguished after expiry of a period of one year 
unless, prior to the expiry of such period, the vessel has been arrested or seized and such arrest or seizure has led 
to a forced sale by the High Court: 
Provided that for a claim under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1), the period shall be two years from the 
date on which the wage, sum, cost of repatriation or social insurance contribution, falls due or becomes 
payable. 6 (3) The maritime lien referred to in this section shall commence— 
(a) in relation to the maritime lien under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1), upon the claimant's discharge 
from the vessel; 
(b) in relation to the maritime liens under clauses ( b) to ( e) of sub-section ( 1), when the claim 
arises,  
and shall run continuously without any suspension or interruption: 
Provided that the period during which the vessel was under arrest or seizure shall be excluded. 
(4) No maritime lien shall attach to a vessel to secure a claim which arises out of or results from— 
(a) damage in connection with the carriage of oil or other hazardous or noxious substances by sea 
for which compensation is payable to the claimants pursuant to any law for the time being in force; 
(b) the radioactive properties or a combination of radioactive properties with toxic, explosive or 
other hazardous properties of nuclear fuel or of radioactive products or waste. 
10. Order of priority of maritime claims.— (1) The order of maritime claims determining the             
inter se priority in an admiralty proceeding shall be as follows:—
(a) a claim on the vessel where there is a maritime lien; 
(b) registered mortgages and charges of same nature on the vessel;  
(c) all other claims. 
(2) The following principles shall apply in determining the priority of claims inter se — 
(a) if there are more claims than one in any single category of priority, they shall rank equally; 
(b) claims for various salvages shall rank in inverse order of time when the claims thereto 
accrue. 
11. Protection of owner, demise charterer, manager or operator or crew of vessel            
arrested.— (1) The High Court may, as a condition of arrest of a vessel, or for permitting an arrest 
already effected to be maintained, impose upon the claimant who seeks to arrest or who has procured the 
arrest of the vessel, an obligation to provide an unconditional undertaking to pay such sums of money as 
damages or such security of a kind for an amount and upon such terms as may be determined by the High 
Court, for any loss or damage which may be incurred by the defendant as a result of the arrest, and for 
which the claimant may be found liable, including but not restricted to the following, namely:—
(a) the arrest having been wrongful or unjustified; or 
(b) excessive security having been demanded and provided. 
(2) Where pursuant to sub-section ( 1), the person providing the security may at any time, apply to the 
High Court to have the security reduced, modified or cancelled for sufficient reasons as may be stated in 
the application. 
(3) If the owner or demise charterer abandons the vessel after its arrest, the High Court shall cause the 
vessel to be auctioned and the proceeds appropriated and dealt with in such manner as the court may 
deem fit within a period of forty-five days from the date of arrest or abandonment: 
Provided that the High Court shall, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the period of auction 
of the vessel for a further period of thirty days. 
CHAPTER III 
PROCEDURE AND APPEALS
12.Application of Code of Civil Procedure.— The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908             
(5 of 1908) shall apply in all the proceedings before the High Court in so far as they are not inconsistent with or 
contrary to the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder. 
13. Assistance of assessors.— (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, the Central Government shall appoint by notification, a list of assessors with such 
qualifications and experience in admiralty and maritime matters, the nature of duties to be performed by 
them, the fees to be paid to them and other ancillary or incidental matters for the purposes of this Act, in 
the manner as may be prescribed. 7 (2) The appointment of assessors shall not be construed as a bar to the examination of expert witnesses 
by any of the parties in any admiralty proceeding. 
14. Appeal.— Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, an 
appeal shall lie from any judgment, decree or final order or interim order of a single Judge of the High 
Court under this Act to a Division Bench of the High Court. 
15. Transfer of proceedings by Supreme Court.— The Supreme Court may on an application of any 
party, transfer, at any stage, any admiralty proceeding from one High Court to any other High Court and 
the latter High Court shall proceed to try, hear and determine the matter from the stage at which it stood 
at the time of transfer: 
Provided that no such proceeding shall be transferred unless parties to the proceeding have been given 
an opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS
16. Power to make rules.— (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the rules may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the qualification, experience, nature of duties and fee to be paid to the assessors and other 
ancillary or incidental matters under sub-section ( 1) of section 13; 
(b) the practice and procedure of admiralty jurisdiction under this Act including fees, costs and 
expenses in such proceedings; and 
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(3) Until rules are made under sub-section ( 2) by the Central Government, all rules for the time being 
in force governing the exercise of admiralty jurisdiction in the High Courts shall be applicable. 
(4) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after the rule is made, or 
notification issued before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or notification or both Houses agree that the rule or notification should not be 
made or issued, the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect, only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or notification. 
17.  Repeal and savings.— (1) The application in India of the following enactments are hereby 
repealed—
(a)  the Admiralty Court Act, 1840 (3 and 4 Vict., c. 65); 
(b) the Admiralty Court Act, 1861 (24 and  25 Vict., c. 10); 
(c) the Colonial Courts of Admiralty Act, 1890 (53 and 54 vict., c. 27); 
(d) the Colonial Courts of Admiralty (India) Act, 1891 (16 of 1891); and 
(e) the provisions of the Letters Patent, 1865 in so far as they apply to the admiralty jurisdiction 
of the Bombay, Calcutta and Madras High Courts. 
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal, all admiralty proceedings pending in any High Court immediately 
before the commencement of this Act shall continue to be adjudicated by such court in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act. 
(3) Anything done or any action taken, under the provisions of the repealed enactments, shall in so far 
as such thing or action is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or 
taken under the corresponding provisions of the Act as if the said provisions were in force when such 
thing was done or such action was taken and shall continue to be in force accordingly until superseded by 
anything done or any action taken under this Act or rules made thereunder.  8 (4) Any rule, regulation, bye-law made or order or notice issued under the repealed enactments, shall 
so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder be deemed to have 
been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
18. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years from the date of 
commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament. 
--------------------------The Central Goods and Services Tax (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 2017--------------------------
1 THE CENTRAL GOODS AND SERVICES TAX (EXTENSION TO JAMMU AND 
KASHMIR) ACT, 2017 
_________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
_________ 
SECTIONS
1.Short title and commencement.
2.Extension and amendment of  Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017.
3.Repeal and saving.2 THE CENTRAL GOODS AND SERVICES TAX (EXTENSION TO JAMMU AND 
KASHMIR) ACT, 2017 
ACT NO. 26 OF 2017 
[23rd August, 2017.] 
An Act to provide for the extension of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 to the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Central  Goods and Services Tax 
(Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 2017. 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 8th day of July, 2017. 
2. Extension and amendment of  Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017. —(1)The Central 
Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 (12 of 2017) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) and all 
rules, notifications and orders made thereunder by the Central  Government are hereby extended to, and 
shall be in force in, the State of  Jammu and Kashmir. 
(2) With effect from the date of commencement of this Act, in the principal Act,— 
(a) in section 1, in sub-section ( 2), the words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” shall be 
omitted; 
(b) in section 22, in the Explanation, in clause ( ii), after the word “Constitution”, the words “except 
the State of Jammu and Kashmir” shall be inserted; 
(c) in section 109, in sub-section ( 6),— 
(i) after the words “each State or Union territory”, the words “except for the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir” shall be inserted; 
(ii) in the first proviso, for the words “Provided that”, the following shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
“Provided that for the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the State Bench of the Goods and 
Services Tax Appellate Tribunal constituted under this Act shall be the State Appellate 
Tribunal constituted under the Jammu and Kashmir Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017: 
Provided further that”; 
(iii) in the second proviso, for the words “Provided further that”, the words “Provided also 
that” shall be substituted. 
3. Repeal and saving. —(1)The Central Goods and Services Tax (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) 
Ordinance, 2017 (Ord. 3 of 2017) is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
--------------------------The Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017--------------------------
1 THE CENTRAL GOODS AND SERVICES TAX ACT, 2017  
____________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
ADMINISTRATION  
3. Officers under this Act.  
4. Appointment of officers.  
5. Powers of officers . 
6. Authorisation of officers of State tax or Union territory tax as proper officer in certain 
circumstances.  
CHAPTER III  
LEVY AND COLLECTION OF TAX  
7. Scope of supply.  
8. Tax liability on composite and mixed supplies.  
9. Levy and collection.  
10. Composition levy.  
11. Power to grant exemption from tax.  
CHAPTER IV  
TIME AND VALUE OF SUPPLY  
12. Time of supply of goods.  
13. Time of supply of services.  
14. Change in rate of tax in respect of supply of goods or services.  
15. Value of taxable supply.  
CHAPTER V  
INPUT TAX CREDIT  
16. Eligibility and conditions for taking input tax credit.  
17. Apportionment of credit and blocked credits.  
18. Availability of credit in special circumstances.  
19. Taking input tax credit in respect of inputs and capital goods sent for job work.  
20. Manner of distrib ution of credit by Input Service Distributor.  2 SECTIONS  
21. Manner of recovery of credit distributed in excess.  
CHAPTER VI   
REGISTRATION  
22. Persons liable for registration.  
23. Persons not liable for registration.  
24. Compulsory registration in certain cases.  
25. Procedure for registration.  
26. Deemed registration.  
27. Special provisions relating to casual taxable person and non -resident taxable person.  
28. Amendment of registration.  
29. Cancellation or suspension of registration.  
30. Revocation of cancellation of registration.  
CHAPTER VII  
TAX INVOICE, CREDIT AND DEBIT NOTES  
31. Tax invoice.  
32. Prohibition of unauthorised collection of tax.  
33. Amount of tax to be indicated in tax invoice and other documents.  
34. Credit and debit notes.  
CHAPTER VIII  
ACCOUNTS AND RECORDS  
35. Accounts and other records.  
36. Period of retention of accounts.  
CHAPTER IX  
RETURNS  
37. Furnishing details of outward supplies.  
38. Furnishing details of inward supplies.  
39. Furnishing of returns.  
40. First return.  
41. Claim of input tax credit and provisional acceptance thereof.  
42. Matching, reversal and reclaim of input tax credit.  
43. Matching, reversal and reclaim of reduction in output tax liability.  
44. Annual return.  
45. Final return.  
46. Notice to return defaulters.  
47. Levy of late fee.  
48. Goods and services tax practitioners.  3 CHAPTER X  
PAYMENT OF TAX  
SECTIONS  
49. Payment of tax, inte rest, penalty and other amounts . 
49A. Utilisation of  input tax  credit subject  to certain  conditions.  
49B. Order of  utilisation of  input tax  credit.  
50. Interest on delayed payment of tax . 
51. Tax deductions at source . 
52. Collection of tax at stores . 
53. Transfer of input  tax credit.  
CHAPTER XI  
REFUNDS  
54. Refund of tax.  
55. Refund in certain cases.  
56. Interest on delayed refunds.  
57. Consumer Welfare Fund.  
58. Utilisation of Fund.  
CHAPTER XII  
ASSESSMENT  
59. Self-assessment.  
60. Provisional assessment.  
61. Scrutiny of returns . 
62. Assessment of non -filers  of returns.  
63. Assessment of unregistered persons.  
64. Summary assessment in certain special cases.  
CHAPTER XIII  
AUDIT  
65. Audit by tax authorities.  
66. Special audit.  
CHAPTER XIV  
INSPECTION , SEARCH, SEIZURE AND ARREST  
 
67. Power of inspection, search and seizure.  
68. Inspec tion of goods in movement.  
69. Power to arrest.  
70. Power to summon persons to give evidence and produce documents.  
71. Access to business premises.  
72. Officers to assist proper officers.  4 CHAPTER XV  
DEMANDS AND RECOVERY  
SECTIONS  
73. Determination of tax not paid or short paid or erroneously refunded or input tax credit wrongly 
availed or utilised for any reason other than fraud or any wilful -misstatement or suppression of 
facts. 
74. Determination of tax not paid or short paid or erroneous ly refunded or input tax credit wrongly 
availed or utilised by reason of fraud or any wilful -misstatement or suppression of facts . 
75. General provisions relating to determination of tax.  
76. Tax collected but not paid to Government.  
77. Tax wrongfully collected and p aid to Central Government or State Government.  
78. Initiation of recovery proceedings.  
79. Recovery of tax.  
80. Payment of tax and other amount in instalments.  
81. Transfer of property to be void in certain cases.  
82. Tax to be first charge on property.  
83. Provisional attachment  to protect revenue in certain cases.  
84. Continuation and validation of certain recovery proceedings.  
CHAPTER XVI  
LIABILITY TO PAY IN CERTAIN CASES  
85. Liability in case of transfer of business.  
86. Liability of agent and principal.  
87. Liability in case of amalgamation or merger of companies.  
88. Liability in case of company in liquidation.  
89. Liability of directors of private company.  
90. Liability of partners of firm to pay tax.  
91. Liability of guardians, trustees, etc.  
92. Liability of Court of Wards, etc.  
93. Special provisions regarding liability to pay tax, interest or penalty in certain cases.  
94. Liability in other cases.  
CHAPTER XVII  
ADVANCE  RULING  
95. Definitions.  
96. Authority for advance ruling.  
97. Application for advance ruling.  
98. Procedure on receipt of application.  
99. Appellate Authority for Advanc e Ruling.  5 SECTIONS  
100. Appeal to Appellate Authority.  
101. Order s of Appellate Authority.  
102. Rectification of advance ruling.  
103. Applicability of advance ruling.  
104. Advance ruling to be void in certain circumstances.  
105. Powers of Authority and Appellate Authority.  
106. Procedure of  Authority and Appellate Authority.  
CHAPTER XVIII  
APPEALS AND REVISION  
107. Appeals to Appellate Authority.  
108. Powers of Revisional Authority.  
109. Constitution of Appellate Tribunal and Benches thereof.  
110. President and Members of Appellate Tribunal, their qualification,  appointment, conditions of 
service, etc.  
111. Procedure before Appellate Tribunal.  
112. Appeals to Appellate Tribunal.  
113. Orders of Appellate Tribunal.  
114. Financial and administrative powers of President.  
115. Interest on refund of amount paid for admission of appeal.  
116. Appeara nce by authorised representative.  
117. Appeal to High Court.  
118. Appeal to Supreme Court.  
119. Sums due to be paid notwithstanding appeal, etc.  
120. Appeal not to be filed in certain cases . 
121. Non-appealable decisions and orders.  
CHAPTER XIX  
                  OFFENCES AND PENALITIS  
122. Penalty for certain offences.  
123. Penalty for failure to furnish information return.  
124. Fine for failure to furnish statistics . 
125. General penalty.  
126. General disciplines related to penalty.  
127. Power to impose penalty in certain cases . 
128. Power to waive penalty or fee or both . 
129. Detention, seizure and release of goods and conveyances in transit.  6 SECTIONS  
130. Confiscation of goods or conveyances and levy of penalty.  
131. Confiscation or penalty not to interfere with other punishments.  
132. Punishment for certain offences.  
133. Liability of officers and certain other persons.  
134. Cognizance of offences.  
135. Presumption of culpable mental state.  
136. Relevancy of statements under certain circumstances.  
137. Offences by companies.  
138. Compounding of offences.  
 
CHAPTER XX  
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS  
139. Migration of existing taxpayers.  
140. Transitional arrangements for input tax credit.  
141. Transitional provisions relating to job work.  
142. Miscellaneous transitional provisions.  
CHAPTER XXI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
143. Job work procedure . 
144. Presumption as to documents in certain cases.  
145. Admissibili ty of micro films, facsimile copies of documents and computer printouts as 
documents and as evidence.  
146. Common Portal.  
147. Deemed exports.  
148. Special procedure for certain processes.  
149. Goods and services tax compliance rating.  
150. Obligation to furnish information return.  
151. Power to collect statistics.  
152. Bar on disclosure of information.  
153. Taking assistance from an expert.  
154. Power to take samples.  
155. Burden of proof.  
156. Persons deemed to be public servants.  
157. Protection of action take under this Act.  
158. Disclosure of information by a public servant.  
159. Publication of information in respect of persons in certain cases.  7 SECTIONS  
160. Assessment proceedings, etc., not to be invalid on certain grounds.  
161. Rectification of errors apparent on the face of record.  
162. Bar on jurisdiction of civil courts.  
163. Levy of fee.  
164. Power of Government to make rules.  
165. Power to make regulations.  
166. Laying of rules, regulations and notifications.  
167. Delegation of powers.  
168. Power to issue instructions or directions.  
169. Service of notice in certain circumstances.  
170. Rounding off of tax, etc . 
171. Anti-profiteering measure.  
172. Removal of difficulties.  
173. Amendment of Act 32 of 1994.  
174. Repeal and saving.  
SCHEDULE I.  
SCHEDULE II.  
SCHEDULE III.  8 
 THE CENTRAL GOODS AND SERVICES TAX ACT, 2017  
ACT NO. 12 OF 2017  
[12th April, 2017.]  
An Act to make a provision for levy and collection of tax on intra -State supply of goods or 
services or both by the Central Government and for matters connected therewith o r incidental 
thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Central Goods and 
Services Tax Act, 2017.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India  1***. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any refe rence 
in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming 
into force of that provision.  
2. Definitions. — In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, –– 
(1) ―actionable  claim‖ shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 3 of the Transfer 
of Property Act, 1882 (4 of 1882);  
(2) ―address of delivery‖ means the address of the recipient of goods or services or both indicated 
on the tax invoice issued by a registe red person for delivery of such goods or services or both;  
(3) ―address on record‖ means the address of the recipient as available in the records of the 
supplier;  
(4) ―adjudicating authority‖ means any authority, appointed or authorised to pass any order o r decision 
under this Act, but does not include the 3[Central  Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs ], the Revisional 
Authority, the Authority for Advance Ruling, the Appellate Authority for Advance Ruling, 4[the Appellate 
Authority, the Appellate Tribunal  and the Authority referred to in sub -section (2) of section 171 ]; 
(5) ―agent‖ means a person, including a factor, broker, commission agent, arhatia , del credere 
agent, an auctioneer or any other mercantile agent, by whatever name called, who carries on the 
business of supply or receipt of goods or services or both on behalf of another;  
(6) ―aggregate turnover‖ means the aggregate value of all taxable supplies (excluding the value of 
inward supplies on which tax is payable by a person on reverse charge basis) , exempt supplies, exports of 
goods or services or both and inter -State supplies of persons having the same Permanent Account Number, to 
be computed on all India basis but excludes central tax, State tax, Union territory tax, integrated tax and cess;  
  
                                                           
1.  The words ― except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ‖ omitted by Act 26 of 2017, s. 2 (w.e.f. 8 -7-2017).  
2. 22nd, June, 2017 for sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 139, 146 and 164 , vide notification No.  G.S.R. 
605 (E) dated the 19 June, 2017, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,  sec. 3( i). 
   1st July, 2017 for sections 6 to 9, 11 to 21, 31 to 41, 42 except the proviso to sub -section (9) of section 42, 43 except the 
proviso to sub -section (9) of section 43, 44 to 50, 53 to 138, 140 to 145, 147 to 163, 165 to 174  vide notification No.  G.S.R. 
658 (E) dated the 28th  June, 2017, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,  sec. 3( i). 
3. Subs. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 2, for Central Board of Excise and Customs ‖ (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid, for ―the Appellate Authority and the Appellate Tribunal ‖ (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   9 
 (7) ―agriculturist‖ means an individual or a Hindu Undivided Family who undertakes cultivation 
of land — 
(a) by own labour, or  
(b) by the labour of family, or  
(c) by servants on wages payable in cash or kind or by hired labour  under personal supervision 
or the personal supervision of any member of the family;  
(8) ―Appellate Authority‖ means an authority appointed or authorised to hear appeals as referred 
to in section 107;  
(9) ―Appellate Tribunal‖ means the Goods and Services T ax Appellate Tribunal constituted under 
section 109;  
(10) ―appointed day‖ means the date on which the provisions of this Act shall come into force;  
(11) ―assessment‖ means determination of tax liability under this Act and includes self -
assessment, re -asses sment, provisional assessment, summary assessment and best judgment 
assessment;  
(12) ―associated enterprises‖ shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 92A of the 
Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961);  
(13) ―audit‖ means the examination of recor ds, returns and other documents maintained or 
furnished by the registered person under this Act or the rules made thereunder or under any other law 
for the time being in force to verify the correctness of turnover declared, taxes paid, refund claimed and 
input tax credit availed, and to assess his compliance with the provisions of this Act or the rules made 
thereunder;  
(14) ―authorised bank‖ shall mean a bank or a branch of a bank authorised by the Government to 
collect the tax or any other amount payable under this Act;  
(15) ―authorised representative‖ means the representative as referred to in section 116;  
(16) ―Board‖ means the 1[Central Board of Indirect  Taxes and Customs ] constituted under the 
Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1963 (54 of 1963);  
(17) ―bus iness‖ includes –– 
(a) any trade, commerce, manufacture, profession, vocation, adventure, wager or any other 
similar activity, whether or not it is for a pecuniary benefit;  
(b) any activity or transaction in connection with or incidental or ancillary to sub -clause ( a); 
(c) any activity or transaction in the nature of sub -clause ( a), whether or not there is volume, 
frequency, continuity or regularity of such transaction;  
(d) supply  or acquisition of goods including capital goods and services in connection with 
commencement or closure of business;  
(e) provision by a club, association, society, or any such body (for a subscription or any other 
consideration) of the facilities or benef its to its members;  
(f) admission, for a consideration, of persons to any premises;  
(g) services supplied by a person as the holder of an office which has been accepted by him in the 
course or furtherance of his trade, profession or vocation;  
2[(h) activities of a race club including by way of totalisator or a license to  book maker or 
activities of a licens ed book maker in such club; and] ;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 221 for ― Central Board of Excise and Customs ‖ (w.e.f. 29-3-2018).   
2. Subs. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  10 
 (i) any  activity or transaction undertaken by the Central Government, a State Government or 
any local authority in which they are engaged as public authorities;  
1*                        *                    *                        *                     *  
(19) ―capital goods‖ means goods, the value of which is capitalised in the books of account of the 
person claiming the input tax credit and which are used or intended to be used in the course or 
furtherance of business;  
(20) ―casual taxable person‖ means a perso n who occasionally undertakes transactions involving 
supply of goods or services or both in the course or furtherance of business, whether as principal, agent 
or in any other capacity, in a State or a Union territory where he has no fixed place of business ; 
(21) ―central tax‖ means the central goods and services tax levied under section 9;  
(22) ―cess‖ shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the Goods and Services Tax 
(Compensation to States) Act;  
(23) ―chartered accountant‖ means a chartered accoun tant as defined in clause ( b) of                    
sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949);  
(24) ―Commissioner‖ means the Commissioner of central tax and includes the Principal 
Commissioner of central tax appointed  under section 3 and the Commissioner of integrated tax 
appointed under the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act;  
(25) ―Commissioner in the Board‖ means the Commissioner referred to in section 168;  
(26) ―common  portal‖ means the common goods and services tax electronic portal referred to in 
section 146;  
(27) ―common working days‖ in respect of a State or Union territory shall mean such days in 
succession which are not declared as gazetted holidays by the Central  Government or the concerned 
State or Union territory Government;  
(28) ―company secretary‖ means a company secretary as defined in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 2 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 (56 of 1980);  
(29) ―competent authority‖ mean s such authority as may be notified by the Government;  
(30) ―composite supply‖ means a supply made by a taxable person to a recipient consisting of two 
or more taxable supplies of goods or services or both, or any combination thereof, which are naturally 
bundled and supplied in conjunction with each other in the ordinary course of business, one of which 
is a principal supply;  
Illustration .— Where goods are packed and transported with insurance, the supply of goods, 
packing materials, transport and insurance  is a composite supply and supply of goods is a principal 
supply;  
(31) ―consideration‖ in relation to the supply of goods or services or both includes –– 
(a) any payment made or to be made, whether in money or otherwise, in respect of, in 
response to, or fo r the inducement of, the supply of goods or services or both, whether by the 
recipient or by any other person but shall not include any subsidy given by the Central 
Government or a State Government;  
(b) the monetary value of any act or forbearance, in resp ect of, in response to, or for the 
inducement of, the supply of goods or services or both, whether by the recipient or by any other 
person but shall not include any subsidy given by the Central Government or a State Government : 
                                                           
1. Clause (18) omitted by s. 2, ibid  (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   11 
 Provided that a deposit give n in respect of the supply of goods or services or both shall not be 
considered as payment made for such supply unless the supplier applies such deposit as consideration 
for the said supply;  
(32) ―continuous supply of goods‖ means a supply of goods which i s provided, or agreed to be 
provided, continuously or on recurrent basis, under a contract, whether or not by means of a wire, 
cable, pipeline or other conduit, and for which the supplier invoices the recipient on a regular or 
periodic basis and includes s upply of such goods as the Government may, subject to such conditions, 
as it may, by notification, specify;  
(33) ―continuous supply of services‖ means a supply of services which is provided, or agreed to 
be provided, continuously or on recurrent basis, und er a contract, for a period exceeding three months 
with periodic payment obligations and includes supply of such services as the Government may, 
subject to such conditions, as it may, by notification, specify;  
(34) ―conveyance‖ includes a vessel, an aircraft and a vehicle;  
(35) ―cost accountant‖ means a cost accountant as defined in 1[clause ( b)] of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 (23 of 1959);  
(36) ―Council‖ means the Goods and Services Tax Council established  under article 279A of the 
Constitution;  
(37) ―credit note‖ means a document issued by a registered person under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 34;  
(38) ―debit note‖ means a document issued by a registered person under sub -section ( 3) of                    
section 34;  
(39) ―deemed exports‖ means such supplies of goods as may be notified under section 147;  
(40) ―designated authority‖ means such authority as may be notified by the Board;  
(41) ―document‖ includes written or printed record of any sort and electronic record as defined in 
clause ( t) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000);  
(42) ―drawback‖ in relation to any goods manufactured in India and exported, means the rebate of 
duty, tax or cess chargeable on any imported inpu ts or on any domestic inputs or input services used 
in the manufacture of such goods;  
(43) ―electronic cash ledger‖ means the electronic cash ledger referred to in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 49;  
(44) ―electronic commerce‖ means the supply of goods or serv ices or both, including digital 
products over digital or electronic network;  
(45) ―electronic commerce operator‖ means any person who owns, operates or manages digital or 
electronic facility or platform for electronic commerce;  
(46) ―electronic credit ledg er‖ means the electronic credit ledger referred to in sub -section ( 2) of 
section 49;  
(47) ―exempt supply‖ means supply of any goods or services or both which attracts nil rate of tax 
or which may be wholly exempt from tax under section 11, or under section  6 of the Integrated Goods 
and Services Tax Act, and includes non -taxable supply;  
(48) ―existing law‖ means any law, notification, order, rule or regulation relating to levy and 
collection of duty or tax on goods or services or both passed or made before t he commencement of 
this Act by Parliament or any Authority or person having the power to make such law, notification, 
order, rule or regulation;  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31  of 2018 by s. 2, for ― clause ( c)‖, (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  12 
 (49) ―family‖ means, –– 
(i) the spouse and children of the person; and  
(ii) the parents, grand -parents, brothers and sisters of the person if they are wholly or mainly 
dependent on the said person;  
(50) ―fixed establishment‖ means a place (other than the registered place of business) which is 
characterised by a sufficient degree of p ermanence and suitable structure in terms of human and 
technical resources to supply services, or to receive and use services for its own needs;  
(51) ―Fund‖ means the Consumer Welfare Fund established under section 57;  
(52) ―goods‖ means every kind of mova ble property other than money and securities but includes 
actionable claim, growing crops, grass and things attached to or forming part of the land which are 
agreed to be severed before supply or under a contract of supply;  
(53) ―Government‖ means the Cent ral Government;  
(54) ―Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to States) Act‖ means the Goods and Services Tax 
(Compensation to States) Act, 2017 (15 of 2017);  
(55) ―goods and services tax practitioner‖ means any person who has been approved under 
section 48 to act as such practitioner;  
(56) ―India‖ means the territory of India as referred to in article 1 of the Constitution, its territorial 
waters, seabed and sub -soil underlying such waters, continental shelf, exclusive economic zone or any 
other maritime zone as referred to in the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone 
and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976 (80 of 1976), and the air space above its territory and territorial 
waters;  
(57) ―Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act‖ means the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 
2017 (13 of 2017);  
(58) ―integrated tax‖ means the integrated goods and services tax levied under the Integrated 
Goods and Services Tax Act;  
(59) ―input‖ means any goods other than capital goods used or intended to be  used by a supplier 
in the course or furtherance of business;  
(60) ―input service‖ means any service used or intended to be used by a supplier in the course or 
furtherance of business;  
(61) ―Input Service Distributor‖ means an office of the supplier of goo ds or services or both 
which receives tax invoices issued under section 31 towards the receipt of input services and issues a 
prescribed document for the purposes of distributing the credit of central tax, State tax, integrated tax 
or Union territory tax p aid on the said services to a supplier of taxable goods or services or both 
having the same Permanent Account Number as that of the said office;  
(62) ―input tax‖ in relation to a registered person, means the central tax, State tax, integrated tax 
or Union territory tax charged on any supply of goods or services or both made to him and includes — 
(a) the integrated goods and services tax charged on import of goods;  
(b) the tax payable under the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) of section 9;  
(c) the  tax payable under the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) of section 5 of the 
Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act;  
(d) the tax payable under the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) of section 9 of the 
respective State Goods and Services Tax Act; o r 
(e) the tax payable under the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) of section 7 of the Union 
Territory Goods and Services Tax Act,  13 
 but does not include the tax paid under the composition levy;  
(63) ―input tax credit‖ means the credit of input tax;  
(64) ―intra -State supply of goods‖ shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 8 of 
the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act;  
(65) ―intra -State supply of services‖ shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 8 of 
the Integrated Goods  and Services Tax Act;  
(66) ―invoice‖ or ―tax invoice‖ means the tax invoice referred to in section 31;  
(67) ―inward  supply‖ in relation to a person, shall mean receipt of goods or services or both 
whether by purchase, acquisition or any other means with or without consideration;  
(68) ―job work‖ means any treatment or process undertaken by a person on goods belonging to  
another registered person and the expression ―job worker‖ shall be construed accordingly;  
(69) ―local authority‖ means –– 
(a) a ―Panchayat‖ as defined in clause ( d) of article 243 of the Constitution;  
(b) a ―Municipality‖ as defined in clause (e) of article 243P of the Constitution;  
(c) a Municipal Committee, a Zilla Parishad, a District Board, and any other authority legally 
entitled to, or entrusted by the Central Government or any State Government with th e control or 
management of a municipal or local fund;  
(d) a Cantonment Board as defined in section 3 of the Cantonments Act, 2006 (41 of 2006);  
(e) a Regional Council or a District Council constituted under the Sixth Schedule to the 
Constitution;  
(f) a Dev elopment Board constituted under article 371 1[and article 371J] of the Constitution; 
or 
(g) a Regional Council constituted under article 371A of the Constitution;  
(70) ―location of the recipient of services‖ means, — 
(a) where  a supply is received at a place of business for which the registration has been 
obtained, the location of such place of business;  
(b) where a supply is received at a place other than the place of business for which 
registration has been obtained (a fixed establishment elsewhere), the location of such fixed 
establishment;  
(c) where a supply is received at more than one establishment, whether the place of business 
or fixed establishment, the location of the establishment most directly concerned with the rece ipt 
of the supply; and  
(d) in absence of such places, the location of the usual place of residence of the recipient;  
(71) ―location of the supplier of services‖ means, — 
(a) where a supply is made from a place of business for which the registration has been  
obtained, the location of such place of business;  
(b) where a supply is made from a place other than the place of business for which 
registration has been obtained (a fixed establishment elsewhere), the location of such fixed 
establishment;  
(c) where a su pply is made from more than one establishment, whether the place of business 
or fixed establishment, the location of the establishment most directly concerned with the 
provisions of the supply; and  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   14 
 (d) in absence of such places, the location of the usual p lace of residence of the supplier;  
(72) ―manufacture‖ means processing of raw material or inputs in any manner that results in 
emergence of a new product having a distinct name, character and use and the term ―manufacturer‖ 
shall be construed accordingly;  
(73) ―market value‖ shall mean the full amount which a recipient of a supply is required to pay in 
order to obtain the goods or services or both of like kind and quality at or about the same time and at the 
same commercial level where the recipient and the  supplier are not related;  
(74) ―mixed supply‖ means two or more individual supplies of goods or services, or any combination 
thereof, made in conjunction with each other by a taxable person for a single price where such supply 
does not constitute a compos ite supply.  
Illustration. — A supply of a package consisting of canned foods, sweets, chocolates, cakes, dry 
fruits, aerated drinks and fruit juices when supplied for a single price is a mixed supply. Each of these 
items can be supplied separately and is not dependent on any other. It shall not be a mixed supply if 
these items are supplied separately;  
(75) ―money‖ means the Indian legal tender or any foreign currency, cheque, promissory note, bill of 
exchange, letter of credit, draft, pay order, traveller cheque, money order, postal or electronic remittance or 
any other instrument recognised by the Reserve Bank of India when used as a consideration to settle an 
obligation or exchange with Indian legal tender of another denomination but shall not include any 
currency that is held for i ts numismatic value;  
(76) ―motor vehicle‖ shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( 28) of section 2 of 
the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988);  
(77) ―non -resident taxable person‖ means any person who occasionally undertakes transactions 
involving supply of goods or services or both, whether as principal or agent or in any other capacity, 
but who has no fixed place of business or residence in India;  
(78) ―non -taxable supply‖ means a supply of goods or services or both which is not leviable to tax 
under this Act or under the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act;  
(79) ―non -taxable territory‖ means the territory which is outside the taxable territory;  
(80) ―notification‖ means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression s 
―notify‖ and ―notified‖ shall be construed accordingly;  
(81) ―other territory‖ includes territories other than those comprising in a State and those referred 
to in sub -clauses ( a) to ( e) of clause ( 114) ; 
(82) ―output tax‖ in relation to a taxable person , means the tax chargeable under this Act on 
taxable supply of goods or services or both made by him or by his agent but excludes tax payable by 
him on reverse charge basis;  
(83) ―outward supply‖ in relation to a taxable person, means supply of goods or se rvices or both, 
whether by sale, transfer, barter, exchange, licence, rental, lease or disposal or any other mode, made 
or agreed to be made by such person in the course or furtherance of business;  
(84) ―person‖ includes — 
(a) an individual;  
(b) a Hindu Und ivided Family;  
(c) a company;  
(d) a firm;  
(e) a Limited Liability Partnership;  
(f) an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated or not, in India or 
outside India;  15 
 (g) any corporation established by or under any Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act or a 
Government company as defined in clause ( 45) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013             
(18 of 2013);  
(h) any body corporate incorporated by or under the laws of a country outside India;  
(i) a co -operative society registered under any law relating to co -operative societies;  
(j) a local authority;  
(k) Central Government or a State Government;  
(l) society as defined under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860);  
(m) trust; and  
(n) every  artificial juridical person, not falling within any of the above;  
(85) ―place of business‖ includes –– 
(a) a place from where the business is ordinarily carried on, and includes a warehouse, a 
godown or any other place where a taxable person stores his goo ds, supplies or receives goods or 
services or both; or  
(b) a place where a taxable person maintains his books of account; or  
(c) a place where a taxable person is engaged in business through an agent, by whatever name 
called;  
(86) ―place  of supply‖ means the place of supply as referred to in Chapter V of the Integrated 
Goods and Services Tax Act;  
(87) ―prescribed‖ means prescribed by rules made under this Act on the recommendations of the 
Council;  
(88) ―principal‖ means a person on whose behalf an agent carries on the business of supply or 
receipt of goods or services or both;  
(89) ―principal place of business‖ means the place of business specified as the principal place of 
business in the certificate of registration;  
(90) ―principal suppl y‖ means the supply of goods or services which constitutes the predominant 
element of a composite supply and to which any other supply forming part of that composite supply is 
ancillary;  
(91) ―proper officer‖ in relation to any function to be performed und er this Act, means the 
Commissioner or the officer of the central tax who is assigned that function by the Commissioner in 
the Board;  
(92) ―quarter‖ shall mean a period comprising three consecutive calendar months, ending on the last 
day of March, June, Se ptember and December of a calendar year;  
(93) ―recipient‖ of supply of goods or services or both, means — 
(a) where a consideration is payable for the supply of goods or services or both, the person 
who is liable to pay that consideration;  
(b) where no cons ideration is payable for the supply of goods, the person to whom the goods 
are delivered or made available, or to whom possession or use of the goods is given or made 
available; and  
(c) where no consideration is payable for the supply of a service, the per son to whom the 
service is rendered,  
and any reference to a person to whom a supply is made shall be construed as a reference to the 
recipient of the supply and shall include an agent acting as such on behalf of the recipient in relation 
to the goods or se rvices or both supplied;  16 
 (94) ―registered person‖ means a person who is registered under section 25 but does not include a 
person having a Unique Identity Number;  
(95) ―regulations‖ means the regulations made by the Board under this Act on the 
recommendations of the Council;  
(96) ―removal‖ in relation to goods, means — 
(a) despatch of the goods for delivery by the supplier thereof or by any other person acting on 
behalf of such supplier; or  
(b) collection  of the goods by the recipient thereof or by any other person acting on behalf of 
such recipient;  
(97) ―return‖ means any return prescribed or otherwise required to be furnished by or under this 
Act or the rules made thereunder;  
(98) ―reverse charge‖ means  the liability to pay tax by the recipient of supply of goods or services 
or both instead of the supplier of such goods or services or both under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) 
of section 9, or under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of section 5 of the Integrated Goods and 
Services Tax Act;  
(99) ―Revisional Authority‖ means an authority appointed or authorised for revision of decision 
or orders as referred to in section 108;  
(100) ―Schedule‖ means a Schedule appended to this Act;  
(101) ―securities‖ s hall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( h) of section 2 of the 
Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956);  
(102) ―services‖ means anything other than goods, money and securities but includes activities 
relating to the use of m oney or its conversion by cash or by any other mode, from one form, currency 
or denomination, to another form, currency or denomination for which a separate consideration is 
charged;  
1[Explanation .––For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that th e expression ―services‖ 
includes facilitating or arranging transactions in  securities;]  
(103) ―State‖ includes a Union territory with Legislature;  
(104) ―State tax‖ means the tax levied under any State Goods and Services Tax Act;  
(105) ―supplier‖ in relati on to any goods or services or both, shall mean the person supplying the 
said goods or services or both and shall include an agent acting as such on behalf of such supplier in 
relation to the goods or services or both supplied;  
(106) ―tax period‖ means the  period for which the return is required to be furnished;  
(107) ―taxable person‖ means a person who is registered or liable to be registered under               
section 22 or section 24;  
(108) ―taxable supply‖ means a supply of goods or services or both wh ich is leviable to tax under 
this Act;  
(109) ―taxable territory‖ means the territory to which the provisions of this Act apply;  
(110) ―telecommunication service‖ means service of any description (including electronic mail, 
voice mail, data services, audio text services, video text services, radio paging and cellular mobile 
telephone services) which is made available to users by means of any transmission or reception of 
signs, signals, writing, images and sounds or intelligence of any nature, by wire, radio,  visual or other 
electromagnetic means;  
                                                           
1. The explanation ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   17 
 (111) ―the State Goods and Services Tax Act‖ means the respective State Goods and Services 
Tax Act, 2017;  
(112) ―turnover in State‖ or ―turnover in Union territory‖ means the aggregate value of all taxable 
supplies ( excluding the value of inward supplies on which tax is payable by a person on reverse charge 
basis) and exempt supplies made within a State or Union territory by a taxable person, exports of goods 
or services or both and inter -State supplies of goods or se rvices or both made from the State or Union 
territory by the said taxable person but excludes central tax, State tax, Union territory tax, integrated tax 
and cess;  
(113) ―usual place of residence‖ means –– 
(a) in case of an individual, the place where he or dinarily resides;  
(b) in other cases, the place where the person is incorporated or otherwise legally constituted;  
(114) ―Union territory‖ means the territory of — 
(a) the Andaman and Nicobar Islands;  
(b) Lakshadweep;  
(c) Dadra and Nagar Haveli;  
(d) Daman and Diu;  
(e) Chandigarh; and  
(f) other territory.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this Act, each of the territories specified in sub -clauses ( a)             
to (f) shall be considered to be a separate Union territory;  
(115) ―Union territory tax‖ means th e Union territory goods and services tax levied under the 
Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act;  
(116) ―Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act‖ means the Union Territory Goods and 
Services Tax Act, 2017 (14 of 2017.);  
(117) ―valid return‖ means a return furnished under sub -section ( 1) of section 39 on which self -
assessed tax has been paid in full;  
(118) ―voucher‖ means an instrument where there is an obligation to accept it as consideration or 
part consideration for a supply of goods or services or  both and where the goods or services or both to 
be supplied or the identities of their potential suppliers are either indicated on the instrument itself or 
in related documentation, including the terms and conditions of use of such instrument;  
(119) ―work s contract‖ means a contract for building, construction, fabrication, completion, 
erection, installation, fitting out, improvement, modification, repair, maintenance, renovation, alteration 
or commissioning of any immovable property wherein transfer of pro perty in goods (whether as goods 
or in some other form) is involved in the execution of such contract;  
(120) words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Integrated Goods 
and Services Tax Act, the Union Territory Goods and Serv ices Tax Act and the Goods and Services 
Tax (Compensation to States) Act shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in those Acts;  
(121) any reference in this Act to a law which is not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, 
shall, in relation to that State be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in 
that State.  
  18 
 CHAPTER II  
ADMINISTRATION  
3. Officers under this Act. ––The Government shall, by notification, appoint the following classes of 
officers for the purposes of this Act, namely: –– 
(a) Principal Chief Commissioners of Central Tax or Principal Directors General of Central Tax,  
(b) Chief Commissioners of Central Tax or Directors General of Central Tax,  
(c) Principal Commissioners of Central Tax or Principal Addition al Directors General of Central 
Tax, 
(d) Commissioners of Central Tax or Additional Directors General of Central Tax,  
(e) Additional Commissioners of Central Tax or Additional Directors of Central Tax,  
(f) Joint Commissioners of Central Tax or Joint Direct ors of Central Tax,  
(g) Deputy Commissioners of Central Tax or Deputy Directors of Central Tax,  
(h) Assistant Commissioners of Central Tax or Assistant Directors of Central Tax, and  
(i) any other class of officers as it may deem fit:  
Provided that the officers appointed under the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) shall be deemed 
to be the officers appointed under the provisions of this Act.  
4. Appointment of officers. –– (1) The Board may, in addition to the officers as may be notified by the 
Governme nt under section 3, appoint such persons as it may think fit to be the officers under this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Board may, by order, authorise any 
officer referred to in clauses ( a) to ( h) of section 3 to app oint officers of central tax below the rank of 
Assistant Commissioner of central tax for the administration of this Act.  
5. Powers of officers .––(1) Subject to such conditions and limitations as the Board may impose, an 
officer of central tax may exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred or imposed on him 
under this Act.  
(2) An officer of central tax may exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred or imposed under 
this Act on any other officer of central tax who is subordinate to him . 
(3) The Commissioner may, subject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified in this 
behalf by him, delegate his powers to any other officer who is subordinate to him.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, an Appellate Autho rity shall not exercise the 
powers and discharge the duties conferred or imposed on any other officer of central tax.  
6. Authorisation of officers of State tax or Union territory tax as proper officer in certain 
circumstances. ––(1) Without prejudice to the  provisions of this Act, the officers appointed under the 
State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act are authorised to 
be the proper officers for the purposes of this Act, subject to such conditions as the Government  shall, on 
the recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify.  
(2) Subject to the conditions specified in the notification issued under sub -section ( 1),–– 
(a) where any proper officer issues an order under this Act, he shall also issue an order u nder the 
State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act, as authorised 
by the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act, as the 
case may be, under intimation to the jurisdictional  officer of State tax or Union territory tax;  
(b) where a proper officer under the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory 
Goods and Services Tax Act has initiated any proceedings on a subject matter, no proceedings shall 
be initiated by th e proper officer under this Act on the same subject matter.  19 
 (3) Any proceedings for rectification, appeal and revision, wherever applicable, of any order passed 
by an officer appointed under this Act shall not lie before an officer appointed under the Stat e Goods and 
Services Tax Act or the Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act.  
CHAPTER III  
LEVY AND COLLECTION OF TAX  
7. Scope of supply. ––(1) For the purposes of this Act, the expression ―supply‖ includes –– 
(a) all forms of supply of goods or services or both such as sale, transfer, barter, exchange, 
licence, rental, lease or disposal made or agreed to be made for a consideration by a person in the 
course or furtherance of business;  
(b) import of services for a  consideration whether or not in the course or furtherance of business;  
1[and]  
(c) the activities specified in Schedule I, made or agreed to be made without a consideration.  2*** 
 3*                               *                        *                             *                         *  
4[(1A) where certain activities or transactions constitute a supply in  accordance with the provisions of 
sub-section ( 1), they shall be treated either as  supply of goods or supply of services as referred to in 
Schedule II. ] 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1),–– 
(a) activities or transactions specified in Schedule III; or  
(b) such activities or transactions undertaken by the Central Government, a State Government or 
any local authority in w hich they are engaged as public authorities, as may be notified by the 
Government on the recommendations of the Council,  
shall be treated neither as a supply of goods nor a supply of services.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of 5[sub-sections ( 1), (1A) and ( 2)], the Government may, on the 
recommendations of the Council, specify, by notification, the transactions that are to be treated as — 
(a) a supply of goods and not as a supply of services; or  
(b) a supply of services and not as a supply of goods.  
8. Tax li ability on composite and mixed supplies. ––The tax liability on a composite or a mixed 
supply shall be determined in the following manner, namely: — 
(a) a composite supply comprising two or more supplies, one of which is a principal supply, shall 
be treated as a supply of such principal supply; and  
(b) a mixed supply comprising two or more supplies shall be treated as a supply of that particular 
supply whic h attracts the highest rate of tax.  
9. Levy and collection. ––(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), there shall be levied a tax 
called the central goods and services tax on all intra -State supplies of goods or services or both, except on 
the sup ply of alcoholic liquor for human consumption, on the value determined under section 15 and at 
such rates, not exceeding twenty per cent., as may be notified by the Government on the 
recommendations of the Council and collected in such manner as may be pre scribed and shall be paid by 
the taxable person.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 3, (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).   
2. The word  ―and‖ omitted by s. 3, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).  
3. Omitted by s. 3, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).   
4. Ins. by s. 3, ibid.,(w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).  
5. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for ―sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2)‖ (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).  20 
 (2) The central tax on the supply of petroleum crude, high speed diesel, motor spirit (commonly 
known as petrol), natural gas and aviation turbine fuel shall be levied with effect from such date as may 
be no tified by the Government on the recommendations of the Council.  
(3) The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify categories 
of supply of goods or services or both, the tax on which shall be paid on reverse charge basi s by the 
recipient of such goods or services or both and all the provisions of this Act shall apply to such recipient 
as if he is the person liable for paying the tax in relation to the supply of such goods or services or both.  
1[(4) The Government may, on  the recommendations of the Council, by notification,  specify a class of 
registered persons who shall, in respect of supply of specified  categories of goods or services or both 
received from an unregistered supplier, pay the  tax on reverse charge basis as the recipient of such supply 
of goods or services or  both, and all the provisions of this Act shall apply to such recipient as if he is the  
person liable for paying the tax in relation to such supply of goods or services or  both. ]  
(5) The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify categories of 
services the tax on intra -State supplies of which shall be paid by the electronic commerce operator if such 
services are supplied through it, and all the provisions of this Act s hall apply to such electronic commerce 
operator as if he is the supplier liable for paying the tax in relation to the supply of such services:  
Provided that where an electronic commerce operator does not have a physical presence in the taxable 
territory, a ny person representing such electronic commerce operator for any purpose in the taxable territory 
shall be liable to pay tax:  
Provided further that where an electronic commerce operator does not have a physical presence in the 
taxable territory and also he  does not have a representative in the said territory, such electronic commerce 
operator shall appoint a person in the taxable territory for the purpose of paying tax and such person shall 
be liable to pay tax.  
10. Composition levy. ––(1) Notwithstanding an ything to the contrary contained in this Act but 
subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) of section 9, a registered person, whose aggregate 
turnover in the preceding financial year did not exceed fifty lakh rupees, may opt to pay, 2[in lieu o f the 
tax payable by him  under sub -section ( 1) of section 9, an amount of tax calculated at such rate ] as may be 
prescribed, but not exceeding, –– 
(a) one per cent. of the turnover in State or turnover in Union territory in case of a manufacturer,  
(b) two and a half per cent. of the turnover in State or turnover in Union territory in case of 
persons engaged in making supplies referred to in clause ( b) of paragraph 6 of Schedule II, and  
(c) half per cent. of  the turnover in State or turnover in Union territory in case of other suppliers,  
subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Government may, by notification, increase the said limit of fifty lakh rupees to such 
higher amount, not exceeding 3[one crore and fifty lakh rupees ], as may be recommended by the Council.  
4[Provided further that a person who opts to pay tax under  clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) may 
supply services (other than those  referred to in clause  (b) of paragraph 6 of Schedule II), of value not  
exceeding ten per cent. of turnover in a State or Union territory in the  preceding financial year or five lakh 
rupees, whichever is higher. ] 
(2) The registered person shall be eligible to opt under sub -section (1), if:— 
5[(a) save as provided in sub -section ( 1), he is not engaged in the supply  of services; ]  
(b) he is not engaged in making any supply of goods which are not leviable to tax under this Act;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for ― in lieu of the tax payable by him, an amount calculated at such rate ‖ (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for ― one crore rupees ‖ (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  
4. The proviso ins. by s. 5, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   
5. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   21 
 (c) he is not engaged in making any inter -State outwar d supplies of goods;  
(d) he is not engaged in making any supply of goods through an electronic commerce operator 
who is required to collect tax at source under section 52; and  
(e) he is not a manufacturer of such goods as may be notified by the Government on the 
recommendations of the Council:  
Provided that where more than one registered persons are having the same Permanent Account Number 
(issued under the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), the registered person shall not be eligible to opt for the 
scheme under sub -section ( 1) unless all such registered persons opt to pay tax under that sub -section.  
(3) The option availed of by a registered person under sub -section ( 1) shall lapse with effect from the 
day on which his aggregate turnover during a financial year exceeds the limit specified under                  
sub-section ( 1). 
(4) A taxable person to whom the provisions of sub -section ( 1) apply shall not collect any tax from 
the recipient on supplies made by him nor shall he be entitled to any credit of inp ut tax.  
(5) If the proper officer has reasons to believe that a taxable person has paid tax under sub -section ( 1) 
despite not being eligible, such person shall, in addition to any tax that may be payable by him under any 
other provisions of this Act, be li able to a penalty and the provisions of section 73 or section 74 shall, 
mutatis mutandis , apply for determination of tax and penalty.  
11. Power to grant exemption from tax. —(1) Where the Government is satisfied that it is necessary in 
the public interest so to do, it may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, exempt generally, 
either absolutely or subject to such conditions as may be specified therein, goods o r services or both of any 
specified description from the whole or any part of the tax leviable thereon with effect from such date as may 
be specified in such notification.  
(2) Where the Government is satisfied that it is necessary in the public interest so  to do, it may, on the 
recommendations of the Council, by special order in each case, under circumstances of an exceptional 
nature to be stated in such order, exempt from payment of tax any goods or services or both on which tax 
is leviable.  
(3) The Govern ment may, if it considers necessary or expedient so to do for the purpose of clarifying 
the scope or applicability of any notification issued under sub -section ( 1) or order issued under sub -
section ( 2), insert an Explanation  in such notification or order, as the case may be, by notification at any 
time within one year of issue of the notification under sub -section ( 1) or order under sub -section ( 2), and 
every such explanation shall have effect as if it had always been the part of the first such notification  or 
order, as the case may be.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this section, where an exemption in respect of any goods or 
services or both from the whole or part of the tax leviable thereon has been granted absolutely, the 
registered person supplying su ch goods or services or both shall not collect the tax, in excess of the 
effective rate, on such supply of goods or services or both.  
CHAPTER IV  
TIME AND VALUE OF SUPPLY  
12. Time of supply of goods. —(1) The  liability to pay tax on goods shall arise at the time of supply, 
as determined in accordance with the provisions of this section.  
(2) The time of supply of goods shall be the earlier of the following dates, namely: — 
(a) the date of issue of invoice by the  supplier or the last date on which he is required, under          
1*** section 31, to issue the invoice with respect to the supply; or  
(b) the date on which the supplier receives the payment with respect to the supply:  
                                                           
1. The words and figures ― sub-section ( 1) of‖ omitted by Act 31 of 2018, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   22 
 Provided that where the supplier of taxable goods receives an amount up to one thousand rupees in 
excess of the amount indicated in the tax invoice, the time of supply to the extent of such excess amount 
shall, at the option of the said supplier, be the date of issue of invoice in respect of  such excess amount.  
Explanation 1.––For the purposes of clauses ( a) and ( b), ―supply‖ shall be deemed to have been made 
to the extent it is covered by the invoice or, as the case may be, the payment.  
Explanation 2.––For the purposes of clause ( b), ―the date on which the supplier receives the payment‖ 
shall be the date on which the payment is entered in his books of account or the date on which the payment 
is credited to his bank account, whichever is earlier.  
(3) In case of supplies in respect of which tax is paid or liable to be paid on reverse charge basis, the 
time of supply shall be the earliest of the following dates, namely: — 
(a) the date of the receipt of goods; or  
(b) the date of payment as entered in the books of account of the recipient or the date on which the 
payment is debited in his bank account, whichever is earlier; or  
(c) the date immediately following thirty days from the date of issue of invoice or any other 
document, by whatever name called, in lieu thereof by the supplier:  
Provided th at where it is not possible to determine the time of supply under clause ( a) or clause ( b) or 
clause ( c), the time of supply shall be the date of entry in the books of account of the recipient of supply.  
(4) In case of supply of vouchers by a supplier, the  time of supply shall be — 
(a) the date of issue of voucher, if the supply is identifiable at that point; or  
(b) the date of redemption of voucher, in all other cases.  
(5) Where it is not possible to determine the time of supply under the provisions of sub -section ( 2) or 
sub-section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4), the time of supply shall –– 
(a) in a case where a periodical return has to be filed, be the date on which such return is to be 
filed; or  
(b) in any other case, be the date on which the tax is paid.  
(6) The time of supply to the extent it relates to an addition in the value of supply by way of interest, 
late fee or penalty for delayed payment of any consideration shall be the date on which the supplier 
receives such addition in value.  
13. Time of supply of se rvices. —(1) The liability to pay tax on services shall arise at the time of 
supply, as determined in accordance with the provisions of this section.  
(2) The time of supply of services shall be the earliest of the following dates, namely: — 
(a) the  date of issue of invoice by the supplier, if the invoice is issued within the period 
prescribed under 1*** section 31 or the date of receipt of payment, whichever is earlier; or  
(b) the date of provision of service, if the invoice is not issued within the  period prescribed under 
1*** section 31 or the date of receipt of payment, whichever is earlier; or  
(c) the date on which the recipient shows the receipt of services in his books of account, in a case 
where the provisions of clause ( a) or clause ( b) do no t apply:  
Provided that where the supplier of taxable service receives an amount up to one thousand rupees in 
excess of the amount indicated in the tax invoice, the time of supply to the extent of such excess amount 
shall, at the option of the said supplier , be the date of issue of invoice relating to such excess amount.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of clauses ( a) and ( b)–– 
(i) the supply shall be deemed to have been made to the extent it is covered by the invoice or, as 
the case may be, the payment;  
                                                           
1. The words and figures ― sub-section ( 2) of‖ omitted by Act 31 of 2018, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  23 
 (ii) ―the date of receipt of payment‖ shall be the date on which the payment is entered in the 
books of account of the supplier or the date on which the payment is credited to his bank account, 
whichever is earlier.  
(3) In case of supplies in respect of which tax is paid or liable to be paid on reverse charge basis, the 
time of supply shall be the earlier of the following dates, namely: –– 
(a) the date of payment as entered in the books of account of the recipient or the date on which the 
payment is debited in h is bank account, whichever is earlier; or  
(b) the date immediately following sixty days from the date of issue of invoice or any other 
document, by whatever name called, in lieu thereof by the supplier:  
Provided that where it is not possible to determine t he time of supply under clause ( a) or clause ( b), 
the time of supply shall be the date of entry in the books of account of the recipient of supply:  
Provided further that in case of supply by associated enterprises, where the supplier of service is 
located outside India, the time of supply shall be the date of entry in the books of account of the recipient 
of supply or the date of payment, whichever is earlier.  
(4) In case of supply of vouchers by a supplier, the time of supply shall be –– 
(a) the date of issue of voucher, if the supply is identifiable at that point; or  
(b) the date of redemption of voucher, in all other cases.  
(5) Where it is not possible to determine the time of supply under the provisions of sub -section ( 2) or 
sub-section ( 3) or sub-section ( 4), the time of supply shall –– 
(a) in a case where a periodical return has to be filed, be the date on which such return is to be 
filed; or  
(b) in any other case, be the date on which the tax is paid.  
(6) The time of supply to the extent it r elates to an addition in the value of supply by way of interest, 
late fee or penalty for delayed payment of any consideration shall be the date on which the supplier 
receives such addition in value.  
14. Change in rate of tax in respect of supply of goods o r services. —Notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 12 or section 13, the time of supply, where there is a change in the rate of tax in 
respect of goods or services or both, shall be determined in the following manner, namely: –– 
(a) in case the goods  or services or both have been supplied before the change in rate of tax, –– 
(i) where the invoice for the same has been issued and the payment is also received after the 
change in rate of tax, the time of supply shall be the date of receipt of payment or t he date of issue of 
invoice, whichever is earlier; or  
(ii) where the invoice has been issued prior to the change in rate of tax but payment is 
received after the change in rate of tax, the time of supply shall be the date of issue of invoice; or  
(iii) wher e the payment has been received before the change in rate of tax, but the invoice for 
the same is issued after the change in rate of tax, the time of supply shall be the date of receipt of 
payment;  
(b) in case the goods or services or both have been supplied after the change in rate of tax, –– 
(i) where the payment is received after the change in rate of tax but the invoice has been 
issued prior to the change in rate of tax, the time of supply shall be the date of receipt of payment; 
or 
(ii) where the invoice has been issued and payment is received before the change in rate of 
tax, the time of supply shall be the date of receipt of payment or date of issue of invoice, 
whichever is earlier; or  24 
 (iii) where the  invoice has been issued after the change in rate of tax but the payment is 
received before the change in rate of tax, the time of supply shall be the date of issue of invoice:  
Provided that the date of receipt of payment shall be the date of credit in the  bank account if 
such credit in the bank account is after four working days from the date of change in the rate of 
tax. 
Explanation .––For the purposes of this section, ―the date of receipt of payment‖ shall be the date on 
which the payment is entered in the books of account of the supplier or the date on which the payment is 
credited to his bank account, whichever is earlier.  
15. Value of taxable supply. —(1) The value of a supply of goods or services or both shall be the 
transaction value, which is the pr ice actually paid or payable for the said supply of goods or services or 
both where the supplier and the recipient of the supply are not related and the price is the sole 
consideration for the supply.  
(2) The value of supply shall include –– 
(a) any taxes, duties, cesses, fees and charges levied under any law for the time being in force 
other than this Act, the State Goods and Services Tax Act, the Union Territory Goods and Services 
Tax Act and the Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to States) Act, if char ged separately by the 
supplier;  
(b) any amount that the supplier is liable to pay in relation to such supply but which has been 
incurred by the recipient of the supply and not included in the price actually paid or payable for the 
goods or services or both ; 
(c) incidental expenses, including commission and packing, charged by the supplier to the 
recipient of a supply and any amount charged for anything done by the supplier in respect of the 
supply of goods or services or both at the time of, or before delivery of goods or supply of services;  
(d) interest or late fee or penalty for delayed payment of any consideration for any supply; and  
(e) subsidies directly linked to the price excluding subsidies provided by the Central Government 
and the State Govern ments.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this sub -section, the amount of subsidy shall be included in the 
value of supply of the supplier who receives the subsidy.  
(3) The value of the supply shall not include any discount which is given –– 
(a) before or at  the time of the supply if such discount has been duly recorded in the invoice 
issued in respect of such supply; and  
(b) after the supply has been effected, if — 
(i) such discount is established in terms of an agreement entered into at or before the time of  
such supply and specifically linked to relevant invoices; and  
 (ii) input tax credit as is attributable to the discount on the basis of document issued by the 
supplier has been reversed by the recipient of the supply.  
(4) Where the value of the supply of goods or services or both cannot be determined under                     
sub-section ( 1), the same shall be determined in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 4), the value of such 
supplies as may be notified by the Government on the recommendations of the Council shall be 
determined in such manner as may be prescribed.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this Act, –– 
(a) persons shall be deemed to be ―related persons‖ if –– 
(i) such  persons are officers or directors of one another‘s businesses;  
(ii) such persons are legally recognised partners in business;  25 
 (iii) such persons are employer and employee;  
(iv) any person directly or indirectly owns, controls or holds twenty -five per cent . or more of 
the outstanding voting stock or shares of both of them;  
(v) one of them directly or indirectly controls the other;  
(vi) both of them are directly or indirectly controlled by a third person;  
(vii) together they directly or indirectly control a third person; or  
(viii) they are members of the same family;  
(b) the term ―person‖ also includes legal persons;  
(c) persons who are associated in the business of one another in that one is the sole agent or sole 
distributor or sole concessionaire, howsoeve r described, of the other, shall be deemed to be related.  
CHAPTER V  
INPUT TAX CREDIT  
16. Eligibility and conditions for taking input tax credit. —(1) Every registered person shall, 
subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed and in the manner specified in section 49, 
be entitled to take credit of input tax charged on any supply of goods or services or both to him which are 
used or intended to be used in the course or furtherance of his business and the said amount shall be 
credited to th e electronic credit ledger of such person.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no registered person shall be entitled to the 
credit of any input tax in respect of any supply of goods or services or both to him unless, –– 
(a) he is in pos session of a tax invoice or debit note issued by a supplier registered under this Act, or 
such other tax paying documents as may be prescribed;  
(b) he has received the goods or services or both.  
1[Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, it shall be deemed that  the registered person has received 
the goods or, as the case may be, services –– 
(i) where the goods are delivered by the supplier to a recipient or  any other person on the direction of such 
registered p erson, whether  acting as an agent or otherwise, before or during movement of goods,  either by way 
of transfer of documents of title to goods or otherwise;  
(ii) where the services are provided by the supplier to any person  on the direction of and on account  of 
such registered person. ] 
(c) subject to the provisions of section 41, the tax charged in respect of such supply has been 
actually paid to the Government, either in cash or through utilisation of input tax credit admissible in 
respect of the said supply ; and  
(d) he has furnished the return under section 39:  
Provided that where the goods against an invoice are received in lots or instalments, the registered 
person shall be entitled to take credit upon receipt of the last lot or instalment:  
Provided furthe r that where a recipient fails to pay to the supplier of goods or services or both, other than 
the supplies on which tax is payable on reverse charge basis, the amount towards the value of supply along 
with tax payable thereon within a period of one hundre d and eighty days from the date of issue of invoice 
by the supplier, an amount equal to the input tax credit availed by the recipient shall be added to his 
output tax liability, along with interest thereon, in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided als o that the recipient shall be entitled to avail of the credit of input tax on payment made by 
him of the amount towards the value of supply of goods or services or both along with tax payable 
thereon.  
                                                           
1. The explanation subs. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2018).   26 
 (3) Where the registered person has claimed depreciatio n on the tax component of the cost of capital 
goods and plant and machinery under the provisions of the Income -tax Act, 1961(43 of 1961), the input 
tax credit on the said tax component shall not be allowed.  
(4) A registered person shall not be entitled to take input tax credit in respect of any invoice or debit note 
for supply of goods or services or both after the due date of furnishing of the return under section 39 for the 
month of September following the end of financial year to which such invoice or in voice relating to such 
debit note pertains or furnishing of the relevant annual return, whichever is earlier.  
17. Apportionment of credit and blocked credits. —(1) Where the goods or services or both are used 
by the registered person partly for the purpose of any business and partly for other purposes, the amount of 
credit shall be restricted to so much of the input tax as is attributable to the purposes of his business.  
(2) Where the goods or services or both are used by the registered person partly for eff ecting taxable 
supplies including zero -rated supplies under this Act or under the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act and 
partly for effecting exempt supplies under the said Acts, the amount of credit shall be restricted to so much of 
the input tax as is  attributable to the said taxable supplies including zero -rated supplies.  
(3) The value of exempt supply under sub -section ( 2) shall be such as may be prescribed, and shall 
include supplies on which the recipient is liable to pay tax on reverse charge basis, transactions in 
securities, sale of land and, subject to clause ( b) of paragraph 5 of Schedule II, sale of building.  
1[Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression  ‗‗value of exempt supply‘‘ shall 
not include the value of activities or transactions  specified in Schedule III, except those specified in 
paragraph 5 of the said  Schedule. ] 
(4) A banking company or a financial institution including a non -banking financial company, engaged 
in supplying services by way of accepting  deposits, extending loans or advances shall have the option to 
either comply with the provisions of sub -section ( 2), or avail of, every month, an amount equal to fifty per 
cent. of the eligible input tax credit on inputs, capital goods and input services in that month and the rest 
shall lapse:  
Provided that the option once exercised shall not be withdrawn during the remaining part of the 
financial year:  
Provided further that the restriction of fifty per cent. shall not apply to the tax paid on supplies mad e 
by one registered person to another registered person having the same Permanent Account Number.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) of section 16 and sub -section ( 1) of             
section 18, input tax credit shall not be availabl e in respect of the following, namely: — 
2[(a) motor vehicles for transportation of persons having approved seating  capacity of not more 
than thirteen persons (including the driver), except when  they are used for making the following 
taxable supplies, namel y:— 
(A) further supply of such motor vehicles; or  
(B) transportation of passengers; or  
(C) imparting training on driving such motor vehicles;  
(aa) vessels and aircraft except when they are used –– 
(i) for making the following taxable supplies, namely: — 
(A) further supply of such vessels or aircraft; or  
(B) transportation of passengers; or  
(C) imparting training on navigating such vessels; or  
                                                           
1. The explanation ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 9, (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   
2. The clauses ( a) and ( b) subs. by s. 9, ibid., (w.e.f. 1-2-2019).   27 
 (D) imparting training on flying such aircraft;  
(ii) for transportation of goods;  
 (ab) services of general insurance, servicing, repair and maintenance in so  far as they relate to 
motor vehicles, vessels or aircraft referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( aa): 
Provided that the input tax credit in respect of such services shall be available — 
(i) where the motor ve hicles, vessels or aircraft referred to in  clause ( a) or clause ( aa) are 
used for the purposes specified therein;  
(ii) where received by a taxable person engaged — 
(I) in the manufacture of such motor vehicles, vessels or  aircraft; or  
(II) in the supply of general insurance services in respect of  such motor vehicles, vessels 
or aircraft insured by him;  
(b) the following supply of goods or services or both — 
(i) food and beverages, outdoor catering, beauty treatment, health  services, cosmetic and 
plastic surge ry, leasing, renting or hiring of motor  vehicles, vessels or aircraft referred to in clause 
(a) or clause ( aa) except  when used for the purposes specified therein, life insurance and health  
insurance:  
Provided that the input tax credit in respect of such g oods or services  or both shall be 
available where an inward supply of such goods or services  or both is used by a registered person 
for making an outward taxable  supply of the same category of goods or services or both or as an 
element  of a taxable composi te or mixed supply;  
(ii) membership of a club, health and fitness centre; and  
(iii) travel benefits extended to employees on vacation such as  leave or home travel 
concession:  
Provided that the input tax credit in respect of such goods or services  or both shall be 
available, where it is obligatory for an employer to provide  the same to its employees under any 
law for the time being in force. ] 
(c) works  contract services when supplied for construction of an immovable property (other than 
plant and machinery) except where it is an input service for further supply of works contract service;  
(d) goods or services or both received by a taxable person for con struction of an immovable property 
(other than plant or machinery) on his own account including when such goods or services or both are 
used in the course or furtherance of business.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of clauses ( c) and ( d), the expression ―co nstruction‖ includes re -
construction, renovation, additions or alterations or repairs, to the extent of capitalisation, to the said 
immovable property;  
(e) goods or services or both on which tax has been paid under section 10;  
(f) goods or services or both  received by a non -resident taxable person except on goods imported 
by him;  
(g) goods or services or both used for personal consumption;  
(h) goods lost, stolen, destroyed, written off or disposed of by way of gift or free samples; and  
(i) any tax paid in a ccordance with the provisions of sections 74, 129 and 130.  
(6) The Government may prescribe the manner in which the credit referred to in sub -sections ( 1)                
and ( 2) may be attributed.  
Explanation. ––For the purposes of this Chapter and Chapter VI, the expression ―plant and machinery‖ 
means apparatus, equipment, and machinery fixed to earth by foundation or structural support that are used for 28 
 making outward supply of goods or services or both and incl udes such foundation and structural supports but 
excludes — 
(i) land, building or any other civil structures;  
(ii) telecommunication towers; and  
(iii) pipelines laid outside the factory premises.  
18.  Availability of credit in special circumstances. —(1) Subject to such conditions and restrictions 
as may be prescribed — 
(a) a person who has applied for registration under this Act within thirty days from the date on 
which he becomes liable to registration and has been granted such registration shall be entit led to take 
credit of input tax in respect of inputs held in stock and inputs contained in semi -finished or finished 
goods held in stock on the day immediately preceding the date from which he becomes liable to pay 
tax under the provisions of this Act;  
(b) a person who takes registration under sub -section ( 3) of section 25 shall be entitled to take 
credit of input tax in respect of inputs held in stock and inputs contained in semi -finished or finished 
goods held in stock on the day immediately preceding the  date of grant of registration;  
(c) where any registered person ceases to pay tax under section 10, he shall be entitled to take credit of 
input tax in respect of inputs held in stock, inputs contained in semi -finished or finished goods held in stock 
and o n capital goods on the day immediately preceding the date from which he becomes liable to pay tax 
under section 9:  
Provided that the credit on capital goods shall be reduced by such percentage points as may be 
prescribed;  
(d) where an exempt supply of goods or services or both by a registered person becomes a taxable 
supply, such person shall be entitled to take credit of input tax in respect of inputs held in stock and 
inputs contained in semi -finished or finished goods held in stock relatable to such exempt supply and on 
capital goods exclusively used for such exempt supply on the day immediately preceding the date from 
which such supply becomes taxable:  
Provided that the credit on capital goods shall be reduced by such percentage points as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) A registered person shall not be entitled to take input tax credit under sub -section ( 1) in respect of 
any supply of goods or services or both to him after the expiry of one year from the date of issue of tax 
invoice relating to such supply.  
(3) Where there is a change in the constitution of a registered person on account of sale, merger, demerger, 
amalgamation, lease or transfer of the business with the specific provisions for transfer of liabilities, the said 
registered person shall be allowed  to transfer the input tax credit which remains unutilised in his electronic 
credit ledger to such sold, merged, demerged, amalgamated, leased or transferred business in such manner as 
may be prescribed.  
(4) Where any registered person who has availed of i nput tax credit opts to pay tax under section 10 or, 
where the goods or services or both supplied by him become wholly exempt, he shall pay an amount, by 
way of debit in the electronic credit ledger or electronic cash ledger, equivalent to the credit of in put tax in 
respect of inputs held in stock and inputs contained in semi -finished or finished goods held in stock and on 
capital goods, reduced by such percentage points as may be prescribed, on the day immediately preceding 
the date of exercising of such o ption or, as the case may be, the date of such exemption:  
Provided that after payment of such amount, the balance of input tax credit, if any, lying in his 
electronic credit ledger shall lapse.  
(5) The amount of credit under sub -section ( 1) and the amount payable under sub -section ( 4) shall be 
calculated in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(6) In case of supply of capital goods or plant and machinery, on which input tax credit has been taken, 
the registered person shall pay an amount equal to the input tax  credit taken on the said capital goods or plant 29 
 and machinery reduced by such percentage points as may be prescribed or the tax on the transaction value of 
such capital goods or plant and machinery determined under section 15, whichever is higher:  
Provide d that where refractory bricks, moulds and dies, jigs and fixtures are supplied as scrap, the 
taxable person may pay tax on the transaction value of such goods determined under section 15.  
19. Taking input tax credit in respect of inputs and capital goods sent for job work. —(1) The 
principal shall, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, be allowed input tax 
credit on inputs sent to a job worker for job work.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 16, the principal shall be 
entitled to take credit of input tax on inputs even if the inputs are directly sent to a job worker for job work 
without being first brought to his place of business.  
(3) Where the inputs sent for job work are not rece ived back by the principal after completion of job 
work or otherwise or are not supplied from the place of business of the job worker in accordance with 
clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 143 within one year of being sent out, it shall be 
deemed that such inputs had been supplied by the principal to the job worker on the day when the said 
inputs were sent out:  
Provided that where the inputs are sent directly to a job worker, the period of one year shall be 
counted from the date of receip t of inputs by the job worker.  
(4) The principal shall, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, be allowed input 
tax credit on capital goods sent to a job worker for job work.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 16, the principal 
shall be entitled to take credit of input tax on capital goods even if the capital goods are directly sent to a 
job worker for job work without being first brought to his place of business.  
(6) Where the capit al goods sent for job work are not received back by the principal within a period of 
three years of being sent out, it shall be deemed that such capital goods had been supplied by the principal 
to the job worker on the day when the said capital goods were sent out:  
Provided that where the capital goods are sent directly to a job worker, the period of three years shall 
be counted from the date of receipt of capital goods by the job worker.  
(7) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 6) shall app ly to moulds and dies, jigs and 
fixtures, or tools sent out to a job worker for job work.  
Explanation .––For the purpose of this section, ―principal‖ means the person referred to in                 
section 143.  
20. Manner of distribution of credit by Input Service Distributor. —(1) The Input Service 
Distributor shall distribute the credit of central tax as central tax or integrated tax and integrated tax as 
integrated tax or central tax, by way of issue of a document containing the amount of input tax credit 
being distributed in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Input Service Distributor may distribute the credit subject to the following conditions, 
namely: –– 
(a) the credit can be distributed to the recipients of credit against a document containing su ch 
details as may be prescribed;  
(b) the amount of the credit distributed shall not exceed the amount of credit available for 
distribution;  
(c) the credit of tax paid on input services attributable to a recipient of credit shall be distributed 
only to that  recipient;  
(d) the credit of tax paid on input services attributable to more than one recipient of credit shall be 
distributed amongst such recipients to whom the input service is attributable and such distribution 
shall be pro rata on the basis of the turnover in a State or turnover in a Union territory of such 
recipient, during the relevant period, to the aggregate of the turnover of all such recipients to whom 30 
 such input service is attributable and which are operational in the curr ent year, during the said 
relevant period;  
(e) the credit of tax paid on input services attributable to all recipients of credit shall be distributed 
amongst such recipients and such distribution shall be pro rata on the basis of the turnover in a State or  
turnover in a Union territory of such recipient, during the relevant period, to the aggregate of the 
turnover of all recipients and which are operational in the current year, during the said relevant period.  
Explanation. ––For the purposes of this section, –– 
(a) the ―relevant period‖ shall be –– 
(i) if the recipients of credit have turnover in their States or Union territories in the financial 
year preceding the year during which credit is to be distributed, the said financial year; or  
(ii) if some or all re cipients of the credit do not have any turnover in their States or Union 
territories in the financial year preceding the year during which the credit is to be distributed, the last 
quarter for which details of such turnover of all the recipients are availa ble, previous to the month 
during which credit is to be distributed;  
(b) the expression ―recipient of credit‖ means the supplier of goods or services or both having the 
same Permanent Account Number as that of the Input Service Distributor;  
(c) the term ―t urnover‖, in relation to any registered person engaged in the supply of taxable goods 
as well as goods not taxable under this Act, means the value of turnover, reduced by the amount of any 
duty or tax levied 1[under entry 84  and 92A]  of List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution and 
entries 51 and 54 of List II of the said Schedule.  
21. Manner of recovery of credit distributed in excess. —Where the Input Service Distributor 
distributes the credit in contravention of the provisi ons contained in section 20 resulting in excess 
distribution of credit to one or more recipients of credit, the excess credit so distributed shall be 
recovered from such recipients along with interest, and the provisions of section 73 or section 74, as 
the case may be, shall, mutatis mutandis , apply for determination of amount to be recovered.  
CHAPTER VI  
REGISTRATION  
22. Persons liable for registration. —(1) Every supplier shall be liable to be registered under this Act 
in the State or Union territory, othe r than special category States, from where he makes a taxable supply 
of goods or services or both, if his aggregate turnover in a financial year exceeds twenty lakh rupees:  
Provided that where such person makes taxable supplies of goods or services or both  from any of the 
special category States, he shall be liable to be registered if his aggregate turnover in a financial year 
exceeds ten lakh rupees.  
2[Provided further that the Government may, at the request of a special  category State and on the 
recommendations of the Council, enhance the aggregate  turnover referred to in the first proviso from ten 
lakh rupees to such amount, not  exceeding twenty lakh rupees and subject to such conditions and 
limitations, as  may be so notified. ] 
(2) Every person w ho, on the day immediately preceding the appointed day, is registered or holds a 
licence under an existing law, shall be liable to be registered under this Act with effect from the appointed 
day. 
(3) Where a business carried on by a taxable person register ed under this Act is transferred, whether 
on account of succession or otherwise, to another person as a going concern, the transferee or the 
successor, as the case may be, shall be liable to be registered with effect from the date of such transfer or 
succe ssion.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 10, for ― under entry 84 ‖ (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  
2. The proviso ins. by s. 11, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   31 
 (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 3), in a case of transfer pursuant to 
sanction of a scheme or an arrangement for amalgamation or, as the case may be, demerger of two or more 
companies pursuant to an order of a High Co urt, Tribunal or otherwise, the transferee shall be liable to be 
registered, with effect from the date on which the Registrar of Companies issues a certificate of 
incorporation giving effect to such order of the High Court or Tribunal.  
Explanation. ––For th e purposes of this section, –– 
(i) the expression ―aggregate turnover‖ shall include all supplies made by the taxable person, 
whether on his own account or made on behalf of all his principals;  
(ii) the supply of goods, after completion of job work, by a re gistered job worker shall be treated 
as the supply of goods by the principal referred to in section 143, and the value of such goods shall 
not be included in the aggregate turnover of the registered job worker;  
(iii) the expression ―special category States ‖ shall mean the States as specified in sub -clause ( g) 
of clause ( 4) of article 279A of the Constitution  1[except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ] 2[and 
States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Himachal Pradesh,  Meghalaya, Sikkim and Uttarakhand‖ ]. 
23.  Persons not liable for registration. —(1) The following persons shall not be liable to registration, 
namely: –– 
(a) any  person engaged exclusively in the business of supplying goods or services or both that are 
not liable to tax or wholly exempt from tax under this Act or under the Integrated Goods and Services 
Tax Act;  
(b) an agriculturist, to the extent of supply of prod uce out of cultivation of land.  
(2) The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify the 
category of persons who may be exempted from obtaining registration under this Act.  
24. Compulsory registration in certain cases. —Notwithstanding anything contained in                      
sub-section ( 1) of section 22, the following categories of persons shall be required to be registered under 
this Act, –– 
(i) persons making any inter -State taxable supply;  
(ii) casual taxable person s making taxable supply;  
(iii) persons who are required to pay tax under reverse charge;  
(iv) person who are required to pay tax under sub -section ( 5) of section 9;  
(v) non -resident taxable persons making taxable supply;  
(vi) persons who are required to de duct tax under section 51, whether or not separately registered 
under this Act;  
(vii) persons who make taxable supply of goods or services or both on behalf of other taxable 
persons whether as an agent or otherwise;  
(viii) Input Service Distributor, whethe r or not separately registered under this Act;  
(ix) persons who supply goods or services or both, other than supplies specified under                    
sub-section ( 5) of section 9, through such electronic commerce operator who is required to collect tax 
at source under section 52;  
(x) every electronic commerce operator  3[who is required to collect tax at source under section 
52]; 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 2017, s. 2 (w.e.f. 8 -7-2017).   
2. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   
3. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 12, (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   32 
 (xi) every person supplying online information and database access or retrieval services from a 
place outside India to a person  in India, other than a registered person; and  
(xii) such other person or class of persons as may be notified by the Government on the 
recommendations of the Council.  
25. Procedure for registration. —(1) Every person who is liable to be registered under section 22 or 
section 24 shall apply for registration in every such State or Union territory in which he is so liable within 
thirty days from the date on which he becomes liable to registration, in such m anner and subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed:  
Provided that a casual taxable person or a non -resident taxable person shall apply for registration at 
least five days prior to the commencement of business.  
1[Provided further that a person having  a unit, as defined in the Special  Economic Zones Act, 2005, in 
a Special Economic Zone or being a Special  Economic Zone developer shall have to apply for a separate 
registration, as  distinct from his place of business located outside the Special Economic Zone in  the same 
State or Union territory. ] 
Explanation .—Every person who makes a supply from the territorial waters of India shall obtain 
registration in the coastal State or Union territory where the nearest point of the appropriate baseline is 
located.  
(2) A person seeking registration under this Act shall be granted a single registration in a State or 
Union territory:  
2[Provided that a person having multiple places of business in a State or  Union territory may be 
granted a separate registration for each  such place of  business, subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed. ]  
(3) A person, though not liable to be registered under section 22 or section 24 may get himself 
registered voluntarily, and all provisions of this Act, as are applicable to a regis tered person, shall apply to 
such person.  
(4) A person who has obtained or is required to obtain more than one registration, whether in one 
State or Union territory or more than one State or Union territory shall, in respect of each such 
registration, be t reated as distinct persons for the purposes of this Act.  
(5) Where a person who has obtained or is required to obtain registration in a State or Union territory 
in respect of an establishment, has an establishment in another State or Union territory, then such 
establishments shall be treated as establishments of distinct persons for the purposes of this Act.  
(6) Every person shall have a Permanent Account Number issued under the Income -tax Act, 1961         
(43 of 1961) in order to be eligible for grant of registration:  
Provided that a person required to deduct tax under section 51 may have, in lieu of a Permanent 
Account Number, a Tax Deduction and Collection Account Number issued under the said Act in order to 
be eligible for grant of registration.  
(7) Not withstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 6), a non -resident taxable person may be 
granted registration under sub -section ( 1) on the basis of such other documents as may be prescribed.  
(8) Where a person who is liable to be registered under this Act fails to obtain registration, the proper 
officer may, without prejudice to any action which may be taken under this Act or under any other law for 
the time being in force, proceed to register such person in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1),–– 
(a) any specialised agency of the United Nations Organisation or any Multilateral Financial 
Institution and Organisation notified under the United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947 
(46 of  1947), Consulate or Embassy of foreign countries; and  
                                                           
1. The proviso ins. by s.13, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   
2. The proviso ins. by s.13, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  33 
 (b) any other person or class of persons, as may be notified by the Commissioner,  
shall be granted a Unique Identity Number in such manner and for such purposes, including refund of 
taxes on the notifi ed supplies of goods or services or both received by them, as may be prescribed.  
(10) The registration or the Unique Identity Number shall be granted or rejected after due verification 
in such manner and within such period as may be prescribed.  
(11) A cert ificate of registration shall be issued in such form and with effect from such date as may be 
prescribed.  
(12) A registration or a Unique Identity Number shall be deemed to have been granted after the expiry 
of the period prescribed under sub -section ( 10), if no deficiency has been communicated to the applicant 
within that period.  
26. Deemed registration. —(1) The grant of registration or the Unique Identity Number under the State 
Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act s hall be deemed to be a 
grant of registration or the Unique Identity Number under this Act subject to the condition that the application 
for registration or the Unique Identity Number has not been rejected under this Act within the time specified 
in sub -section ( 10) of section 25.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 10) of section 25, any rejection of application 
for registration or the Unique Identity Number under the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union 
Territory Goods and Servi ces Tax Act shall be deemed to be a rejection of application for registration 
under this Act.  
27. Special provisions relating to casual taxable person and non -resident taxable person. —(1) 
The certificate of registration issued to a casual taxable person or  a non -resident taxable person shall be 
valid for the period specified in the application for registration or ninety days from the effective date of 
registration, whichever is earlier and such person shall make taxable supplies only after the issuance of 
the certificate of registration:  
Provided that the proper officer may, on sufficient cause being shown by the said taxable person, 
extend the said period of ninety days by a further period not exceeding ninety days.  
(2) A casual taxable person or a non -resident taxable person shall, at the time of submission of 
application for registration under sub -section ( 1) of section 25, make an advance deposit of tax in an 
amount equivalent to the estimated tax liability of such person for the period for which the reg istration is 
sought:  
Provided that where any extension of time is sought under sub -section ( 1), such taxable person shall 
deposit an additional amount of tax equivalent to the estimated tax liability of such person for the period 
for which the extension is  sought.  
(3) The amount deposited under sub -section ( 2) shall be credited to the electronic cash ledger of 
such person and shall be utilised in the manner provided under section 49.  
28. Amendment of registration. —(1) Every registered person and a person to  whom a Unique 
Identity Number has been assigned shall inform the proper officer of any changes in the information 
furnished at the time of registration or subsequent thereto, in such form and manner and within such 
period as may be prescribed.  
(2) The pro per officer may, on the basis of information furnished under sub -section ( 1) or as 
ascertained by him, approve or reject amendments in the registration particulars in such manner and 
within such period as may be prescribed:  
Provided that approval of the pr oper officer shall not be required in respect of amendment of such 
particulars as may be prescribed:  
Provided further that the proper officer shall not reject the application for amendment in the registration 
particulars without giving the person an opport unity of being heard.  34 
 (3) Any rejection or approval of amendments under the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the 
Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be a rejection or 
approval under this Act.  
29. Cancellati on 1[or suspension] of registration. —(1) The proper officer may, either on his own 
motion or on an application filed by the registered person or by his legal heirs, in case of death of such 
person, cancel the registration, in such manner and within such period as may be prescribed, having 
regard to the circumstances where, –– 
(a) the business has been discontinued, transferred fully for any reason including death of the 
proprietor, amalgamated with other legal entity, demerged or otherwise disposed of; or  
(b) there is any change in the constitution of the business; or  
(c) the taxable person, other than the person registered under sub -section ( 3) of section 25, is no 
longer liable to be registered under section 22 or section 24.  
2[Provided that during pendency of the proceedings relating to cancellation  of registration filed by 
the registered person, the registration may be suspended  for such period and in such manner as may 
be prescribed. ] 
(2) The proper officer may cancel the registration of a person from such date, including any 
retrospective date, as he may deem fit, where, –– 
(a) a registered person has contravened such provisions of the Act or the rules made thereunder as 
may be prescribed; or  
(b) a person paying tax under section 10 has not furnish ed returns for three consecutive tax 
periods; or  
(c) any registered person, other than a person specified in clause ( b), has not furnished returns for 
a continuous period of six months; or  
(d) any person who has taken voluntary registration under sub -section (3) of section 25 has not 
commenced business within six months from the date of registration; or  
(e) registration has been obtained by means of fraud, wilful misstatement or suppression of facts:  
Provided that the proper officer shall not cancel the registration without giving the person an 
opportunity of being heard.  
3[Provided further that during pendency of the proceedings relating to  cancellation of registration, the 
proper officer may suspend the registration for  such period and in such manner as  may be prescribed. ] 
(3) The cancellation of registration under this section shall not affect the liability of the person to pay tax 
and other dues under this Act or to discharge any obligation under this Act or the rules made thereunder for 
any period prior to the date of cancellation whether or not such tax and other dues are determined before or 
after the date of cancellation.  
(4) The cancellation of registration under the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union 
Territory Goods and Services Tax Act, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be a cancellation of 
registration under this Act.  
(5) Every registered person whose registration is cancelled shall pay an amount, by way of debit in the 
electronic credit ledger or electronic cash ledger, equiva lent to the credit of input tax in respect of inputs 
held in stock and inputs contained in semi -finished or finished goods held in stock or capital goods or plant 
and machinery on the day immediately preceding the date of such cancellation or the output ta x payable on 
such goods, whichever is higher, calculated in such manner as may be prescribed:  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 14 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   
2. The proviso ins. by s. 14, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   
3. The proviso ins. by s. 14, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   35 
 Provided that in case of capital goods or plant and machinery, the taxable person shall pay an amount 
equal to the input tax credit taken on the said capital good s or plant and machinery, reduced by such 
percentage points as may be prescribed or the tax on the transaction value of such capital goods or plant 
and machinery under section 15, whichever is higher.  
(6) The amount payable under sub -section ( 5) shall be c alculated in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
30. Revocation of cancellation of registration. —(1) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, 
any registered person, whose registration is cancelled by the proper officer on his own motion, may apply to  
such officer for revocation of cancellation of the registration in the prescribed manner within thirty days from 
the date of service of the cancellation order.  
(2) The proper officer may, in such manner and within such period as may be prescribed, by orde r, either 
revoke cancellation of the registration or reject the application:  
Provided that the application for revocation of cancellation of registration shall not be rejected unless 
the applicant has been given an opportunity of being heard.  
(3) The revoc ation of cancellation of registration under the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the 
Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be a revocation of 
cancellation of registration under this Act.  
CHAPTER VII  
TAX INVOICE, CREDIT AND DEBIT NOTES  
31. Tax invoice. —(1) A registered person supplying taxable goods shall, before or at the time of, — 
(a) removal of goods for supply to the recipient, where the supply involves movement of goods; 
or 
(b) delivery of goods or ma king available thereof to the recipient, in any other case,  
issue a tax invoice showing the description, quantity and value of goods, the tax charged thereon and such 
other particulars as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Government may, on the recommen dations of the Council, by notification, specify 
the categories of goods or supplies in respect of which a tax invoice shall be issued, within such time and 
in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) A registered person supplying taxable services shall, befo re or after the provision of service but 
within a prescribed period, issue a tax invoice, showing the description, value, tax charged thereon and such 
other particulars as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Government may, on the recommendations of the C ouncil, by notification and 
subject to such conditions as may be mentioned therein, specify the categories of services in respect of 
which –– 
(a) any other document issued in relation to the supply shall be deemed to be a tax invoice; or  
(b) tax invoice may  not be issued.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2)–– 
(a) a registered person may, within one month from the date of issuance of certificate of registration 
and in such manner as may be prescribed, issue a revised invoice against the invoice already issued during 
the period beginning with the effective date of registration till the date of issuance of certificate of 
registration to him;  
(b) a registered person may not issue a tax invoice if the value of the goods or services or both 
supplied is less than two hundred rupees subject to such conditions and in such manner as may be 
prescribed;  36 
 (c) a registered person supplying exempted goods or se rvices or both or paying tax under the 
provisions of section 10 shall issue, instead of a tax invoice, a bill of supply containing such particulars 
and in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the registered person may not issue a bill of supply if the value of the goods or 
services or both supplied is less than two hundred rupees subject to such conditions and in such 
manner as may be prescribed;  
(d) a registered person shall, on receipt of advance payment with respect to any supply of goods or 
services or both, issue a receipt voucher or any other document, containing such particulars as may be 
prescribed, evidencing receipt of such payment;  
(e) where, on receipt of advance payment with respect to any supply of goods or services or both 
the regis tered person issues a receipt voucher, but subsequently no supply is made and no tax invoice 
is issued in pursuance thereof, the said registered person may issue to the person who had made the 
payment, a refund voucher against such payment;  
(f) a registere d person who is liable to pay tax under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of              
section 9 shall issue an invoice in respect of goods or services or both received by him from the 
supplier who is not registered on the date of receipt of goods or s ervices or both;  
(g) a registered person who is liable to pay tax under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of             
section 9 shall issue a payment voucher at the time of making payment to the supplier.  
(4) In case of continuous supply of goods, wher e successive statements of accounts or successive 
payments are involved, the invoice shall be issued before or at the time each such statement is issued or, 
as the case may be, each such payment is received.  
(5) Subject to the provisions of clause ( d) of s ub-section ( 3), in case of continuous supply of 
services, –– 
(a) where the due date of payment is ascertainable from the contract, the invoice shall be issued 
on or before the due date of payment;  
(b) where the due date of payment is not ascertainable from the contract, the invoice shall be 
issued before or at the time when the supplier of service receives the payment;  
(c) where the payment is linked to the completion of an event, the invoice shall be issued on or 
before the date of completion of that event.  
(6) In a case where the supply of services ceases under a contract before the completion of the supply, 
the invoice shall be issued at the time when the supply ceases and such invoice shall be issued to the 
extent of the supply made before such cessation.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where the goods being sent or taken on 
approval for sale or return are removed before the supply takes place, the invoice shall be issued before or 
at the time of supply or six months from the dat e of removal, whichever is earlier.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this section, the expression ―tax invoice‖ shall include any revised 
invoice issued by the supplier in respect of a supply made earlier.  
32. Prohibition of unauthorised collection of tax.—(1) A person who is not a registered person 
shall not collect in respect of any supply of goods or services or both any amount by way of tax under this 
Act. 
(2) No registered person shall collect tax except in accordance with the provisions of this Ac t or the 
rules made thereunder.  
33. Amount of tax to be indicated in tax invoice and other documents. —Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, where any supply is made for a 
consideration, every person wh o is liable to pay tax for such supply shall prominently indicate in all 
documents relating to assessment, tax invoice and other like documents, the amount of tax which shall 
form part of the price at which such supply is made.  37 
 34. Credit and debit notes. —(1) 1[Where one or more  tax invoice s have] been issued for supply of 
any goods or services or both and the taxable value or tax charged in that tax invoice is found to exceed 
the taxable value or tax payable in respect of such supply, or where the goods su pplied are returned by the 
recipient, or where goods or services or both supplied are found to be deficient, the registered person, who 
has supplied such goods or services or both, may issue to the recipient 2[one or more credit notes for  
supplies made in a financial year ] containing such particulars as may be prescribed.  
(2) Any registered person who issues a credit note in relation to a supply of goods or services or both 
shall declare the details of such credit note in the return for the month during whi ch such credit note has 
been issued but not later than September following the end of the financial year in which such supply was 
made, or the date of furnishing of the relevant annual return, whichever is earlier, and the tax liability 
shall be adjusted i n such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no reduction in output tax liability of the supplier shall be permitted, if the incidence of 
tax and interest on such supply has been passed on to any other person.  
(3) 3[Where one or more  tax invoice s have] been issued for supply of any goods or services or both 
and the taxable value or tax charged in that tax invoice is found to be less than the taxable value or tax 
payable in respect of such supply, the registered person, who has supplied such goods or services or both, 
shall issue to the recipient 4[one or more credit notes for  supplies made in a financial year ] containing 
such particulars as may be prescribed.  
(4) Any registered person who issues a debit note in relation to a supply of goods or service s or both 
shall declare the details of such debit note in the return for the month during which such debit note has 
been issued and the tax liability shall be adjusted in such manner as may be prescribed.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this Act, the exp ression ―debit note‖ shall include a supplementary 
invoice.  
CHAPTER VIII  
ACCOUNTS AND RECORDS  
35. Accounts and other records. —(1) Every registered person shall keep and maintain, at his 
principal place of business, as mentioned in the certificate of registration, a true and correct account of — 
(a) production or manufacture of goods;  
(b) inward and outward supply of goods or services or both;  
(c) stock of goods;  
(d) input tax credit availed;  
(e) output tax payable and paid; and  
(f) such  other particulars as may be prescribed:  
Provided that where more than one place of business is specified in the certificate of registration, the 
accounts relating to each place of business shall be kept at such places of business:  
Provided further that th e registered person may keep and maintain such accounts and other particulars 
in electronic form in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every owner or operator of warehouse or godown or any other place used for storage of goods and 
every transporter, irr espective of whether he is a registered person or not, shall maintain records of the 
consigner, consignee and other relevant details of the goods in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Commissioner may notify a class of taxable persons to maintain ad ditional accounts or 
documents for such purpose as may be specified therein.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 15, for ― Where a tax invoice has ‖ (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  
2. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for ―a credit note ‖ (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  
3. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for ―Where a tax invoice has ‖ (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  
4. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  38 
 (4) Where the Commissioner considers that any class of taxable person is not in a position to keep 
and maintain accounts in accordance with the provisions of this section, he may,  for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, permit such class of taxable persons to maintain accounts in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(5) Every registered person whose turnover during a financial year exceeds the prescribed limit shall get 
his accounts audited by a chartered accountant or a cost accountant and shall submit a copy of the audited 
annual accounts, the reconciliation statement  under sub -section ( 2) of section 44 and such other 
documents in such form and manner as may be prescribed.  
1[Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to any  department of the Central 
Government or a State Government or a local autho rity, whose books of account are subject to audit by 
the Comptroller and Auditor -General  of India or an auditor appointed for auditing the accounts of local 
authorities under  any law for the time being in force. ] 
(6) Subject to the provisions of clause ( h) of sub -section ( 5) of section 17, where the registered 
person fails to account for the goods or services or both in accordance with the provisions of sub -
section ( 1), the proper officer shall determine the amount of tax payable on the goods or services or  
both that are not accounted for, as if such goods or services or both had been supplied by such person 
and the provisions of section 73 or section 74, as the case may be, shall, mutatis mutandis, apply for 
determination of such tax.  
36. Period of retentio n of accounts. —Every registered person required to keep and maintain books 
of account or other records in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 35 shall retain 
them until the expiry of seventy -two months from the due date of furnishing of annual return for the year 
pertaining to such accounts and records:  
Provided that a registered person, who is a party to an appeal or revision or any other proceedings 
before any Appellate Authority or Revisional Authority or Appellate Tribun al or court, whether filed by him 
or by the Commissioner, or is under investigation for an offence under Chapter XIX, shall retain the books 
of account and other records pertaining to the subject matter of such appeal or revision or proceedings or 
investig ation for a period of one year after final disposal of such appeal or revision or proceedings or 
investigation, or for the period specified above, whichever is later.  
CHAPTER IX  
RETURNS  
37. Furnishing details of outward supplies. —(1) Every registered person, other than an Input 
Service Distributor, a non -resident taxable person and a person paying tax under the provisions of section 
10 or section 51 or section 52, shall furnish, electronically, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed, the details of outward supplies of goods or services or both effected during a tax period on or 
before the tenth day of the month succeeding the said tax period and such details shall be communicated 
to the recipient of the said supplies within such time and in such m anner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the registered person shall not be allowed to furnish the details of outward supplies 
during the period from the eleventh day to the fifteenth day of the month succeeding the tax period:  
Provided further that the C ommissioner may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, by notification, 
extend the time limit for furnishing such details for such class of taxable persons as may be specified 
therein:  
Provided also that any extension of time limit notified by the Commiss ioner of State tax or 
Commissioner of Union territory tax shall be deemed to be notified by the Commissioner.  
(2) Every registered person who has been communicated the details under sub -section ( 3) of             
section 38 or the details pertaining to inw ard supplies of Input Service Distributor under sub -section ( 4) 
of section 38, shall either accept or reject the details so communicated, on or before the seventeenth day, 
but not before the fifteenth day, of the month succeeding the tax period and the det ails furnished by him 
under sub -section ( 1) shall stand amended accordingly.  
                                                           
1. The proviso ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 16 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  39 
 (3) Any registered person, who has furnished the details under sub -section ( 1) for any tax period and 
which have remained unmatched under section 42 or section 43, shall, upon dis covery of any error or 
omission therein, rectify such error or omission in such manner as may be prescribed, and shall pay the 
tax and interest, if any, in case there is a short payment of tax on account of such error or omission, in the 
return to be furni shed for such tax period:  
Provided that no rectification of error or omission in respect of the details furnished under                 
sub-section ( 1) shall be allowed after furnishing of the return under section 39 for the month of September 
following th e end of the financial year to which such details pertain, or furnishing of the relevant annual 
return, whichever is earlier.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression ―details of outward supplies‖ shall 
include details of invoices, de bit notes, credit notes and revised invoices issued in relation to outward 
supplies made during any tax period.  
38. Furnishing details of inward supplies. —(1) Every registered person, other than an Input Service 
Distributor or a non -resident taxable person  or a person paying tax under the provisions of section 10 or 
section 51 or section 52, shall verify, validate, modify or delete, if required, the details relating to outward 
supplies and credit or debit notes communicated under sub -section ( 1) of section 37 to prepare the details 
of his inward supplies and credit or debit notes and may include therein, the details of inward supplies and 
credit or debit notes received by him in respect of such supplies that have not been declared by the 
supplier under sub -section ( 1) of section 37.  
(2) Every registered person, other than an Input Service Distributor or a non -resident taxable person 
or a person paying tax under the provisions of section 10 or section 51 or section 52, shall furnish, 
electronically, the detail s of inward supplies of taxable goods or services or both, including inward 
supplies of goods or services or both on which the tax is payable on reverse charge basis under this Act 
and inward supplies of goods or services or both taxable under the Integrat ed Goods and Services Tax Act 
or on which integrated goods and services tax is payable under section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 
(51 of 1975), and credit or debit notes received in respect of such supplies during a tax period after the 
tenth day but on or before the fifteenth day of the month succeeding the tax period in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Commissioner may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, by notification, extend 
the time limit for furnishing such detail s for such class of taxable persons as may be specified therein:  
Provided further that any extension of time limit notified by the Commissioner of State tax or Commissioner 
of Union territory tax shall be deemed to be notified by the Commissioner.  
(3) The details of supplies modified, deleted or included by the recipient and furnished under               
sub-section ( 2) shall be communicated to the supplier concerned in such manner and within such time as 
may be prescribed.  
(4) The details of supplies modified, deleted or included by the recipient in the return furnished 
under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 4) of section 39 shall be communicated to the supplier concerned 
in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed.  
(5) Any registered perso n, who has furnished the details under sub -section ( 2) for any tax period and 
which have remained unmatched under section 42 or section 43, shall, upon discovery of any error or 
omission therein, rectify such error or omission in the tax period during whic h such error or omission is 
noticed in such manner as may be prescribed, and shall pay the tax and interest, if any, in case there is a short 
payment of tax on account of such error or omission, in the return to be furnished for such tax period:  
Provided t hat no rectification of error or omission in respect of the details furnished under             
sub-section ( 2) shall be allowed after furnishing of the return under section 39 for the month of September 
following the end of the financial year to which suc h details pertain, or furnishing of the relevant annual 
return, whichever is earlier.  
39. Furnishing of returns. —(1) Every registered person, other than an Input Service Distributor or a 
non-resident taxable person or a person paying tax under the provisions of section 10 or section 51 or 
section 52 shall, for every calendar month or part thereof, furnish, in such form  and manner as may be 40 
 prescribed, a return, electronically, of inward and outward supplies of goods or services or both, input tax 
credit availed, tax payable, tax paid and such other particulars as may be prescribed, on or before the 
twentieth day of the month succeeding such calendar month or part thereof.  
(2) A registered person paying tax under the provisions of section 10 shall, for each quarter or part thereof, 
furnish, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, a return, electronically, of turnove r in the State or 
Union territory, inward supplies of goods or services or both, tax payable and tax paid within eighteen days 
after the end of such quarter.  
(3) Every registered person required to deduct tax at source under the provisions of section 51 sh all 
furnish, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, a return, electronically, for the month in which 
such deductions have been made within ten days after the end of such month.  
(4) Every taxable person registered as an Input Service Distributor shal l, for every calendar month or 
part thereof, furnish, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, a return, electronically, within 
thirteen days after the end of such month.  
(5) Every registered non -resident taxable person shall, for every calendar month  or part thereof, 
furnish, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, a return, electronically, within twenty days after 
the end of a calendar month or within seven days after the last day of the period of registration specified 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 27, whichever is earlier.  
(6) The Commissioner may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, by notification, extend the time 
limit for furnishing the returns under this section for such class of registered persons as may be specified 
therein:  
Provi ded that any extension of time limit notified by the Commissioner of State tax or Union territory 
tax shall be deemed to be notified by the Commissioner.  
(7) Every registered person, who is required to furnish a return under sub -section ( 1) or                        
sub-section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 5), shall pay to the Government the tax due as per such 
return not later than the last date on which he is required to furnish such return.  
(8) Every registered person who is required to furnish  a return under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) 
shall furnish a return for every tax period whether or not any supplies of goods or services or both have 
been made during such tax period.  
(9) Subject to the provisions of sections 37 and 38, if any regis tered person after furnishing a return 
under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 5) discovers 
any omission or incorrect particulars therein, other than as a result of scrutiny, audit, inspection or 
enfor cement activity by the tax authorities, he shall rectify such omission or incorrect particulars in the 
return to be furnished for the month or quarter during which such omission or incorrect particulars are 
noticed, subject to payment of interest under thi s Act:  
Provided that no such rectification of any omission or incorrect particulars shall be allowed after the 
due date for furnishing of return for the month of September or second quarter following the end of the 
financial year, or the actual date of fur nishing of relevant annual return, whichever is earlier.  
(10) A registered person shall not be allowed to furnish a return for a tax period if the return for any 
of the previous tax periods has not been furnished by him.  
40. First return. —Every registered person who has made outward supplies in the period between the 
date on which he became liable to registration till the date on which registration has been granted shall 
declare the same in the first return furnished by him after grant of registration.  
41. Claim of input tax credit and provisional acceptance thereof. —(1) Every registered person 
shall, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, be entitled to take the credit of 
eligible input tax, as self -assessed, in his return and suc h amount shall be credited on a provisional basis 
to his electronic credit ledger.  
(2) The credit referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be utilised only for payment of self -assessed output 
tax as per the return referred to in the said sub -section.  41 
 42. Match ing, reversal and reclaim of input tax credit. —(1) The details of every inward supply 
furnished by a registered person (hereafter in this section referred to as the ―recipient‖) for a tax period shall, 
in such manner and within such time as may be prescrib ed, be matched –– 
(a) with the corresponding details of outward supply furnished by the corresponding registered 
person (hereafter in this section referred to as the ―supplier‖) in his valid return for the same tax 
period or any preceding tax period;  
(b) with the integrated goods and services tax paid under section 3 of the Customs Tariff                 
Act, 1975 (51 of 1975) in respect of goods imported by him; and  
(c) for duplication of claims of input tax credit.  
(2) The claim of input tax credit in respect of invoices or debit notes relating to inward supply that 
match with the details of corresponding outward supply or with the integrated goods and services tax paid 
under section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 (51 of 1975) in respect of goods imp orted by him shall be 
finally accepted and such acceptance shall be communicated, in such manner as may be prescribed, to the 
recipient.  
(3) Where the input tax credit claimed by a recipient in respect of an inward supply is in excess of the 
tax declared b y the supplier for the same supply or the outward supply is not declared by the supplier in 
his valid returns, the discrepancy shall be communicated to both such persons in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(4) The duplication of claims of input tax credit  shall be communicated to the recipient in such 
manner as may be prescribed.  
(5) The amount in respect of which any discrepancy is communicated under sub -section ( 3) and 
which is not rectified by the supplier in his valid return for the month in which disc repancy is 
communicated shall be added to the output tax liability of the recipient, in such manner as may be 
prescribed, in his return for the month succeeding the month in which the discrepancy is communicated.  
(6) The amount claimed as input tax credit that is found to be in excess on account of duplication of 
claims shall be added to the output tax liability of the recipient in his return for the month in which the 
duplication is communicated.  
(7) The recipient shall be eligible to reduce, from his outp ut tax liability, the amount added under  
sub-section ( 5), if the supplier declares the details of the invoice or debit note in his valid return within the 
time specified in sub -section ( 9) of section 39.  
(8) A recipient in whose output tax liability any a mount has been added under sub -section ( 5) or   
sub-section ( 6), shall be liable to pay interest at the rate specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 50 on 
the amount so added from the date of availing of credit till the corresponding additions are made under 
the said sub -sections.  
(9) Where any reduction in output tax liability is accepted under sub -section ( 7), the interest paid under 
sub-section ( 8) shall be refunded to the recipient by crediting the amount in the corresponding head of his 
electronic c ash ledger in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the amount of interest to be credited in any case shall not exceed the amount of interest 
paid by the supplier.  
(10) The amount reduced from the output tax liability in contravention of the prov isions of sub -
section ( 7) shall be added to the output tax liability of the recipient in his return for the month in which 
such contravention takes place and such recipient shall be liable to pay interest on the amount so added at 
the rate specified in sub -section ( 3) of section 50.  
43. Matching, reversal and reclaim of reduction in output tax liability. —(1) The details of every 
credit note relating to outward supply furnished by a registered person (hereafter in this section referred to 
as the ―supplier‖) for a tax period shall, in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed, be 
matched –– 42 
 (a) with the corresponding reduction in the claim for input tax credit by the corresponding registered 
person (hereafter in this section referred to as the ―recipient‖) in his valid return for the same tax period or 
any subsequent tax period; and  
(b) for duplication of claims for reduction in output tax liability.  
(2) The claim for reduction in output tax liability by the supplier that matches with the corresponding 
reduction in the claim for input tax credit by the recipient shall be finally accepted and communicated, in 
such manner as may be prescribed, to the supplier.  
(3) Where the reduction of output tax liability in respect of outward supplies exce eds the corresponding 
reduction in the claim for input tax credit or the corresponding credit note is not declared by the recipient in 
his valid returns, the discrepancy shall be communicated to both such persons in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(4) Th e duplication of claims for reduction in output tax liability shall be communicated to the 
supplier in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(5) The amount in respect of which any discrepancy is communicated under sub -section ( 3) and 
which is not rectified by the recipient in his valid return for the month in which discrepancy is 
communicated shall be added to the output tax liability of the supplier, in such manner as may be 
prescribed, in his return for the month succeeding the month in which the discrepancy is communicated.  
(6) The amount in respect of any reduction in output tax liability that is found to be on account of 
duplication of claims shall be added to the output tax liability of the supplier in his return for the month in 
which such duplication is communicated.  
(7) The supplier shall be eligible to reduce, from his output tax liability, the amount added under sub -
section ( 5) if the recipient declares the details of the credit note in his valid return within the time 
specified in sub -section ( 9) of s ection 39.  
(8) A supplier in whose output tax liability any amount has been added under sub -section ( 5) or sub -
section ( 6), shall be liable to pay interest at the rate specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 50 in respect 
of the amount so added from the  date of such claim for reduction in the output tax liability till the 
corresponding additions are made under the said sub -sections.  
(9) Where any reduction in output tax liability is accepted under sub -section ( 7), the interest paid under 
sub-section ( 8) shall be refunded to the supplier by crediting the amount in the corresponding head of his 
electronic cash ledger in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the amount of interest to be credited in any case shall not exceed the amount of interest 
paid by the recipient.  
(10) The amount reduced from output tax liability in contravention of the provisions of                  
sub-section ( 7) shall be added to the output tax liability of the supplier in his return for the month in 
which such contraventio n takes place and such supplier shall be liable to pay interest on the amount so 
added at the rate specified in sub -section ( 3) of section 50.  
44. Annual return. —(1) Every registered person, other than an Input Service Distributor, a person 
paying tax under section 51 or section 52, a casual taxable person and a non -resident taxable person, shall 
furnish an annual return for every financial year electronically in such form and manner as may be prescribed 
on or before the thirty -first day of December fol lowing the end of such financial year.  
(2) Every registered person who is required to get his accounts audited in accordance with the 
provisions of sub -section ( 5) of section 35 shall furnish, electronically, the annual return under                        
sub-section ( 1) along with a copy of the audited annual accounts and a reconciliation statement, reconciling 
the value of supplies declared in the return furnished for the financial year with the audited annual financial 
statement, and such other particula rs as may be prescribed.  
45. Final return. —Every registered person who is required to furnish a return under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 39 and whose registration has been cancelled shall furnish a final return within three months of 
the date of cancellatio n or date of order of cancellation, whichever is later, in such form and manner as 
may be prescribed.  43 
 46. Notice to return defaulters. —Where a registered person fails to furnish a return under section 
39 or section 44 or section 45, a notice shall be issue d requiring him to furnish such return within fifteen 
days in such form and manner as may be prescribed.  
47. Levy of late fee. —(1) Any registered person who fails to furnish the details of outward or 
inward supplies required under section 37 or section 38 or returns required under section 39 or section 
45 by the due date shall pay a late fee of one hundred rupees for every day during which such failure 
continues subject to a maximum amount of five thousand rupees.  
(2) Any registered person who fails to furn ish the return required under section 44 by the due date 
shall be liable to pay a late fee of one hundred rupees for every day during which such failure continues 
subject to a maximum of an amount calculated at a quarter per cent. of his turnover in the St ate or Union 
territory.  
48. Goods and services tax practitioners. —(1) The manner of approval of goods and services tax 
practitioners, their eligibility conditions, duties and obligations, manner of removal and other conditions 
relevant for their functionin g shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(2) A registered person may authorise an approved goods and services tax practitioner to furnish the 
details of outward supplies under section 37, the details of inward supplies under section 38 and the return 
under se ction 39 or section 44 or section 45 1[and to perform such other functions ] in such manner as may 
be prescribed.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the responsibility for correctness of any 
particulars furnished in the return or other details filed by the goods and services tax practitioners shall 
continue to rest with the registered person on whose behalf such return and details are furnished.  
CHAPTER X  
PAYMENT OF TAX  
49. Payment of tax, interest, penalty and other amounts .—(1) Every deposit made towards tax, 
interest, penalty, fee or any other amount by a person by internet banking or by using credit or debit cards 
or National Electronic Fund Transfer or Real Time Gross Settlement or by such other mode and subject to 
such condit ions and restrictions as may be prescribed, shall be credited to the electronic cash ledger of 
such person to be maintained in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The input tax credit as self -assessed in the return of a registered person shall be credite d to his 
electronic credit ledger, in accordance with section 41, to be maintained in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) The amount available in the electronic cash ledger may be used for making any payment towards 
tax, interest, penalty, fees or any ot her amount payable under the provisions of this Act or the rules made 
thereunder in such manner and subject to such conditions and within such time as may be prescribed.  
(4) The amount available in the electronic credit ledger may be used for making any pa yment towards 
output tax under this Act or under the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act in such manner and subject to 
such conditions and within such time as may be prescribed.  
(5) The amount of input tax credit available in the electronic credit ledger  of the registered person on 
account of –– 
(a) integrated tax shall first be utilised towards payment of integrated tax and the amount 
remaining, if any, may be utilised towards the payment of central tax and State tax, or as the case may 
be, Union territor y tax, in that order;  
(b) the central tax shall first be utilised towards payment of central tax and the amount remaining, if 
any, may be utilised towards the payment of integrated tax;  
(c) the State tax shall first be utilised towards payment of State tax  and the amount remaining, if 
any, may be utilised towards payment of integrated tax;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 19 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   44 
 1[Provided that the input tax credit on account of State tax shall be  utilised towards payment of 
integrated tax only where the balance of the  input tax credit on account  of central tax is not available 
for payment of  integrated tax; ] 
(d) the Union territory tax shall first be utilised towards payment of Union territory tax and the amount 
remaining, if any, may be utilised towards payment of integrated tax;  
2[Provided that  the input tax credit on account of Union territory tax  shall be utilised towards payment of 
integrated tax only where the balance  of the input tax credit on account of central tax is not available for 
payment  of integrated tax;]  
(e) the central tax shall not be utilised towards payment of State tax or Union territory tax; and  
(f) the State tax or Union territory tax shall not be utilised towards payment of central tax.  
(6) The balance in the electronic cash ledger or electronic credit ledger after payment of tax, interest, 
penalty, fee or any other amount payable under this Act or the rules made thereunder may be refunded in 
accordance with the provisions of section 54.  
(7) All liabilities of a taxable person under this Act shall be recorded and maintained in an electronic 
liability register in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(8) Every taxable person shall discharge his tax and other dues under this Act or the rules made 
thereunder in the following order, namely: –– 
(a) self -assessed tax, and other dues rel ated to returns of previous tax periods;  
(b) self -assessed tax, and other dues related to the return of the current tax period;  
(c) any other amount payable under this Act or the rules made thereunder including the demand 
determined under section 73 or sec tion 74.  
(9) Every person who has paid the tax on goods or services or both under this Act shall, unless the 
contrary is proved by him, be deemed to have passed on the full incidence of such tax to the recipient of 
such goods or services or both.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) the date of credit to the account of the Government in the authorised bank shall be deemed to 
be the date of deposit in the electronic cash ledger;  
(b) the expression, — 
(i) ―tax dues‖ means the tax payab le under this Act and does not include interest, fee and 
penalty; and  
(ii) ―other dues‖ means interest, penalty, fee or any other amount payable under this Act or 
the rules made thereunder.  
3[49A. Utilisation of input tax credit subject to certain conditions. — Notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 49, the input tax credit on  account of central tax, State tax or Union territory tax shall be 
utilised towards payment  of integrated tax, central tax, State tax or Union territory tax, as the case may be, only  
after the input tax credit available on account of integrated tax has first been utilised  fully towards such 
payment.  
49B. Order of utilisation of input tax credit .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter and  
subject to the  provisions of clause ( e) and clause ( f) of sub -section ( 5) of section 49, the Government  may, on 
the recommendations of the Council, prescribe the order and manner of  utilisation of the input tax credit on 
account of integrated tax, central tax, State tax or Union territory tax, as the case may be, to wards payment of 
any such tax.]  
                                                           
1. The proviso ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 20  (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   
2. The proviso ins. by s. 20., ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).    
3. Ins. by s. 21, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   45 
 50. Interest on delayed payment of tax .—(1) Every person who is liable to pay tax in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, but fails to pay the  tax or any part thereof to the 
Government within the period prescribed, shall for the period for which the tax or any part thereof remains 
unpaid, pay, on his own, interest at such rate, not exceeding eighteen per cent., as may be notified by the 
Governme nt on the recommendations of the Council.  
(2) The interest under sub -section ( 1) shall be calculated, in such manner as may be prescribed, from 
the day succeeding the day on which such tax was due to be paid.  
(3) A taxable person who makes an undue or excess claim of input tax credit under sub -section ( 10) of 
section 42 or undue or excess reduction in output tax liability under sub -section ( 10) of section 43, shall 
pay interest on such undue or excess claim or on such undue or excess reduction, as the c ase may be, at 
such rate not exceeding twenty -four per cent., as may be notified by the Government on the 
recommendations of the Council.  
51. Tax deduction at source .—(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, 
the Government may ma ndate, –– 
(a) a department or establishment of the Central Government or State Government; or  
(b) local authority; or  
(c) Governmental agencies; or  
(d) such persons or category of persons as may be notified by the Government on the 
recommendations of the Co uncil,  
(hereafter in this section referred to as ―the deductor‖), to deduct tax at the rate of one per cent. from the 
payment made or credited to the supplier (hereafter in this section referred to as ―the deductee‖) of 
taxable goods or services or both, where the total value of such supply, under a contract, exceeds two lakh 
and fifty thousand rupees:  
Provided that no deduction shall be made if the location of the supplier and the place of supply is in a 
State or Union territory which is different from th e State or as the case may be, Union territory of 
registration of the recipient.  
Explanation .––For the purpose of deduction of tax specified above, the value of supply shall be taken 
as the amount excluding the central tax, State tax, Union territory tax, integrated tax and cess indicated in 
the invoice.  
(2) The amount deducted as tax under this section shall be paid to the Government by the deductor 
within ten days after the end of the month in which such deduction is made, in such manner as may be 
prescri bed. 
(3) The deductor shall furnish to the deductee a certificate mentioning therein the contract value, rate 
of deduction, amount deducted, amount paid to the Government and such other particulars in such manner 
as may be prescribed.  
(4) If any deductor f ails to furnish to the deductee the certificate, after deducting the tax at source, 
within five days of crediting the amount so deducted to the Government, the deductor shall pay, by way 
of a late fee, a sum of one hundred rupees per day from the day after  the expiry of such five days period 
until the failure is rectified, subject to a maximum amount of five thousand rupees.  
(5) The deductee shall claim credit, in his electronic cash ledger, of the tax deducted and reflected in 
the return of the deductor fu rnished under sub -section ( 3) of section 39, in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(6) If any deductor fails to pay to the Government the amount deducted as tax under sub -section ( 1), 
he shall pay interest in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 50, in addition to the 
amount of tax deducted.  
(7) The determination of the amount in default under this section shall be made in the manner 
specified in section 73 or section 74.  46 
 (8)The refund to the deductor or the deductee  arising on account of excess or erroneous deduction 
shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of section 54:  
Provided that no refund to the deductor shall be granted, if the amount deducted has been credited to 
the electronic cash ledger of th e deductee.  
52. Collection of tax at source .—(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, 
every electronic commerce operator (hereafter in this section referred to as the ―operator‖), not being an 
agent, shall collect an amount calcu lated at such rate not exceeding one per cent., as may be notified by 
the Government on the recommendations of the Council, of the net value of taxable supplies made 
through it by other suppliers where the consideration with respect to such supplies is to be collected by 
the operator.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression ―net value of taxable supplies‖ 
shall mean the aggregate value of taxable supplies of goods or services or both, other than services 
notified under sub -section  (5) of section 9, made during any month by all registered persons through the 
operator reduced by the aggregate value of taxable supplies returned to the suppliers during the said 
month.  
(2) The power to collect the amount specified in sub -section ( 1) sha ll be without prejudice to any 
other mode of recovery from the operator.  
(3) The amount collected under sub -section ( 1) shall be paid to the Government by the operator 
within ten days after the end of the month in which such collection is made, in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(4) Every operator who collects the amount specified in sub -section ( 1) shall furnish a statement, 
electronically, containing the details of outward supplies of goods or services or both effected through it, 
including the suppl ies of goods or services or both returned through it, and the amount collected under 
sub-section ( 1) during a month, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, within ten days after the 
end of such month.  
(5) Every operator who collects the amount speci fied in sub -section ( 1) shall furnish an annual 
statement, electronically, containing the details of outward supplies of goods or services or both effected 
through it, including the supplies of goods or services or both returned through it, and the amount 
collected under the said sub -section during the financial year, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed, before the thirty first day of December following the end of such financial year.  
(6) If any operator after furnishing a statement under sub -section (4) discovers any omission or 
incorrect particulars therein, other than as a result of scrutiny, audit, inspection or enforcement activity by 
the tax authorities, he shall rectify such omission or incorrect particulars in the statement to be furnished 
for the month during which such omission or incorrect particulars are noticed, subject to payment of 
interest, as specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 50:  
Provided that no such rectification of any omission or incorrect particulars shall be allowed after  the due 
date for furnishing of statement for the month of September following the end of the financial year or the 
actual date of furnishing of the relevant annual statement, whichever is earlier.  
(7) The supplier who has supplied the goods or services or  both through the operator shall claim 
credit, in his electronic cash ledger, of the amount collected and reflected in the statement of the operator 
furnished under sub -section ( 4), in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(8) The details of supplies furnished  by every operator under sub -section ( 4) shall be matched with the 
corresponding details of outward supplies furnished by the concerned supplier registered under this Act in such 
manner and within such time as may be prescribed.  
(9) Where the details of ou tward supplies furnished by the operator under sub -section ( 4) do not 
match with the corresponding details furnished by the supplier under 1[section 37  or section 39] , the 
discrepancy shall be communicated to both persons in such manner and within such time as may be 
prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 22 for ―section 37‖ (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   47 
 (10) The amount in respect of which any discrepancy is communicated under sub -section ( 9) and 
which is not rectified by the supplier in his valid return or the operator in his statement for the month in 
which discrepancy is commu nicated, shall be added to the output tax liability of the said supplier, where 
the value of outward supplies furnished by the operator is more than the value of outward supplies 
furnished by the supplier, in his return for the month succeeding the month i n which the discrepancy is 
communicated in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(11) The concerned supplier, in whose output tax liability any amount has been added under sub -
section ( 10), shall pay the tax payable in respect of such supply along with interes t, at the rate specified 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 50 on the amount so added from the date such tax was due till the date of 
its payment.  
(12) Any authority not below the rank of Deputy Commissioner may serve a notice, either before or 
during the co urse of any proceedings under this Act, requiring the operator to furnish such details relating 
to— 
(a) supplies of goods or services or both effected through such operator during any period; or  
(b) stock of goods held by the suppliers making supplies thro ugh such operator in the godowns or 
warehouses, by whatever name called, managed by such operator and declared as additional places of 
business by such suppliers,  
as may be specified in the notice.  
(13) Every operator on whom a notice has been served under  sub-section ( 12) shall furnish the 
required information within fifteen working days of the date of service of such notice.  
(14) Any person who fails to furnish the information required by the notice served under                       
sub-section ( 12) shal l, without prejudice to any action that may be taken under section 122, be liable to a 
penalty which may extend to twenty -five thousand rupees.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression ―concerned supplier‖ shall mean the 
supplier of go ods or services or both making supplies through the operator.  
53. Transfer of input tax credit .—On utilisation of input tax credit availed under this Act for 
payment of tax dues under the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act in accordance with the provisions 
of sub -section ( 5) of section 49, as reflected in the valid return furnished under sub -section ( 1) of section 
39, the amount collected as central tax shall stand reduced by an amount equal to such credit so utilised 
and the Central Government sh all transfer an amount equal to the amount so reduced from the central tax 
account to the integrated tax account in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER XI  
REFUNDS  
54. Refund of tax. —(1) Any person claiming refund of any tax and interest, if any, paid on such tax 
or any other amount paid by him, may make an application before the expiry of two years from the 
relevant date in such form and manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that a registered person, claiming refund of any balanc e in the electronic cash ledger in 
accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 6) of section 49, may claim such refund in the return 
furnished under section 39 in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) A specialised agency of the United Nations Organisat ion or any Multilateral Financial Institution and 
Organisation notified under the United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947 (46 of 1947), Consulate or 
Embassy of foreign countries or any other person or class of persons, as notified under sectio n 55, entitled to a 
refund of tax paid by it on inward supplies of goods or services or both, may make an application for such refund, 
in such form and manner as may be prescribed, before the expiry of six months from the last day of the quarter in 
which s uch supply was received.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 10), a registered person may claim refund of any 
unutilised input tax credit at the end of any tax period:  
Provided that no refund of unutilised input tax credit shall be allowed in cas es other than –– 48 
 (i) zero rated supplies made without payment of tax;  
(ii) where the credit has accumulated on account of rate of tax on inputs being higher than the rate 
of tax on output supplies (other than nil rated or fully exempt supplies), except supplies of goods or 
services or both as may be notified by the Government on the recommendations of the Council:  
Provided further that no refund of unutilised input tax credit shall be allowed in cases where the 
goods exported out of India are subjected t o export duty:  
Provided also that no refund of input tax credit shall be allowed, if the supplier of goods or services or 
both avails of drawback in respect of central tax or claims refund of the integrated tax paid on such 
supplies.  
(4) The application sh all be accompanied by — 
(a) such documentary evidence as may be prescribed to establish that a refund is due to the 
applicant; and  
(b) such documentary or other evidence (including the documents referred to in section 33) as the 
applicant may furnish to establish that the amount of tax and interest, if any, paid on such tax or any 
other amount paid in relation to which such refund is claimed was collected from, or paid by, him and 
the incidence of such tax and interest had not been passed on to any other person:  
Provided that where the amount claimed as refund is less than two lakh rupees, it shall not be 
necessary for the applicant to furnish any documentary and other evidences but he may file a declaration, 
based on the documentary or other evidences ava ilable with him, certifying that the incidence of such tax 
and interest had not been passed on to any other person.  
(5) If, on receipt of any such application, the proper officer is satisfied that the whole or part of the 
amount claimed as refund is refund able, he may make an order accordingly and the amount so determined 
shall be credited to the Fund referred to in section 57.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 5), the proper officer may, in the case of any 
claim for refund on account o f zero -rated supply of goods or services or both made by registered persons, 
other than such category of registered persons as may be notified by the Government on the 
recommendations of the Council, refund on a provisional basis, ninety per cent. of the t otal amount so 
claimed, excluding the amount of input tax credit provisionally accepted, in such manner and subject to 
such conditions, limitations and safeguards as may be prescribed and thereafter make an order under          
sub-section ( 5) for final se ttlement of the refund claim after due verification of documents furnished by 
the applicant.  
(7) The proper officer shall issue the order under sub -section ( 5) within sixty days from the date of 
receipt of application complete in all respects.  
(8) Notwiths tanding anything contained in sub -section ( 5), the refundable amount shall, instead of 
being credited to the Fund, be paid to the applicant, if such amount is relatable to — 
(a) refund of tax paid on 1[export]  of goods or services or both or on inputs or in put services used 
in making such 1[exports] ; 
(b) refund of unutilised input tax credit under sub -section ( 3); 
(c) refund  of tax paid on a supply which is not provided, either wholly or partially, and for which 
invoice has not been issued, or where a refund voucher has been issued;  
(d) refund of tax in pursuance of section 77;  
(e) the tax and interest, if any, or any other a mount paid by the applicant, if he had not passed on 
the incidence of such tax and interest to any other person; or  
(f) the tax or interest borne by such other class of applicants as the Government may, on the 
recommendations of the Council, by notificatio n, specify.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 23 for ― zero-rated supplies ‖ (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   49 
 (9) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any judgment, decree, order or direction of 
the Appellate Tribunal or any court or in any other provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or 
in any other law for the time being  in force, no refund shall be made except in accordance with the 
provisions of sub -section ( 8). 
(10) Where any refund is due under sub -section ( 3) to a registered person who has defaulted in 
furnishing any return or who is required to pay any tax, interest  or penalty, which has not been stayed by 
any court, Tribunal or Appellate Authority by the specified date, the proper officer may — 
(a) withhold payment of refund due until the said person has furnished the return or paid the tax, 
interest or penalty, as t he case may be;  
(b) deduct from the refund due, any tax, interest, penalty, fee or any other amount which the 
taxable person is liable to pay but which remains unpaid under this Act or under the existing law . 
Explanation .––For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression ―specified date‖ shall mean the 
last date for filing an appeal under this Act.  
(11) Where an order giving rise to a refund is the subject matter of an appeal or further proceedings or 
where any other proceedings under this Act is pendin g and the Commissioner is of the opinion that grant of 
such refund is likely to adversely affect the revenue in the said appeal or other proceedings on account of 
malfeasance or fraud committed, he may, after giving the taxable person an opportunity of bei ng heard, 
withhold the refund till such time as he may determine.  
(12) Where a refund is withheld under sub -section ( 11), the taxable person shall, notwithstanding 
anything contained in section 56, be entitled to interest at such rate not exceeding six per  cent. as may be 
notified on the recommendations of the Council, if as a result of the appeal or further proceedings he 
becomes entitled to refund.  
(13) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section, the amount of advance tax 
deposited  by a casual taxable person or a non -resident taxable person under sub -section ( 2) of section 27, 
shall not be refunded unless such person has, in respect of the entire period for which the certificate of 
registration granted to him had remained in force, furnished all the returns required under section 39.  
(14) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no refund under sub -section ( 5) or sub -section ( 6) 
shall be paid to an applicant, if the amount is less than one thousand rupees.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, –– 
(1) ―refund‖ includes refund of tax paid on zero -rated supplies of goods or services or both or on 
inputs or input services used in making such zero -rated supplies, or refund of tax on the supply of 
goods regarded as deemed  exports, or refund of unutilised input tax credit as provided under sub -
section ( 3). 
(2) ―relevant date‖ means — 
(a) in the case of goods exported out of India where a refund of tax paid is available in 
respect of goods themselves or, as the case may be, the inputs or input services used in such 
goods, –– 
(i) if the goods are exported by sea or air, the date on which the ship or the aircraft in 
which such goods are loaded, leaves India; or  
(ii) if the goods are exported by land, the date on which such goods  pass the frontier; or  
(iii) if the goods are exported by post, the date of despatch of goods by the Post Office 
concerned to a place outside India;  
(b) in the case of supply of goods regarded as deemed exports where a refund of tax paid is 
available in re spect of the goods, the date on which the return relating to such deemed exports is 
furnished;  50 
 (c) in the case of services exported out of India where a refund of tax paid is available in 
respect of services themselves or, as the case may be, the inputs or  input services used in such 
services, the date of –– 
(i) receipt of payment in convertible foreign exchange, 1[or in Indian rupees wherever 
permitted by the Reserve Bank of India ] where the supply of services had been completed 
prior to the receipt of such  payment; or  
(ii) issue of invoice, where payment for the services had been received in advance prior to 
the date of issue of the invoice;  
(d) in case where the tax becomes refundable as a consequence of judgment, decree, order or 
direction of the Appellate Authority, Appellate Tribunal or any court, the date of communication of such 
judgment, decree, order or direction;  
2[(e) in the case of refund of unutilised input tax credit under  clause ( ii) of the first proviso 
to sub -section ( 3), the due date  for furnishing  of return under section 39 for the period in which 
such claim for refund  arises; ]  
(f) in the case where tax is paid provisionally under this Act or the rules made thereunder, the date 
of adjustment of tax after the final assessment thereof ; 
(g) in the case of a person, other than the supplier, the date of receipt of goods or services or 
both by such person; and  
(h) in any other case, the date of payment of tax.  
55. Refund in certain cases. ––The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by 
notification, specify any specialised agency of the United Nations Organisation or any Multilateral Financial 
Institution and Organisation notified under the United Nations (Privileges and Immun ities) Act, 1947 (46 of 
1947), Consulate or Embassy of foreign countries and any other person or class of persons as may be specified in 
this behalf, who shall, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, be entitled to claim a 
refund  of taxes paid on the notified supplies of goods or services or both received by them.  
56. Interest on delayed refunds. ––If any tax ordered to be refunded under sub -section ( 5) of section 54 
to any applicant is not refunded within sixty days from the date of receipt of application under sub -section ( 1) 
of that section, interest at such rate not exceeding six per cent. as may be specified in the notification issued 
by the Government on the recommendations of the Council shall be payable in respect of such r efund from 
the date immediately after the expiry of sixty days from the date of receipt of application under the said sub -
section till the date of refund of such tax:  
Provided that where any claim of refund arises from an order passed by an adjudicating au thority or 
Appellate Authority or Appellate Tribunal or court which has attained finality and the same is not refunded 
within sixty days from the date of receipt of application filed consequent to such order, interest at such rate not 
exceeding nine per ce nt. as may be notified by the Government on the recommendations of the Council shall be 
payable in respect of such refund from the date immediately after the expiry of sixty days from the date of 
receipt of application till the date of refund.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this section, where any order of refund is made by an Appellate 
Authority, Appellate Tribunal or any court against an order of the proper officer under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 54, the order passed by the Appellate Authority, Appel late Tribunal or by the court shall be 
deemed to be an order passed under the said sub -section ( 5). 
57. Consumer Welfare Fund. —The Government shall constitute a Fund, to be called the Consumer 
Welfare Fund and there shall be credited to the Fund, — 
(a) the amount referred to in sub -section ( 5) of section 54;  
(b) any income from investment of the amount credited to the Fund; and  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   
2. Subs. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 23 (w.e.f.. 1 -2-2019).   51 
 (c) such other monies received by it,  
in such manner as may be prescribed.  
58. Utilisation of Fund. —(1) All sums credited to the Fu nd shall be utilised by the Government for 
the welfare of the consumers in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Government or the authority specified by it shall maintain proper and separate account and 
other relevant records in relation to the Fund a nd prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as 
may be prescribed in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
CHAPTER XII  
ASSESSMENT  
59. Self -assessment. —Every registered person shall self -assess the taxes payable under t his Act and 
furnish a return for each tax period as specified under section 39.  
60. Provisional assessment. —(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), where the taxable person 
is unable to determine the value of goods or services or both or determine the rate of tax applicable thereto, 
he may request the proper officer in writing giving reasons for payment of tax on a provisional basis and the 
proper officer shall pass an order, within a period not later than ninety days from the date of rece ipt of such 
request, allowing payment of tax on provisional basis at such rate or on such value as may be specified by 
him. 
(2) The payment of tax on provisional basis may be allowed, if the taxable person executes a bond in such 
form as may be prescribed,  and with such surety or security as the proper officer may deem fit, binding the 
taxable person for payment of the difference between the amount of tax as may be finally assessed and the 
amount of tax provisionally assessed.  
(3) The proper officer shall, within a period not exceeding six months from the date of the 
communication of the order issued under sub -section ( 1), pass the final assessment order after taking into 
account such information as may be required for finalizing the assessment:  
Provided tha t the period specified in this sub -section may, on sufficient cause being shown and for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, be extended by the Joint Commissioner or Additional Commissioner 
for a further period not exceeding six months and by the Commissione r for such further period not 
exceeding four years.  
(4) The registered person shall be liable to pay interest on any tax payable on the supply of goods or 
services or both under provisional assessment but not paid on the due date specified under sub -sectio n (7) of 
section 39 or the rules made thereunder, at the rate specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 50, from the first 
day after the due date of payment of tax in respect of the said supply of goods or services or both till the date of 
actual payment,  whether such amount is paid before or after the issuance of order for final assessment.  
(5) Where the registered person is entitled to a refund consequent to the order of final assessment 
under sub -section ( 3), subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 8) of section 54, interest shall be paid on 
such refund as provided in section 56.  
61. Scrutiny of returns .––(1) The proper officer may scrutinize the return and related particulars furnished 
by the registered person to verify the correctness of the return a nd inform him of the discrepancies noticed, if 
any, in such manner as may be prescribed and seek his explanation thereto.  
(2) In case the explanation is found acceptable, the registered person shall be informed accordingly 
and no further action shall be taken in this regard.  
(3) In case no satisfactory explanation is furnished within a period of thirty days of being informed by 
the proper officer or such further period as may be permitted by him or where the registered person, after 
accepting the discrepa ncies, fails to take the corrective measure in his return for the month in which the 
discrepancy is accepted, the proper officer may initiate appropriate action including those under section 65 
or section 66 or section 67, or proceed to determine the tax a nd other dues under section 73 or section 74.  52 
 62. Assessment of non -filers of returns .––(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in 
section 73 or section 74, where a registered person fails to furnish the return under section 39 or section 45 , 
even after the service of a notice under section 46, the proper officer may proceed to assess the tax liability of 
the said person to the best of his judgment taking into account all the relevant material which is available or 
which he has gathered and i ssue an assessment order within a period of five years from the date specified 
under section 44 for furnishing of the annual return for the financial year to which the tax not paid relates.  
(2) Where the registered person furnishes a valid return within th irty days of the service of the 
assessment order under sub -section ( 1), the said assessment order shall be deemed to have been 
withdrawn but the liability for payment of interest under sub -section ( 1) of section 50 or for payment of 
late fee under section 47 shall continue.  
63. Assessment of unregistered persons .––Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in 
section 73 or section 74, where a taxable person fails to obtain registration even though liable to do so or 
whose registration has been cance lled under sub -section ( 2) of section 29 but who was liable to pay tax, 
the proper officer may proceed to assess the tax liability of such taxable person to the best of his judgment 
for the relevant tax periods and issue an assessment order within a period  of five years from the date 
specified under section 44 for furnishing of the annual return for the financial year to which the tax not 
paid relates:  
Provided that no such assessment order shall be passed without giving the person an opportunity of 
being h eard.  
64. Summary assessment in certain special cases .––(1) The proper officer may, on any evidence 
showing a tax liability of a person coming to his notice, with the previous permission of Additional 
Commissioner or Joint Commissioner, proceed to assess t he tax liability of such person to protect the 
interest of revenue and issue an assessment order, if he has sufficient grounds to believe that any delay in 
doing so may adversely affect the interest of revenue:  
Provided that where the taxable person to who m the liability pertains is not ascertainable and such 
liability pertains to supply of goods, the person in charge of such goods shall be deemed to be the taxable 
person liable to be assessed and liable to pay tax and any other amount due under this sectio n. 
(2) On an application made by the taxable person within thirty days from the date of receipt of order 
passed under sub -section ( 1) or on his own motion, if the Additional Commissioner or Joint 
Commissioner considers that such order is erroneous, he may withdraw such order and follow the 
procedure laid down in section 73 or section 74.  
CHAPTER XIII  
AUDIT  
65. Audit by tax authorities. ––(1) The Commissioner or any officer authorised  by him, by way of a 
general or a specific order, may undertake audit of any registered person for such period, at such 
frequency and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The officers referred to in sub -section ( 1) may conduct audit at the place of bus iness of the 
registered person or in their office.  
(3) The registered person shall be informed by way of a notice not less than fifteen working days 
prior to the conduct of audit in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(4) The audit under sub -section ( 1) shal l be completed within a period of three months from the date 
of commencement of the audit:  
Provided that where the Commissioner is satisfied that audit in respect of such registered person 
cannot be completed within three months, he may, for the reasons to  be recorded in writing, extend the 
period by a further period not exceeding six months.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression ―commencement of audit‖ shall 
mean the date on which the records and other documents, called for by the tax authorities, are made 
available by the registered person or the actual institution of audit at the place of business, whichever is 
later.  53 
 (5) During the course of audit, the authorised officer may require the registered person, — 
(i) to afford him t he necessary facility to verify the books of account or other documents as he 
may require;  
(ii) to furnish such information as he may require and render assistance for timely completion of 
the audit.  
(6) On conclusion of audit, the proper officer shall, wi thin thirty days, inform the registered person, 
whose records are audited, about the findings, his rights and obligations and the reasons for such findings.  
(7) Where the audit conducted under sub -section ( 1) results in detection of tax not paid or short p aid 
or erroneously refunded, or input tax credit wrongly availed or utilised, the proper officer may initiate 
action under section 73 or section 74.  
66. Special audit. ––(1) If at any stage of scrutiny, inquiry, investigation or any other proceedings before  
him, any officer not below the rank of Assistant Commissioner, having regard to the nature and complexity of 
the case and the interest of revenue, is of the opinion that the value has not been correctly declared or the credit 
availed is not within the nor mal limits, he may, with the prior approval of the Commissioner, direct such 
registered person by a communication in writing to get his records including books of account examined and 
audited by a chartered accountant or a cost accountant as may be nominat ed by the Commissioner.  
(2) The chartered accountant or cost accountant so nominated shall, within the period of ninety days, 
submit a report of such audit duly signed and certified by him to the said Assistant Commissioner 
mentioning therein such other pa rticulars as may be specified:  
Provided that the Assistant Commissioner may, on an application made to him in this behalf by the 
registered person or the chartered accountant or cost accountant or for any material and sufficient reason, 
extend the said per iod by a further period of ninety days.  
(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall have effect notwithstanding that the accounts of the 
registered person have been audited under any other provisions of this Act or any other law for the time 
being in force . 
(4) The registered person shall be given an opportunity of being heard in respect of any material 
gathered on the basis of special audit under sub -section ( 1) which is proposed to be used in any proceedings 
against him under this Act or the rules made thereunder.  
(5) The expenses of the examination and audit of records under sub -section ( 1), including the 
remuneration of such chartered accountant or cost accountant, shall be determined and paid by the 
Commissioner and such determination shall be final.  
(6) Where the special audit conducted under sub -section ( 1) results in detection of tax not paid or 
short paid or erroneously refunded, or input tax credit wrongly availed or utilised, the proper officer may 
initiate action under section 73 or section 74.  
CHAPTER XIV  
INSPECTION, SEARCH, SEIZURE AND ARREST  
67. Power of inspection, search and seizure .––(1) Where the proper officer, not below the rank of 
Joint Commissioner, has reasons to believe that –– 
(a) a taxable person has suppressed any transaction relating to supply of goods or services or both or 
the stock of goods in hand, or has claimed input tax credit in excess of his entitlement under this Act or 
has indulged in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder to  evade 
tax under this Act; or  
(b) any person engaged in the business of transporting goods or an owner or operator of a 
warehouse or a godown or any other place is keeping goods which have escaped payment of tax or 
has kept his accounts or goods in such a manner as is likely to cause evasion of tax payable under this 
Act, 54 
 he may authorise in writing any other officer of central tax to inspect any places of business of the taxable 
person or the persons engaged in the business of transporting goods or the own er or the operator of 
warehouse or godown or any other place.  
(2) Where the proper officer, not below the rank of Joint Commissioner, either pursuant to an inspection 
carried out under sub -section ( 1) or otherwise, has reasons to believe that any goods lia ble to confiscation or 
any documents or books or things, which in his opinion shall be useful for or relevant to any proceedings under 
this Act, are secreted in any place, he may authorise in writing any other officer of central tax to search and 
seize or may himself search and seize such goods, documents or books or things:  
Provided that where it is not practicable to seize any such goods, the proper officer, or any officer 
authorised by him, may serve on the owner or the custodian of the goods an order th at he shall not 
remove, part with, or otherwise deal with the goods except with the previous permission of such officer:  
Provided further that the documents or books or things so seized shall be retained by such officer only 
for so long as may be necessary  for their examination and for any inquiry or proceedings under this Act.  
(3) The documents, books or things referred to in sub -section ( 2) or any other documents, books or 
things produced by a taxable person or any other person, which have not been relied  upon for the issue of 
notice under this Act or the rules made thereunder, shall be returned to such person within a period not 
exceeding thirty days of the issue of the said notice.  
(4) The officer authorised under sub -section ( 2) shall have the power to seal or break open the door of any 
premises or to break open any almirah , electronic devices, box, receptacle in which any goods, accounts, 
registers or documents of the person are suspected to be concealed, where access to such premises, almirah , 
electron ic devices, box or receptacle is denied.  
(5) The person from whose custody any documents are seized under sub -section ( 2) shall be entitled to 
make copies thereof or take extracts therefrom in the presence of an authorised  officer at such place and 
time as such officer may indicate in this behalf except where making such copies or taking such extracts 
may, in the opinion of the proper officer, prejudicially affect the investigation.  
(6) The goods so seized under sub -section  (2) shall be released, on a provisional basis, upon 
execution of a bond and furnishing of a security, in such manner and of such quantum, respectively, as 
may be prescribed or on payment of applicable tax, interest and penalty payable, as the case may be.  
(7) Where any goods are seized under sub -section ( 2) and no notice in respect thereof is given within 
six months of the seizure of the goods, the goods shall be returned to the person from whose possession 
they were seized:  
Provided that the period of six  months may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended by the 
proper officer for a further period not exceeding six months.  
(8) The Government may, having regard to the perishable or hazardous nature of any goods, 
depreciation in the value of the goods with the passage of time, constraints of storage space for the goods 
or any other relevant considerations, by notification, specify the goods or class of goods which shall, as 
soon as may be after its seizure under sub -section ( 2), be disposed of by the pr oper officer in such manner 
as may be prescribed.  
(9) Where any goods, being goods specified under sub -section ( 8), have been seized by a proper 
officer, or any officer authorised by him under sub -section ( 2), he shall prepare an inventory of such 
goods in  such manner as may be prescribed.  
(10) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), relating to search and seizure, 
shall, so far as may be, apply to search and seizure under this section subject to the modification that sub -
section  (5) of section 165 of the said Code shall have effect as if for the word ―Magistrate‖, wherever it 
occurs, the word ―Commissioner‖ were substituted.  
(11) Where the proper officer has reasons to believe that any person has evaded or is attempting to evade 
the payment of any tax, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, seize the accounts, registers or 
documents of such person produced before him and shall grant a receipt for the same, and shall retain the same 55 
 for so long as may be necessary in connec tion with any proceedings under this Act or the rules made 
thereunder for prosecution.  
(12) The Commissioner or an officer authorised by him may cause purchase of any goods or services 
or both by any person authorised by him from the business premises of a ny taxable person, to check the 
issue of tax invoices or bills of supply by such taxable person, and on return of goods so purchased by 
such officer, such taxable person or any person in charge of the business premises shall refund the amount 
so paid towar ds the goods after cancelling any tax invoice or bill of supply issued earlier.  
68. Inspection of goods in movement .––(1) The Government may require the person in charge of a 
conveyance carrying any consignment of goods of value exceeding such amount as ma y be specified to 
carry with him such documents and such devices as may be prescribed.  
(2) The details of documents required to be carried under sub -section ( 1) shall be validated in such 
manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) Where any conveyance referred to in  sub-section ( 1) is intercepted by the proper officer at any 
place, he may require the person in charge of the said conveyance to produce the documents prescribed 
under the said sub -section and devices for verification, and the said person shall be liable to produce the 
documents and devices and also allow the inspection of goods.  
69. Power to arrest .––(1) Where the Commissioner has reasons to believe that a person has 
committed any offence specified in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) or clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 132 which is punishable under clause ( i) or ( ii) of sub -section ( 1), or sub -section ( 2) of the said 
section, he may, by order, authorise any officer of central tax to arrest such person.  
(2) Where a person is arrested under sub-section ( 1) for an offence specified under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 132, the officer authorised to arrest the person shall inform such person of the grounds of arrest and 
produce him before a Magistrate within twenty -four hours.  
(3) Subject to the p rovisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973(2 of 1974), –– 
(a) where a person is arrested under sub -section ( 1) for any offence specified under                         
sub-section ( 4) of section 132, he shall be admitted to bail or in default of bail,  forwarded to the 
custody of the Magistrate;  
(b) in the case of a non -cognizable and bailable offence, the Deputy Commissioner or the Assistant 
Commissioner shall, for the purpose of releasing an arrested person on bail or otherwise, have the same 
powers a nd be subject to the same provisions as an officer -in-charge of a police station.  
70. Power to summon persons to give evidence and produce documents. ––(1) The proper officer 
under this Act shall have power to summon any person whose attendance he considers  necessary either to 
give evidence or to produce a document or any other thing in any inquiry in the same manner, as provided 
in the case of a civil court under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).  
(2) Every such inquiry referre d to in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be a ―judicial proceedings‖ 
within the meaning of section 193 and section 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
71. Access to business premises .––(1) Any officer under this Act, authorised  by the proper officer not 
below the rank of Joint Commissioner, shall have access to any place of business of a registered person to 
inspect books of account, documents, computers, computer programs, computer software whether installed in 
a computer or ot herwise and such other things as he may require and which may be available at such place, 
for the purposes of carrying out any audit, scrutiny, verification and checks as may be necessary to safeguard 
the interest of revenue.  
(2) Every person in charge of place referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall, on demand, make available to 
the officer authorised under sub -section ( 1) or the audit party deputed by the proper officer or a cost 
accountant or chartered accountant nominated under section 66 — 
(i) such  records as prepared or maintained by the registered person and declared to the proper 
officer in such manner as may be prescribed;  56 
 (ii) trial balance or its equivalent;  
(iii) statements of annual financial accounts, duly audited, wherever required;  
(iv) cost audit report, if any, under section 148 of the Companies Act, 2013(18 of 2013);  
(v) the income -tax audit report, if any, under section 44AB of the Income -tax Act, 1961              
(43 of 1961); and  
(vi) any other relevant record,  
for the scrutiny by t he officer or audit party or the chartered accountant or cost accountant within a period 
not exceeding fifteen working days from the day when such demand is made, or such further period as 
may be allowed by the said officer or the audit party or the charte red accountant or cost accountant.  
72. Officers to assist proper officers. ––(1) All officers of Police, Railways, Customs, and those 
officers engaged in the collection of land revenue, including village officers, officers of State tax and 
officers of Union  territory tax shall assist the proper officers in the implementation of this Act.  
(2) The Government may, by notification, empower and require any other class of officers to assist 
the proper officers in the implementation of this Act when called upon to do so by the Commissioner.  
CHAPTER XV  
DEMANDS AND RECOVERY  
73. Determination of tax not paid or short paid or erroneously refunded or input tax credit 
wrongly availed or utilised for any reason other than fraud or any wilful -misstatement or suppression 
of facts .––(1) Where it appears to the proper officer that any tax has not been paid or short paid or 
erroneously refunded, or where input tax credit has been wrongly availed or utilised for any reason, other 
than the reason of fraud or any wilful -misstatemen t or suppression of facts to evade tax, he shall serve notice 
on the person chargeable with tax which has not been so paid or which has been so short paid or to whom 
the refund has erroneously been made, or who has wrongly availed or utilised input tax cre dit, requiring him 
to show cause as to why he should not pay the amount specified in the notice along with interest payable 
thereon under section 50 and a penalty leviable under the provisions of this Act or the rules made 
thereunder.  
(2) The proper officer shall issue the notice under sub -section ( 1) at least three months prior to the 
time limit specified in sub -section ( 10) for issuance of order.  
(3) Where a notice has been issued for any period under sub -section ( 1), the proper officer may serve 
a statement, containing the details of tax not paid or short paid or erroneously refunded or input tax credit 
wrongly availed or utilised for such periods other than those covered under sub -section ( 1), on the person 
chargeable with tax.  
(4) The service of s uch statement shall be deemed to be service of notice on such person under             
sub-section ( 1), subject to the condition that the grounds relied upon for such tax periods other than those 
covered under sub -section ( 1) are the same as are mentioned in the earlier notice.  
(5) The person chargeable with tax may, before service of notice under sub -section ( 1) or, as the case 
may be, the statement under sub -section ( 3), pay the amount of tax along with interest payable thereon 
under section 50 on the bas is of his own ascertainment of such tax or the tax as ascertained by the proper 
officer and inform the proper officer in writing of such payment.  
(6) The proper officer, on receipt of such information, shall not serve any notice under sub -section ( 1) 
or, as the case may be, the statement under sub -section ( 3), in respect of the tax so paid or any penalty 
payable under the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder.  
(7) Where the proper officer is of the opinion that the amount paid under sub -sectio n (5) falls short of 
the amount actually payable, he shall proceed to issue the notice as provided for in sub -section ( 1) in 
respect of such amount which falls short of the amount actually payable.  
(8) Where any person chargeable with tax under sub -section  (1) or sub -section ( 3) pays the said tax 
along with interest payable under section 50 within thirty days of issue of show cause notice, no penalty 
shall be payable and all proceedings in respect of the said notice shall be deemed to be concluded.  57 
 (9) The proper officer shall, after considering the representation, if any, made by person chargeable 
with tax, determine the amount of tax, interest and a penalty equivalent to ten per cent. of tax or ten 
thousand rupees, whichever is higher, due from such person  and issue an order.  
(10) The proper officer shall issue the order under sub -section ( 9) within three years from the due date 
for furnishing of annual return for the financial year to which the tax not paid or short paid or input tax 
credit wrongly availed  or utilised relates to or within three years from the date of erroneous refund.  
(11) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 6) or sub -section ( 8), penalty under          
sub-section ( 9) shall be payable where any amount of self -assessed tax or  any amount collected as tax has 
not been paid within a period of thirty days from the due date of payment of such tax.  
74. Determination of tax not paid or short paid or erroneously refunded or input tax credit 
wrongly availed or utilised by reason of fra ud or any wilful -misstatement or suppression of facts .––(1) 
Where it appears to the proper officer that any tax has not been paid or short paid or erroneously refunded or 
where input tax credit has been wrongly availed or utilised by reason of fraud, or any wilful -misstatement or 
suppression of facts to evade tax , he shall serve notice on the person chargeable with tax which has not been 
so paid or which has been so short paid or to whom the refund has erroneously been made, or who has 
wrongly availed or utilised input tax credit, requiring him to show cause as to  why he should not pay the 
amount specified in the notice along with interest payable thereon under section 50 and a penalty equivalent 
to the tax specified in the notice.  
(2) The proper officer shall issue the notice under sub -section ( 1) at least six mon ths prior to the time 
limit specified in sub -section ( 10) for issuance of order.  
(3) Where a notice has been issued for any period under sub -section ( 1), the proper officer may serve 
a statement, containing the details of tax not paid or short paid or erro neously refunded or input tax credit 
wrongly availed or utilised for such periods other than those covered under sub -section ( 1), on the person 
chargeable with tax.  
(4) The service of statement under sub -section ( 3) shall be deemed to be service of notice under            
sub-section ( 1) of section 73, subject to the condition that the grounds relied upon in the said statement, 
except the ground of fraud, or any wilful -misstatement or suppression of facts to evade tax, for periods 
other than those covered u nder sub -section ( 1) are the same as are mentioned in the earlier notice.  
(5) The person chargeable with tax may, before service of notice under sub -section ( 1), pay the 
amount of tax along with interest payable under section 50 and a penalty equivalent to  fifteen per cent. of 
such tax on the basis of his own ascertainment of such tax or the tax as ascertained by the proper officer 
and inform the proper officer in writing of such payment.  
(6) The proper officer, on receipt of such information, shall not ser ve any notice under                     
sub-section ( 1), in respect of the tax so paid or any penalty payable under the provisions of this Act or the 
rules made thereunder.  
(7) Where the proper officer is of the opinion that the amount paid under sub-section ( 5) falls short of 
the amount actually payable, he shall proceed to issue the notice as provided for in sub -section ( 1) in 
respect of such amount which falls short of the amount actually payable.  
(8) Where any person chargeable with tax under s ub-section ( 1) pays the said tax along with interest 
payable under section 50 and a penalty equivalent to twenty -five per cent. of such tax within thirty days 
of issue of the notice, all proceedings in respect of the said notice shall be deemed to be concl uded.  
(9) The proper officer shall, after considering the representation, if any, made by the person 
chargeable with tax, determine the amount of tax, interest and penalty due from such person and issue an 
order.  
(10) The proper officer shall issue the ord er under sub -section ( 9) within a period of five years from 
the due date for furnishing of annual return for the financial year to which the tax not paid or short paid or 
input tax credit wrongly availed or utilised relates to or within five years from the  date of erroneous 
refund.  
(11) Where any person served with an order issued under sub -section ( 9) pays the tax along with 
interest payable thereon under section 50 and a penalty equivalent to fifty per cent. of such tax within 58 
 thirty days of communication  of the order, all proceedings in respect of the said notice shall be deemed to 
be concluded.  
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of section 73 and this section, — 
(i) the expression ―all proceedings in respect of the said notice‖ shall not include proceedings 
under section 132;  
(ii) where the notice under the same proceedings is issued to the main person liable to pay tax and 
some other persons, and such proceedings against the main person have been concluded under section 
73 or section 74, the proceedings agai nst all the persons liable to pay penalty under sections 122, 125, 
129 and 130 are deemed to be concluded.  
Explanation 2.––For the purposes of this Act, the expression ―suppression‖ shall mean non -declaration 
of facts or information which a taxable person is required to declare in the return, statement, report or any 
other document furnished under this Act or the rules made thereunder, or failure to furnish any information 
on being asked for, in writing, by the proper officer.  
75. General provisions relatin g to determination of tax. —(1) Where the service of notice or 
issuance of order is stayed by an order of a court or Appellate Tribunal, the period of such stay shall be 
excluded in computing the period specified in sub -sections ( 2) and ( 10) of section 73 o r sub -sections ( 2) 
and ( 10) of section 74, as the case may be.  
(2) Where any Appellate Authority or Appellate Tribunal or court concludes that the notice issued 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 74 is not sustainable for the reason that the charges of fraud  or any 
willful -misstatement or suppression of facts to evade tax has not been established against the person to 
whom the notice was issued, the proper officer shall determine the tax payable by such person, deeming 
as if the notice were issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 73.  
(3) Where any order is required to be issued in pursuance of the direction of the Appellate Authority 
or Appellate Tribunal or a court, such order shall be issued within two years from the date of 
communication of the said directi on. 
(4) An opportunity of hearing shall be granted where a request is received in writing from the person 
chargeable with tax or penalty, or where any adverse decision is contemplated against such person.  
(5) The proper officer shall, if sufficient cause i s shown by the person chargeable with tax, grant time 
to the said person and adjourn the hearing for reasons to be recorded in writing:  
Provided that no such adjournment shall be granted for more than three times to a person during the 
proceedings.  
(6) The  proper officer, in his order, shall set out the relevant facts and the basis of his decision.  
(7) The amount of tax, interest and penalty demanded in the order shall not be in excess of the amount 
specified in the notice and no demand shall be confirmed o n the grounds other than the grounds specified 
in the notice.  
(8) Where the Appellate Authority or Appellate Tribunal or court modifies the amount of tax 
determined by the proper officer, the amount of interest and penalty shall stand modified accordingly,  
taking into account the amount of tax so modified.  
(9) The interest on the tax short paid or not paid shall be payable whether or not specified in the order 
determining the tax liability.  59 
 (10) The adjudication proceedings shall be deemed to be concluded, if the order is not issued within 
three years as provided for in sub -section ( 10) of section 73 or within five years as provided for in         
sub-section ( 10) of section 74.  
(11) An issue on which the Appellate Authority or the Appellate Tribunal or the High Court has given 
its decision which is prejudicial to the interest of revenue in some other proceedings and an appeal to the 
Appellate Tribunal or the High Court or the Supreme Court against such decision of the Appellate Authority 
or the Appellate Tri bunal or the High Court is pending, the period spent between the date of the decision of 
the Appellate Authority and that of the Appellate Tribunal or the date of decision of the Appellate 
Tribunal and that of the High Court or the date of the decision of the High Court and that of the Supreme 
Court shall be excluded in computing the period referred to in sub -section ( 10) of section 73 or                
sub-section ( 10) of section 74 where proceedings are initiated by way of issue of a show cause notice 
under the said sections.  
(12) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 73 or section 74, where any amount of self -assessed 
tax in accordance with a return furnished under section 39 remains unpaid, either wholly or partly, or any 
amount of interest payable on such tax remains unpaid, the same shall be recovered under the provisions of 
section 79.  
(13) Where any penalty is imposed under section 73 or section 74, no penalty for the same act or 
omission shall be imposed on the same person under any othe r provision of this Act.  
76. Tax collected but not paid to Government .—(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in any order or direction of any Appellate Authority or Appellate Tribunal or court or in any 
other provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or any other law for the time being in force, 
every person who has collected from any other person any amount as representing the tax under this Act, 
and has not paid the said amount to the Government, shall forthwith pay the said amo unt to the 
Government, irrespective of whether the supplies in respect of which such amount was collected are 
taxable or not.  
(2) Where any amount is required to be paid to the Government under sub -section ( 1), and which has 
not been so paid, the proper of ficer may serve on the person liable to pay such amount a notice requiring 
him to show cause as to why the said amount as specified in the notice, should not be paid by him to the 
Government and why a penalty equivalent to the amount specified in the notic e should not be imposed on 
him under the provisions of this Act.  
(3) The proper officer shall, after considering the representation, if any, made by the person on whom 
the notice is served under sub -section ( 2), determine the amount due from such person an d thereupon 
such person shall pay the amount so determined.  
(4) The person referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall in addition to paying the amount referred to in         
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3) also be liable to pay interest thereon at the rate sp ecified under section 
50 from the date such amount was collected by him to the date such amount is paid by him to the 
Government.  
(5) An opportunity of hearing shall be granted where a request is received in writing from the person 
to whom the notice was i ssued to show cause.  
(6) The proper officer shall issue an order within one year from the date of issue of the notice.  
(7) Where the issuance of order is stayed by an order of the court or Appellate Tribunal, the period of 
such stay shall be excluded in co mputing the period of one year.  
(8) The proper officer, in his order, shall set out the relevant facts and the basis of his decision.  
(9) The amount paid to the Government under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3) shall be adjusted 
against the tax payable, if any, by the person in relation to the supplies referred to in sub -section ( 1). 60 
 (10) Where any surplus is left after the adjustment under sub -section ( 9), the amount of such surplus 
shall either be credited to the Fund or refunded to the person who has b orne the incidence of such amount.  
(11) The person who has borne the incidence of the amount, may apply for the refund of the same in 
accordance with the provisions of section 54.  
77. Tax wrongfully collected and paid to Central Government or State Governm ent.—(1) A 
registered person who has paid the central tax and State tax or, as the case may be , the central tax and the 
Union territory tax on a transaction considered by him to be an intra -State supply, but which is 
subsequently held to be an inter -State supply, shall be refunded the amount of taxes so paid in such 
manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.  
(2) A registered person who has paid integrated tax on a transaction considered by him to be an         
inter-State supply, but which is subsequently held to be an intra -State supply, shall not be required to pay 
any interest on the amount of central tax and State tax or, as the case may be , the central tax and the 
Union territory tax payable.  
78. Initiation of recovery proceedings. —Any amount payable by a taxable person in pursuance of 
an order passed under this Act shall be paid by such person within a period of three months from the date 
of service of such order failing which recovery proceedings shall be initiated:  
Provided that where  the proper officer considers it expedient in the interest of revenue, he may, for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, require the said taxable person to make such payment within such period less 
than a period of three months as may be specified by him.  
79. Recovery of tax. —(1) Where any amount payable by a person to the Government under any of 
the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder is not paid, the proper officer shall proceed to 
recover the amount by one or more of the following modes, nam ely:–– 
(a) the proper officer may deduct or may require any other specified officer to deduct the amount 
so payable from any money owing to such person which may be under the control of the proper 
officer or such other specified officer;  
(b) the proper off icer may recover or may require any other specified officer to recover the amount so 
payable by detaining and selling any goods belonging to such person which are under the control of the 
proper officer or such other specified officer;  
(c) (i) the proper o fficer may, by a notice in writing, require any other person from whom money is 
due or may become due to such person or who holds or may subsequently hold money for or on account 
of such person, to pay to the Government either forthwith upon the money beco ming due or being held, or 
within the time specified in the notice not being before the money becomes due or is held, so much of the 
money as is sufficient to pay the amount due from such person or the whole of the money when it is equal 
to or less than th at amount;  
(ii) every person to whom the notice is issued under sub -clause ( i) shall be bound to comply with 
such notice, and in particular, where any such notice is issued to a post office, banking company or an 
insurer, it shall not be necessary to produ ce any pass book, deposit receipt, policy or any other 
document for the purpose of any entry, endorsement or the like being made before payment is made, 
notwithstanding any rule, practice or requirement to the contrary;  
(iii) in case the person to whom a n otice under sub -clause ( i) has been issued, fails to make the 
payment in pursuance thereof to the Government, he shall be deemed to be a defaulter in respect of 
the amount specified in the notice and all the consequences of this Act or the rules made there under 
shall follow;  
(iv) the officer issuing a notice under sub -clause ( i) may, at any time, amend or revoke such 
notice or extend the time for making any payment in pursuance of the notice;  
(v) any person making any payment in compliance with a notice issued under sub -clause ( i) shall be 
deemed to have made the payment under the authority of the person in default and such payment being 61 
 credited to the Government shall be deemed to constitute a good and sufficient discharge of the liability 
of such perso n to the person in default to the extent of the amount specified in the receipt;  
(vi) any person discharging any liability to the person in default after service on him of the notice 
issued under sub -clause ( i) shall be personally liable to the Government to the extent of the liability 
discharged or to the extent of the liability of the person in default for tax, interest and penalty, whichever is 
less; 
(vii) where a person on whom a notice is served under sub -clause ( i) proves to the satisfaction of 
the of ficer issuing the notice that the money demanded or any part thereof was not due to the person 
in default or that he did not hold any money for or on account of the person in default, at the time the 
notice was served on him, nor is the money demanded or a ny part thereof, likely to become due to the 
said person or be held for or on account of such person, nothing contained in this section shall be 
deemed to require the person on whom the notice has been served to pay to the Government any such 
money or part  thereof;  
(d) the proper officer may, in accordance with the rules to be made in this behalf, distrain any 
movable or immovable property belonging to or under the control of such person, and detain the same 
until the amount payable is paid; and in case, an y part of the said amount payable or of the cost of the 
distress or keeping of the property, remains unpaid for a period of thirty days next after any such distress, 
may cause the said property to be sold and with the proceeds of such sale, may satisfy the  amount payable 
and the costs including cost of sale remaining unpaid and shall render the surplus amount, if any, to such 
person;  
(e) the proper officer may prepare a certificate signed by him specifying the amount due from 
such person and send it to the Collector of the district in which such person owns any property or 
resides or carries on his business or to any officer authorised by the Government and the said 
Collector or the said officer, on receipt of such certificate, shall proceed to recover from such person 
the amount specified thereunder as if it were an arrear of land revenue;  
(f) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the 
proper officer may file an application to the appropriate Magistrate and su ch Magistrate shall proceed 
to recover from such person the amount specified thereunder as if it were a fine imposed by him.  
(2) Where the terms of any bond or other instrument executed under this Act or any rules or 
regulations made thereunder provide tha t any amount due under such instrument may be recovered in the 
manner laid down in sub -section ( 1), the amount may, without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, 
be recovered in accordance with the provisions of that sub -section.  
(3) Where any amount of  tax, interest or penalty is payable by a person to the Government under any 
of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder and which remains unpaid, the proper officer of 
State tax or Union territory tax, during the course of recovery of said tax arrears, may recover the amount 
from the said person as if it were an arrear of State tax or Union territory tax and credit the amount so 
recovered to the account of the Government.  
(4) Where the amount recovered under sub -section ( 3) is less than the amount due to the Central 
Government and State Government, the amount to be credited to the account of the respective 
Governments shall be in proportion to the amount due to each such Government.  
1[Explanation .––For the purposes of this section, the word p erson shall include  ―distinct persons‖ as  
referred to in sub -section ( 4) or, as the case may be,  sub-section ( 5) of section 25. ] 
80. Payment of tax and other amount in instalments. —On an application filed by a taxable person, 
the Commissioner may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the time for payment or allow payment of 
any amount due under this Act, other than the amount due as per the liability self -assessed in any ret urn, by 
                                                           
1. The explanation ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 24 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   62 
 such person in monthly instalments not exceeding twenty four, subject to payment of interest under section 50 
and subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed:  
Provided that where there is default in payment of any one instalment  on its due date, the whole 
outstanding balance payable on such date shall become due and payable forthwith and shall, without any 
further notice being served on the person, be liable for recovery.  
 81. Transfer of property to be void in certain cases. —Whe re a person, after any amount has 
become due from him, creates a charge on or parts with the property belonging to him or in his possession 
by way of sale, mortgage, exchange, or any other mode of transfer whatsoever of any of his properties in 
favour of a ny other person with the intention of defrauding the Government revenue, such charge or 
transfer shall be void as against any claim in respect of any tax or any other sum payable by the said 
person:  
Provided that, such charge or transfer shall not be void if it is made for adequate consideration, in 
good faith and without notice of the pendency of such proceedings under this Act or without notice of 
such tax or other sum payable by the said person, or with the previous permission of the proper officer.  
82. Tax to be first charge on property. —Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any 
law for the time being in force, save as otherwise provided in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 
(31 of 2016), any amount payable by a taxable person or an y other person on account of tax, interest or 
penalty which he is liable to pay to the Government shall be a first charge on the property of such taxable 
person or such person.  
83. Provisional attachment to protect revenue in certain cases. —(1) Where durin g the pendency of 
any proceedings under section 62 or section 63 or section 64 or section 67 or section 73 or section 74, the 
Commissioner is of the opinion that for the purpose of protecting the interest of the Government revenue, it 
is necessary so to do , he may, by order in writing attach provisionally any property, including bank account, 
belonging to the taxable person in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every such provisional attachment shall cease to have effect after the expiry of a period of one 
year from the date of the order made under sub -section ( 1). 
84. Continuation and validation of certain recovery proceedings. —Where any notice of demand in 
respect of any tax, penalty, interest or any other amount payable under this Act, (hereafter in t his section 
referred to as ―Government dues‖), is served upon any taxable person or any other person and any appeal or 
revision application is filed or any other proceedings is initiated in respect of such Government dues, then –– 
(a) where such Government dues are enhanced in such appeal, revision or other proceedings, the 
Commissioner shall serve upon the taxable person or any other person another notice of demand in 
respect of the amount by which such Government dues are enhanced and any recovery proceedi ngs in 
relation to such Government dues as are covered by the notice of demand served upon him before the 
disposal of such appeal, revision or other proceedings may, without the service of any fresh notice of 
demand, be continued from the stage at which su ch proceedings stood immediately before such 
disposal;  
(b) where such Government dues are reduced in such appeal, revision or in other proceedings –– 
(i) it shall not be necessary for the Commissioner to serve upon the taxable person a fresh 
notice of deman d; 
(ii) the Commissioner shall give intimation of such reduction to him and to the appropriate 
authority with whom recovery proceedings is pending;  
(iii) any recovery proceedings initiated on the basis of the demand served upon him prior to the 
disposal of  such appeal, revision or other proceedings may be continued in relation to the amount so 
reduced from the stage at which such proceedings stood immediately before such disposal.  
  63 
 CHAPTER XVI  
LIABILITY TO PAY IN CERTAIN CASES  
85. Liability in case of tran sfer of business. —(1) Where a taxable person, liable to pay tax under 
this Act, transfers his business in whole or in part, by sale, gift, lease, leave and license, hire or in any other 
manner whatsoever, the taxable person and the person to whom the business is so transferred shall, jointly 
and severally, be liable wholly or to the extent of such transfer, to pay the tax, interest or any penalty due 
from the taxable person up to the time of such transfer, whether such tax, interest or penalty has been  
determined before such transfer, but has remained unpaid or is determined thereafter.  
(2) Where the transferee of a business referred to in sub -section ( 1) carries on such business either 
in his own name or in some other name, he shall be liable to pay ta x on the supply of goods or services or 
both effected by him with effect from the date of such transfer and shall, if he is a registered person under 
this Act, apply within the prescribed time for amendment of his certificate of registration.  
86. Liability  of agent and principal. —Where an agent supplies or receives any taxable goods on 
behalf of his principal, such agent and his principal shall, jointly and severally, be liable to pay the tax 
payable on such goods under this Act.  
87. Liability in case of am algamation or merger of companies. —(1) When two or more companies 
are amalgamated or merged in pursuance of an order of court or of Tribunal or otherwise and the order is to 
take effect from a date earlier to the date of the order and any two or more of su ch companies have supplied 
or received any goods or services or both to or from each other during the period commencing on the date 
from which the order takes effect till the date of the order, then such transactions of supply and receipt shall 
be included  in the turnover of supply or receipt of the respective companies and they shall be liable to pay 
tax accordingly.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the said order, for the purposes of this Act, the said two or 
more companies shall be treated as di stinct companies for the period up to the date of the said order and 
the registration certificates of the said companies shall be cancelled with effect from the date of the said 
order.  
88. Liability in case of company in liquidation. —(1) When any company is being wound up 
whether under the orders of a court or Tribunal or otherwise, every person appointed as receiver of any 
assets of a company (hereafter in this section referred to as the ―liquidator‖), shall, within thirty days after 
his appointment, give  intimation of his appointment to the Commissioner.  
(2) The Commissioner shall, after making such inquiry or calling for such information as he may deem 
fit, notify the liquidator within three months from the date on which he receives intimation of the app ointment 
of the liquidator, the amount which in the opinion of the Commissioner would be sufficient to provide for any 
tax, interest or penalty which is then, or is likely thereafter to become, payable by the company.  
(3) When any private company is wound up and any tax, interest or penalty determined under this Act on 
the company for any period, whether before or in the course of or after its liquidation, cannot be recovered, 
then every person who was a director of such company at any time during the perio d for which the tax was due 
shall, jointly and severally, be liable for the payment of such tax, interest or penalty, unless he proves to the 
satisfaction of the Commissioner that such non -recovery cannot be attributed to any gross neglect, misfeasance 
or breach of duty on his part in relation to the affairs of the company.  
89. Liability of directors of private company. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013), where any tax, interest or penalty due from a private company in respect 
of any supply of goods or services or both for any period cannot be recovered, then, every person who was  a 
director of the private company during such period shall, jointly and severally, be liable for the payment of 
such tax, interest or penalty unless he proves that the non -recovery cannot be attributed to any gross 
neglect, misfeasance or breach of duty o n his part in relation to the affairs of the company.  
(2) Where a private company is converted into a public company and the tax, interest or penalty in 
respect of any supply of goods or services or both for any period during which such company was a priva te 64 
 company cannot be recovered before such conversion, then, nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall apply 
to any person who was a director of such private company in relation to any tax, interest or penalty in respect 
of such supply of goods or service s or both of such private company:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to any personal penalty imposed on 
such director.  
90. Liability of partners of firm to pay tax. —Notwithstanding any contract to the contrary and any 
other la w for the time being in force, where any firm is liable to pay any tax, interest or penalty under this 
Act, the firm and each of the partners of the firm shall, jointly and severally, be liable for such payment:  
Provided that where any partner retires from  the firm, he or the firm, shall intimate the date of 
retirement of the said partner to the Commissioner by a notice in that behalf in writing and such partner 
shall be liable to pay tax, interest or penalty due up to the date of his retirement whether det ermined or 
not, on that date:  
Provided further that if no such intimation is given within one month from the date of retirement, the 
liability of such partner under the first proviso shall continue until the date on which such intimation is 
received by the  Commissioner.  
91. Liability of guardians, trustees, etc. —Where the business in respect of which any tax, interest or 
penalty is payable under this Act is carried on by any guardian, trustee or agent of a minor or other 
incapacitated person on behalf of and for the benefit of such minor or other incapacitated person, the tax, 
interest or penalty shall be levied upon and recoverable from such guardian, trustee or agent in like manner 
and to the same extent as it would be determined and recoverable from any  such minor or other incapacitated 
person, as if he were a major or capacitated person and as if he were conducting the business himself, and all 
the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall apply accordingly.  
92. Liability of Court of War ds, etc.—Where the estate or any portion of the estate of a taxable person 
owning a business in respect of which any tax, interest or penalty is payable under this Act is under the control 
of the Court of Wards, the Administrator General, the Official Trus tee or any receiver or manager (including 
any person, whatever be his designation, who in fact manages the business) appointed by or under any order of 
a court, the tax, interest or penalty shall be levied upon and be recoverable from such Court of Wards, 
Administrator General, Official Trustee, receiver or manager in like manner and to the same extent as it would 
be determined and be recoverable from the taxable person as if he were conducting the business himself, and 
all the provisions of this Act or the  rules made thereunder shall apply accordingly.  
93. Special provisions regarding liability to pay tax, interest or penalty in certain               
cases. —(1) Save as otherwise provided in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016), 
where a pers on, liable to pay tax, interest or penalty under this Act, dies, then –– 
(a) if a business carried on by the person is continued after his death by his legal liability to pay 
tax, representative or any other person, such legal representative or other person , shall be               
liable to pay tax, interest or penalty due from such person under this Act; and  
(b) if the business carried on by the person is discontinued, whether before or after his death, his 
legal representative shall be liable to pay, out of the estate of the deceased, to the extent to which the 
estate is capable of meeting the charge, the tax, interest or penalty due from such person under this 
Act,  
whether such tax, interest or penalty has been determined before his death but has remaine d unpaid or is 
determined after his death.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016), where a 
taxable person, liable to pay tax, interest or penalty under this Act, is a Hindu Undivided Family or an 
association  of persons and the property of the Hindu Undivided Family or the association of persons is 
partitioned amongst the various members or groups of members, then, each member or group of members 
shall, jointly and severally, be liable to pay the tax, interest  or penalty due from the taxable person under this 
Act up to the time of the partition whether such tax, penalty or interest has been determined before partition 
but has remained unpaid or is determined after the partition.  65 
 (3) Save as otherwise provided i n the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016), where a 
taxable person, liable to pay tax, interest or penalty under this Act, is a firm, and the firm is dissolved, then, 
every person who was a partner shall, jointly and severally, be liable to pa y the tax, interest or penalty due 
from the firm under this Act up to the time of dissolution whether such tax, interest or penalty has been 
determined before the dissolution, but has remained unpaid or is determined after dissolution.  
(4) Save as otherwis e provided in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016), where a 
taxable person liable to pay tax, interest or penalty under this Act, –– 
(a) is the guardian of a ward on whose behalf the business is carried on by the guardian; or  
(b) is a trustee who carries on the business under a trust for a beneficiary,  
then, if the guardianship or trust is terminated, the ward or the beneficiary shall be liable to pay the tax, 
interest or penalty due from the taxable person up to the time of the term ination of the guardianship or 
trust, whether such tax, interest or penalty has been determined before the termination of guardianship or 
trust but has remained unpaid or is determined thereafter.  
94. Liability in other cases. ––(1) Where a taxable person i s a firm or an association of persons or a 
Hindu Undivided Family and such firm, association or family has discontinued business –– 
(a) the tax, interest or penalty payable under this Act by such firm, association or family up to the 
date of such discontinu ance may be determined as if no such discontinuance had taken place; and  
(b) every person who, at the time of such discontinuance, was a partner of such firm, or a member 
of such association or family, shall, notwithstanding such discontinuance, jointly an d severally, be 
liable for the payment of tax and interest determined and penalty imposed and payable by such firm, 
association or family, whether such tax and interest has been determined or penalty imposed prior to 
or after such discontinuance and subjec t as aforesaid, the provisions of this Act shall, so far as may 
be, apply as if every such person or partner or member were himself a taxable person.  
(2) Where a change has occurred in the constitution of a firm or an association of persons, the 
partners o f the firm or members of association, as it existed before and as it exists after the reconstitution, 
shall, without prejudice to the provisions of section 90, jointly and severally, be liable to pay tax, interest 
or penalty due from such firm or associati on for any period before its reconstitution.  
(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall, so far as may be, apply where the taxable person, being a firm 
or association of persons is dissolved or where the taxable person, being a Hindu Undivided Family, has  
effected partition with respect to the business carried on by it and accordingly references in that sub -section to 
discontinuance shall be construed as reference to dissolution or to partition.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this Chapter, –– 
(i) a ―Limi ted Liability Partnership‖ formed and registered under the provisions of the Limited 
Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009) shall also be considered as a firm;  
(ii) ―court‖ means the District Court, High Court or Supreme Court.  
CHAPTER XVII  
ADVANCE RULING  
95.  Definitions. ––In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, –– 
(a) ―advance ruling‖ means a decision provided by the Authority or the Appellate Authority to an 
applicant on matters or on questions specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 97 or sub -section ( 1) of             
section 100, in relation to the supply of goods or services or both being undertaken or proposed to be 
undertaken by the applicant;  
(b) ―Appellate Authority‖ means the Appellate Authority for Advance Ruling refe rred to in 
section 99;  
(c) ―applicant‖ means any person registered or desirous of obtaining registration under this Act;  66 
 (d) ―application‖ means an application made to the Authority under sub -section ( 1) of section 97;  
(e) ―Authority‖ means the Authority f or Advance Ruling referred to in section 96.  
96. Authority for advance ruling. ––Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, for the purposes of this 
Act, the Authority for advance ruling constituted under the provisions of a State Goods and Services Tax Act  
or Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act shall be deemed to be the Authority for advance ruling in 
respect of that State or Union territory.  
97. Application for advance ruling. ––(1) An applicant desirous of obtaining an advance ruling 
under this Chap ter may make an application in such form and manner and accompanied by such fee as 
may be prescribed, stating the question on which the advance ruling is sought.  
(2) The question on which the advance ruling is sought under this Act, shall be in respect of, –– 
(a) classification of any goods or services or both;  
(b) applicability of a notification issued under the provisions of this Act;  
(c) determination of time and value of supply of goods or services or both;  
(d) admissibility of input tax credit of tax pa id or deemed to have been paid;  
(e) determination of the liability to pay tax on any goods or services or both;  
(f) whether applicant is required to be registered;  
(g) whether any particular thing done by the applicant with respect to any goods or services  or 
both amounts to or results in a supply of goods or services or both, within the meaning of that term.  
98. Procedure on receipt of application. ––(1) On receipt of an application, the Authority shall cause 
a copy thereof to be forwarded to the concerned officer and, if necessary, call upon him to furnish the 
relevant records:  
Provided that where any records have been called for by the Authority in any cas e, such records shall, 
as soon as possible, be returned to the said concerned officer.  
(2) The Authority may, after examining the application and the records called for and after hearing 
the applicant or his authorised representative and the concerned offi cer or his authorised representative, 
by order, either admit or reject the application:  
Provided that the Authority shall not admit the application where the question raised in the 
application is already pending or decided in any proceedings in the case of  an applicant under any of the 
provisions of this Act:  
Provided further that no application shall be rejected under this sub -section unless an opportunity of 
hearing has been given to the applicant:  
Provided also that where the application is rejected, the  reasons for such rejection shall be specified 
in the order.  
(3) A copy of every order made under sub -section ( 2) shall be sent to the applicant and to the 
concerned officer.  
(4) Where an application is admitted under sub -section ( 2), the Authority shall, after examining such 
further material as may be placed before it by the applicant or obtained by the Authority and after providing 
an opportunity of being heard to the applicant or his authorised representative as well as to the concerned 
officer or his au thorised representative, pronounce its advance ruling on the question specified in the 
application.  
(5) Where the members of the Authority differ on any question on which the advance ruling is sought, 
they shall state the point or points on which they diff er and make a reference to the Appellate Authority 
for hearing and decision on such question.  67 
 (6) The Authority shall pronounce its advance ruling in writing within ninety days from the date of 
receipt of application.  
(7) A copy of the advance ruling prono unced by the Authority duly signed by the members and 
certified in such manner as may be prescribed shall be sent to the applicant, the concerned officer and the 
jurisdictional officer after such pronouncement.  
99. Appellate Authority for advance ruling. ––Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, for the 
purposes of this Act, the Appellate Authority for advance ruling constituted under the provisions of a State 
Goods and Services Tax Act or a Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act shall be deemed to be  the 
Appellate Authority in respect of that State or Union territory.  
100. Appeal to Appellate Authority. ––(1) The concerned officer, the jurisdictional officer or an 
applicant aggrieved by any advance ruling pronounced under sub -section ( 4) of section 98,  may appeal to 
the Appellate Authority.  
(2) Every appeal under this section shall be filed within a period of thirty days from the date on which 
the ruling sought to be appealed against is communicated to the concerned officer, the jurisdictional 
officer a nd the applicant:  
Provided that the Appellate Authority may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by a 
sufficient cause from presenting the appeal within the said period of thirty days, allow it to be presented 
within a further period not ex ceeding thirty days.  
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be in such form, accompanied by such fee and verified in 
such manner as may be prescribed.  
101. Orders of Appellate Authority. ––(1) The Appellate Authority may, after giving the parties to 
the appeal or reference an opportunity of being heard, pass such order as it thinks fit, confirming or 
modifying the ruling appealed against or referred to.  
(2) The order referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be passed within a period of ninety days from the 
date of filing of the appeal under section 100 or a reference under sub -section ( 5) of section 98.  
(3) Where the members of the Appellate Authority differ on any point or points referred to in appeal 
or reference, it shall be deemed that no advance ruling ca n be issued in respect of the question under the 
appeal or reference.  
(4) A copy of the advance ruling pronounced by the Appellate Authority duly signed by the Members 
and certified in such manner as may be prescribed shall be sent to the applicant, the co ncerned officer, the 
jurisdictional officer and to the Authority after such pronouncement.  
102. Rectification of advance ruling. —The Authority or the Appellate Authority may amend any 
order passed by it under section 98 or section 101, so as to rectify any  error apparent on the face of the 
record, if such error is noticed by the Authority or the Appellate Authority on its own accord, or is 
brought to its notice by the concerned officer, the jurisdictional officer, the applicant or the appellant 
within a per iod of six months from the date of the order:  
Provided that no rectification which has the effect of enhancing the tax liability or reducing the 
amount of admissible input tax credit shall be made unless the applicant or the appellant has been given 
an opp ortunity of being heard.  
103. Applicability of advance ruling. —(1) The advance ruling pronounced by the Authority or the 
Appellate Authority under this Chapter shall be binding only — 
(a) on the applicant who had sought it in respect of any matter referred to in sub -section ( 2) 
of section 97 for advance ruling;  
(b) on the concerned officer or the jurisdictional officer in respect of the applicant.  
(2) The advance ruling referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be binding unless the law, facts or 
circumstances supporting the original advance ruling have changed.  68 
 104. Advance ruling to be void in certain circumstances. —(1) Where the Authority or the Appellate 
Authority finds that advance ruling pronounced by it under sub -section ( 4) of section 98 or under             
sub-section ( 1) of section 101 has been obtained by the applicant or the appellant by fraud or suppression of 
material facts or misrepresentation of facts, it may, by order, declare such ruling to be void ab-initio and 
thereupon all the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall apply to the applicant or the 
appellant as if such advance ruling had never been made:  
Provided that no order shall be passed under this sub -section unless an opportunity of being heard has 
been given to the applicant or the appellant.  
Explanation .––The period beginning with the date of such advance ruling and ending with the date 
of order under this sub -section shall be excluded while computing the period specified in sub -sections ( 2) 
and ( 10) of section 73 or sub -sections ( 2) and ( 10) of section 74.  
(2) A copy of the order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be sent to the applicant, the concerned 
officer and the jurisdictional officer.  
105. Powers  of Authority and Appellate Authority. —(1) The Authority or the Appellate Authority 
shall, for the purpose of exercising its powers regarding — 
(a) discovery and inspection;  
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(c) issuing  commissions and compelling production of books of account and other records,  
have all the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).  
(2) The Authority or the Appellate Authority shall be deemed to be a civil court for the  purposes of 
section 195, but not for the purposes of Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973                      
(2 of 1974), and every proceeding before the Authority or the Appellate Authority shall be deemed to be a 
judicial proceedings w ithin the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose of section 196 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
106. Procedure of Authority and Appellate Authority .—The Authority or the Appellate Authority 
shall, subject to the provisions of this Chap ter, have power to regulate its own procedure.  
CHAPTER XVIII  
APPEALS AND REVISION  
107. Appeals to Appellate Authority. —(1) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order passed 
under this Act or the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory Go ods and Services Tax 
Act by an adjudicating authority may appeal to such Appellate Authority as may be prescribed within 
three months from the date on which the said decision or order is communicated to such person.  
(2) The Commissioner may, on his own mot ion, or upon request from the Commissioner of State tax or 
the Commissioner of Union territory tax, call for and examine the record of any proceedings in which an 
adjudicating authority has passed any decision or order under this Act or the State Goods and  Services Tax Act 
or the Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act, for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the legality or 
propriety of the said decision or order and may, by order, direct any officer subordinate to him to apply to the 
Appellate Auth ority within six months from the date of communication of the said decision or order for the 
determination of such points arising out of the said decision or order as may be specified by the Commissioner 
in his order.  
(3) Where, in pursuance of an order un der sub -section ( 2), the authorised officer makes an application 
to the Appellate Authority, such application shall be dealt with by the Appellate Authority as if it were an 
appeal made against the decision or order of the adjudicating authority and such authorised officer were 
an appellant and the provisions of this Act relating to appeals shall apply to such application.  
(4) The Appellate Authority may, if he is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from presenting the appeal wit hin the aforesaid period of three months or six months, as the case may be, 
allow it to be presented within a further period of one month.  69 
 (5) Every appeal under this section shall be in such form and shall be verified in such manner as may 
be prescribed.  
(6) No appeal shall be filed under sub -section ( 1), unless the appellant has paid — 
(a) in full, such part of the amount of tax, interest, fine, fee and penalty arising from the 
impugned order, 1[subject to a maxim um of twenty -five crore rupees,] as is admi tted by him; and  
(b) a sum equal to ten per cent. of the remaining amount of tax in dispute arising from the said 
order, in relation to which the appeal has been filed.  
(7) Where the appellant has paid the amount under sub -section ( 6), the recovery proceed ings for the 
balance amount shall be deemed to be stayed.  
(8) The Appellate Authority shall give an opportunity to the appellant of  being heard.  
(9) The Appellate Authority may, if sufficient cause is shown at any stage of hearing of an appeal, 
grant time  to the parties or any of them and adjourn the hearing of the appeal for reasons to be recorded in 
writing:  
Provided that no such adjournment shall be granted more than three times to a party during hearing of 
the appeal.  
(10) The Appellate Authority may, at the time of hearing of an appeal, allow an appellant to add any 
ground of appeal not specified in the grounds of appeal, if it is satisfied that the omission of that ground from 
the grounds of appeal was not wilful or unre asonable.  
(11) The Appellate Authority shall, after making such further inquiry as may be necessary, pass such 
order, as it thinks just and proper, confirming, modifying or annulling the decision or order appealed 
against but shall not refer the case back to the adjudicating authority that passed the said decision or 
order:  
Provided that an order enhancing any fee or penalty or fine in lieu of confiscation or confiscating 
goods of greater value or reducing the amount of refund or input tax credit shall not be passed unless the 
appellant has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed order:  
Provided further that where the Appellate Authority is of the opinion that any tax has not been paid or 
short -paid or erroneously refunded, or where input tax credit has been wrongly availed or utilised, no 
order requiring the appellant to pay such tax or input tax credit shall be passed unless the appellant is 
given notice to show cause against the proposed order and the order is passed withi n the time limit 
specified under section 73 or section 74.  
(12) The order of the Appellate Authority disposing of the appeal shall be in writing and shall state 
the points for determination, the decision thereon and the reasons for such decision.  
(13) The Appellate Authority shall, where it is possible to do so, hear and decide every appeal within 
a period of one year from the date on which it is filed:  
Provided that where the issuance of order is stayed by an order of a court or Tribunal, the period of 
such stay shall be excluded in computing the period of one year.  
(14) On disposal of the appeal, the Appellate Authority shall communicate the order passed by it to 
the appellant, respondent and to the adjudicating authority.  
(15) A copy of the order passed b y the Appellate Authority shall also be sent to the jurisdictional 
Commissioner or the authority designated by him in this behalf and the jurisdictional Commissioner of 
State tax or Commissioner of Union Territory Tax or an authority designated by him in t his behalf.  
(16) Every order passed under this section shall, subject to the provisions of section 108 or section 113 
or section 117 or section 118 be final and binding on the parties.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 25 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   70 
 108. Powers of Revisional Authority. —(1) Subject to the provisions of section 121 and any rules made 
thereunder, the Revisional Authority may, on his own motion, or upon information received by him or on 
request from the Commissioner of State tax, or the Commissioner of Union territory tax, cal l for and examine 
the record of any proceedings, and if he considers that any decision or order passed under this Act or under the 
State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act by any officer 
subordinate to him is erron eous in so far as it is prejudicial to the interest of revenue and is illegal or improper 
or has not taken into account certain material facts, whether available at the time of issuance of the said order 
or not or in consequence of an observation by the Co mptroller and Auditor -General of India, he may, if 
necessary, stay the operation of such decision or order for such period as he deems fit and after giving the 
person concerned an opportunity of being heard and after making such further inquiry as may be n ecessary, 
pass such order, as he thinks just and proper, including enhancing or modifying or annulling the said decision 
or order.  
(2) The Revisional Authority shall not exercise any power under sub -section ( 1), if— 
(a) the order has been subject to an app eal under section 107 or section 112 or section 117 or 
section 118; or  
(b) the period specified under sub -section ( 2) of section 107 has not yet expired or more than 
three years have expired after the passing of the decision or order sought to be revised; or 
(c) the order has already been taken for revision under this section at an earlier stage; or  
(d) the order has been passed in exercise of the powers under sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that the Revisional Authority may pass an order under sub -section ( 1) on any point which 
has not been raised and decided in an appeal referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2), before the expiry 
of a period of one year from the date of the order in such appeal or before the expiry of a period of three 
years referred to in c lause ( b) of that sub -section, whichever is later.  
(3) Every order passed in revision under sub -section ( 1) shall, subject to the provisions of section 113 or 
section 117 or section 118, be final and binding on the parties.  
(4) If the said decision or order involves an issue on which the Appellate Tribunal or the High Court has 
given its decision in some other proceedings and an appeal to the High Court or the Supreme Court against 
such decision of the Appellate Tribunal or the High Court is pending, th e period spent between the date of the 
decision of the Appellate Tribunal and the date of the decision of the High Court or the date of the decision of  
the High Court and the date of decision of the Supreme Court shall be excluded in computing the period of 
limitation referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) where proceedings for revision have been initiated by way 
of issue of a notice under this section.  
(5) Where the issuance of an order under sub -section ( 1) is stayed by the order of a court or Appe llate 
Tribunal, the period of such stay shall be excluded in computing the period of limitation referred to in 
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2). 
(6) For the purposes of this section, the term, –– 
(i) ―record‖ shall include all records relating to any proceedin gs under this Act available at the 
time of examination by the Revisional Authority;  
(ii) ―decision‖ shall include intimation given by any officer lower in rank than the Revisional 
Authority.  
109. Constitution of Appellate Tribunal and Benches thereof. —(1) The Government shall, on the 
recommendations of the Council, by notification, constitute with effect from such date as may be specified 
therein, an Appellate Tribunal known as the Goods and Services Tax Appellate Tribunal for hearing appeals 
against the or ders passed by the Appellate Authority or the Revisional Authority.  
(2) The powers of the Appellate Tribunal shall be exercisable by the National Bench and Benches 
thereof (hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as ―Regional Benches‖), State Bench and Ben ches thereof 
(hereafter in this Chapter referred to as ―Area Benches‖).  71 
 (3) The National Bench of the Appellate Tribunal shall be situated at New Delhi which shall be 
presided over by the President and shall consist of one Technical Member (Centre) and one  Technical 
Member (State).  
(4) The Government shall, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, constitute such number 
of Regional Benches as may be required and such Regional Benches shall consist of a Judicial Member, one 
Technical Member (Centre) and one Technical Member (State).  
(5) The National Bench or Regional Benches of the Appellate Tribunal shall have jurisdiction to hear 
appeals against the orders passed by the Appellate Authority or the Revisional Authority in the cases 
where one of the issues involved relates to the place of supply.  
(6) The Government shall, by notification, specify for each State or Union territory, 1[except for the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir ] a Bench of the Appellate Tribunal (hereafter in this Chapter, referred  to as ―State Bench‖) 
for exercising the powers of the Appellate Tribunal within the concerned State or Union territory:  
2[Provided that for the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the State Bench of the Goods and Services Tax 
Appellate Tribunal constituted under this Act shall be the State Appellate Tribunal constituted under the 
Jammu and Kashmir Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017:  
Provided further that ] the Government shall, on receipt of a request from any State Government, 
constitute such number of Area Benches  in that State, as may be recommended by the Council:  
3[Provided also that] the Government may, on receipt of a request from any State, or on its own 
motion for a Union territory, notify the Appellate Tribunal in a State to act as the Appellate Tribunal fo r 
any other State or Union territory, as may be recommended by the Council, subject to such terms and 
conditions as may be prescribed.  
(7) The State Bench or Area Benches shall have jurisdiction to hear appeals against the orders passed 
by the Appellate Au thority or the Revisional Authority in the cases involving matters other than those 
referred to in sub -section ( 5). 
(8) The President and the State President shall, by general or special order, distribute the business or 
transfer cases among Regional Bench es or, as the case may be, Area Benches in a State.  
(9) Each State Bench and Area Benches of the Appellate Tribunal shall consist of a Judicial Member, 
one Technical Member (Centre) and one Technical Member (State) and the State Government may 
designate th e senior most Judicial Member in a State as the State President.  
(10) In the absence of a Member in any Bench due to vacancy or otherwise, any appeal may, with the 
approval of the President or, as the case may be, the State President, be heard by a Bench o f two 
Members:  
Provided that any appeal where the tax or input tax credit involved or the difference in tax or input tax 
credit involved or the amount of fine, fee or penalty determined in any order appealed against, does not 
exceed five lakh rupees and wh ich does not involve any question of law may, with the approval of the 
President and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed on the recommendations of the Council, be 
heard by a bench consisting of a single member.  
(11) If the Members of the Nation al Bench, Regional Benches, State Bench or Area Benches differ in 
opinion on any point or points, it shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority, if there is a 
majority, but if the Members are equally divided, they shall state the point or po ints on which they differ, and 
the case shall be referred by the President or as the case may be, State President for hearing on such point or 
points to one or more of the other Members of the National Bench, Regional Benches, State Bench or Area 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 2017, s. 2, (w.e.f. 8 -7-2017).   
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for ―Provided that‖  (w.e.f. 8 -7-2017).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for ―Provided further that‖  (w.e.f. 8 -7-2017).  72 
 Benches a nd such point or points shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of Members who 
have heard the case, including those who first heard it.  
(12) The Government, in consultation with the President may, for the administrative convenience, 
trans fer— 
(a) any Judicial Member or a Member Technical (State) from one Bench to another Bench, 
whether National or Regional; or  
(b) any Member Technical (Centre) from one Bench to another Bench, whether National, Regional, 
State or Area.  
(13) The State Govern ment, in consultation with the State President may, for the administrative 
convenience, transfer a Judicial Member or a Member Technical (State) from one Bench to another Bench 
within the State.  
(14) No act or proceedings of the Appellate Tribunal shall be  questioned or shall be invalid merely on 
the ground of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Appellate Tribunal.  
110.  President and Members of Appellate Tribunal, their qualification, appointment, conditions 
of service, etc. —(1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as — 
(a) the President, unless he has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or is or has been the Chief 
Justice of a High Court, or is or has been a Judge of a High Court for a period not less than five years;  
(b) a Judicial Member, unless he — 
(i) has been a Judge of the High Court; or  
(ii) is or has been a District Judge qualified to be appointed as a Judge of a High Court; or  
(iii) is or has been a Member of Indian Legal Service and has held a post not less th an 
Additional Secretary for three years;  
(c) a Technical Member (Centre) unless he is or has been a member of Indian Revenue (Customs 
and Central Excise) Service, Group A, and has completed at least fifteen years of service in Group A;  
(d) a Technical Memb er (State) unless he is or has been an officer of the State Government not below 
the rank of Additional Commissioner of Value Added Tax or the State goods and services tax or such rank 
as may be notified by the concerned State Government on the recommendat ions of the Council with at 
least three years of experience in the administration of an existing law or the State Goods and Services Tax 
Act or in the field of finance and taxation.  
(2) The President and the Judicial Members of the National Bench and the R egional Benches shall be 
appointed by the Government after consultation with the Chief Justice of India or his nominee:  
Provided that in the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the President by reason of his 
death, resignation or otherw ise, the senior most Member of the National Bench shall act as the President until 
the date on which a new President, appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such 
vacancy, enters upon his office:  
Provided further that where the Pres ident is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness 
or any other cause, the senior most Member of the National Bench shall discharge the functions of the 
President until the date on which the President resumes his duties.  
(3) The Technical  Member (Centre) and Technical Member (State) of the National Bench and Regional 
Benches shall be appointed by the Government on the recommendations of a Selection Committee consisting of 
such persons and in such manner as may be prescribed.  73 
 (4) The Judicial Member of the State Bench or Area Benches shall be appointed by the State 
Government after consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court of the State or his nominee.  
(5) The Technical Member (Centre) of the State Bench or Area Benches shal l be appointed by the 
Central Government and Technical Member (State) of the State Bench or Area Benches shall be 
appointed by the State Government in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(6) No appointment of the Members of the Appellate Tribunal shall be in valid merely by the reason of any 
vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Selection Committee.  
(7) Before appointing any person as the President or Members of the Appellate Tribunal, the Central 
Government or, as the case may be, the State Government,  shall satisfy itself that such person does not have any 
financial or other interests which are likely to prejudicially affect his functions as such President or Member.  
(8) The salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the President,  State President and the 
Members of the Appellate Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that neither salary and allowances nor other terms and conditions of service of the President, 
State President or Members of the Appellate Tribunal shal l be varied to their disadvantage after their 
appointment.  
(9) The President of the Appellate Tribunal shall hold office for a term of three years from the date on 
which he enters upon his office, or until he attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier and shall 
be eligible for reappointment.  
(10) The Judicial Member of the Appellate Tribunal and the State President shall hold office for a term 
of three years from the date on which he enters upon his office, or until he attains the age of sixty -five 
years, whichever is earlier and shall be eligible for reappointment.  
(11) The Technical Member (Centre) or Technical Member (State) of the Appellate Tribunal shall 
hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office, o r until he attains the 
age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier and shall be eligible for reappointment.  
(12) The President, State President or any Member may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed 
to the Central Government or, as the case may  be, the State Government resign from his office:  
Provided that the President, State President or Member shall continue to hold office until the expiry of 
three months from the date of receipt of such notice by the Central Government, or, as the case may b e, 
the State Government or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until the 
expiry of his term of office, whichever is the earliest.  
(13) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Chief Justice of India, in c ase of the 
President, Judicial Members and Technical Members of the National Bench, Regional Benches or Technical 
Members (Centre) of the State Bench or Area Benches, and the State Government may, after consultation with 
the Chief Justice of High Court, in  case of the State President, Judicial Members, Technical Members (State) 
of the State Bench or Area Benches, may remove from the office such President or Member, who — 
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in th e opinion of such Government involves moral 
turpitude; or  
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such President, State President or 
Member; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
such President, State President or Member; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest:  
Provided that the President, State President or the Member shall not be removed on any of t he grounds 
specified in clauses ( d) and ( e), unless he has been informed of the charges against him and has been given an 
opportunity of being heard.  74 
 (14) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 13),–– 
(a) the President or a Judicial and Technical Member of the National Bench or Regional Benches, 
Technical Member (Centre) of the State Bench or Area Benches shall not be removed from their office 
except by an order made by the Central Government on the groun d of proved misbehaviour or incapacity 
after an inquiry made by a Judge of the Supreme Court nominated by the Chief Justice of India on a 
reference made to him by the Central Government and of which the President or the said Member had 
been given an opport unity of being heard;  
(b) the Judicial Member or Technical Member (State) of the State Bench or Area Benches shall not 
be removed from their office except by an order made by the State Government on the ground of proved 
misbehaviour  or incapacity after an inquiry made by a Judge of the concerned High Court nominated by 
the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court on a reference made to him by the State Government and 
of which the said Member had been given an opportunity of being he ard. 
(15) The Central Government, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of India, may suspend from 
office, the President or a Judicial or Technical Members of the National Bench or the Regional Benches or 
the Technical Member (Centre) of the State Benc h or Area Benches in respect of whom a reference has 
been made to the Judge of the Supreme Court under sub -section ( 14). 
(16) The State Government, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court, may suspend 
from office, a Judicial Member or T echnical Member (State) of the State Bench or Area Benches in 
respect of whom a reference has been made to the Judge of the High Court under sub -section ( 14). 
(17) Subject to the provisions of article 220 of the Constitution, the President, State President  or other 
Members, on ceasing to hold their office, shall not be eligible to appear, act or plead before the National 
Bench and the Regional Benches or the State Bench and the Area Benches thereof where he was the 
President or, as the case may be, a Member . 
111. Procedure before Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Appellate Tribunal shall not, while disposing 
of any proceedings before it or an appeal before it, be bound by the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), but shall be guided  by the principles of natural justice and subject to the other 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the Appellate Tribunal shall have power to regulate its 
own procedure.  
(2) The Appellate Tribunal shall, for the purposes of discharging it s functions under this Act, have 
the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while 
trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning  and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872                    
(1 of 1872), requisitioning any public record or document or a copy of such record or document from 
any office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  
(f) dismissing a representation for default or deciding i t ex parte ; 
(g) setting aside any order of dismissal of any representation for default or any order passed by it 
ex parte ; and  
(h) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(3) Any order made by the Appellate Tribunal may be enforced by it in the same mann er as if it were 
a decree made by a court in a suit pending therein, and it shall be lawful for the Appellate Tribunal to 
send for execution of its orders to the court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction, — 
(a) in the case of an order against a co mpany, the registered office of the company is situated; or  75 
 (b) in the case of an order against any other person, the person concerned voluntarily resides or 
carries on business or personally works for gain.  
(4) All proceedings before the Appellate Tribuna l shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), 
and the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be civil court for the purposes of section 195  and Chapter XXVI 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
112. Appeals to Appellate Tribunal. —(1) Any person aggrieved by an order passed against him 
under section 107 or section 108 of this Act or the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union 
Territory Goods and Services Tax Act may appeal to the Appellate Tribunal against such order within 
three months from the date on which the order sought to be appealed against is communicated to the 
person preferring the appeal.  
(2) The Appellate Tribunal may, in its discretion, refuse to admit any such appeal where the tax or 
input tax credit involved or th e difference in tax or input tax credit involved or the amount of fine, fee or 
penalty determined by such order, does not exceed fifty thousand rupees.  
(3) The Commissioner may, on his own motion, or upon request from the Commissioner of State tax or 
Commi ssioner of Union territory tax, call for and examine the record of any order passed by the Appellate 
Authority or the Revisional Authority under this Act or the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union 
Territory Goods and Services Tax Act for the purp ose of satisfying himself as to the legality or propriety of the 
said order and may, by order, direct any officer subordinate to him to apply to the Appellate Tribunal within 
six months from the date on which the said order has been passed for determinatio n of such points arising out 
of the said order as may be specified by the Commissioner in his order.  
(4) Where in pursuance of an order under sub -section ( 3) the authorised officer makes an application to 
the Appellate Tribunal, such application shall be d ealt with by the Appellate Tribunal as if it were an appeal 
made against the order under sub -section ( 11) of section 107 or under sub -section ( 1) of section 108 and the 
provisions of this Act shall apply to such application, as they apply in relation to ap peals filed under            
sub-section ( 1). 
(5) On receipt of notice that an appeal has been preferred under this section, the party against whom 
the appeal has been preferred may, notwithstanding that he may not have appealed against such order or 
any p art thereof, file, within forty -five days of the receipt of notice, a memorandum of cross -objections, 
verified in the prescribed manner, against any part of the order appealed against and such memorandum 
shall be disposed of by the Appellate Tribunal, as i f it were an appeal presented within the time specified 
in sub -section ( 1). 
(6) The Appellate Tribunal may admit an appeal within three months after the expiry of the period 
referred to in sub -section ( 1), or permit the filing of a memorandum of cross -objections within forty -five 
days after the expiry of the period referred to in sub -section ( 5) if it is satisfied that there was sufficient 
cause for not presenting it within that period.  
(7) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal shall be in such form, verified  in such manner and shall be 
accompanied by such fee, as may be prescribed.  
(8) No appeal shall be filed under sub -section ( 1), unless the appellant has paid –– 
(a) in full, such part of the amount of tax, interest, fine, fee and penalty arising from the 
impugned order, as is admitted by him; and  
(b) a sum equal to twenty per cent. of the remaining amount of tax in dispute, in addition to the 
amount paid under sub -section ( 6) of section 107, arising from the said order,  1[subject to a  maximum 
of fifty crore rupees,]  in relation to which the appeal has been filed.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 2 6 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  76 
 (9) Where the appellant has paid the amount as per sub -section ( 8), the recovery proceedings for the 
balance amount shall be deemed to be stayed till the disposal of the appeal.  
(10) Every applicatio n made before the Appellate Tribunal, — 
(a) in an appeal for rectification of error or for any other purpose; or  
(b) for restoration of an appeal or an application,  
shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.  
113. Orders of Appellate Tribunal. —(1) The Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the 
appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or 
annulling the decision or order appealed against or may refer the case back to the App ellate Authority, or 
the Revisional Authority or to the original adjudicating authority, with such directions as it may think fit, 
for a fresh adjudication or decision after taking additional evidence, if necessary.  
(2) The Appellate Tribunal may, if suffi cient cause is shown, at any stage of hearing of an appeal, 
grant time to the parties or any of them and adjourn the hearing of the appeal for reasons to be recorded in 
writing:  
Provided that no such adjournment shall be granted more than three times to a party during hearing 
of the appeal.  
(3) The Appellate Tribunal may amend any order passed by it under sub -section ( 1) so as to rectify 
any error apparent on the face of the record, if such error is noticed by it on its own accord, or is brought 
to its noti ce by the Commissioner or the Commissioner of State tax or the Commissioner of the Union 
territory tax or the other party to the appeal within a period of three months from the date of the order:  
Provided that no amendment which has the effect of enhancing  an assessment or reducing a refund or 
input tax credit or otherwise increasing the liability of the other party, shall be made under this                     
sub-section, unless the party has been given an opportunity of being heard.  
(4) The Appellate Tri bunal shall, as far as possible, hear and decide every appeal within a period of 
one year from the date on which it is filed.  
(5) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order passed under this section to the Appellate 
Authority or the Revisional  Authority, or the original adjudicating authority, as the case may be, the appellant 
and the jurisdictional Commissioner or the Commissioner of State tax or the Union territory tax.  
(6) Save as provided in section 117 or section 118, orders passed by the Appellate Tribunal on an 
appeal shall be final and binding on the parties.  
114. Financial and administrative powers of President .—The President shall exercise such 
financial and administrative powers over the National Bench and Regional Benches of the Appe llate 
Tribunal as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the President shall have the authority to delegate such of his financial and 
administrative powers as he may think fit to any other Member or any officer of the National Bench and 
Regional Benches, subject  to the condition that such Member or officer shall, while exercising such 
delegated powers, continue to act under the direction, control and supervision of the President.  
115. Interest on refund of amount paid for admission of appeal .—Where an amount paid  by the 
appellant under sub -section ( 6) of section 107 or sub -section ( 8) of section 112 is required to be refunded 
consequent to any order of the Appellate Authority or of the Appellate Tribunal, interest at the rate 
specified under section 56 shall be pa yable in respect of such refund from the date of payment of the 
amount till the date of refund of such amount.  
116. Appearance by authorised representative .—(1) Any person who is entitled or required to 
appear before an officer appointed under this Act, or  the Appellate Authority or the Appellate Tribunal in 
connection with any proceedings under this Act, may, otherwise than when required under this Act to 77 
 appear personally for examination on oath or affirmation, subject to the other provisions of this sect ion, 
appear by an authorised representative.  
(2) For the purposes of this Act, the expression ―authorised representative‖ shall mean a person 
authorised by the person referred to in sub -section ( 1) to appear on his behalf, being — 
(a) his relative or regular employee; or  
(b) an advocate who is entitled to practice in any court in India, and who has not been debarred 
from practicing before any court in India; or  
(c) any chartered accountant, a cost accountant or a company secretary, who hol ds a certificate of 
practice and who has not been debarred from practice; or  
(d) a retired officer of the Commercial Tax Department of any State Government or Union territory or 
of the Board who, during his service under the Government, had worked in a pos t not below the rank than 
that of a Group -B Gazetted officer for a period of not less than two years:  
Provided that such officer shall not be entitled to appear before any proceedings under this Act for a 
period of one year from the date of his retirement or resignation; or  
(e) any person who has been authorised to act as a goods and services tax practitioner on behalf of 
the concerned registered person.  
(3) No person, — 
(a)  who has been dismissed or removed from Government service; or  
(b) who is convicted of an offence connected with any proceedings under this Act, the State 
Goods and Services Tax Act, the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory 
Goods and Services Tax Act, or under the existing law or under any of the Acts passed by a S tate 
Legislature dealing with the imposition of taxes on sale of goods or supply of goods or services or 
both; or  
(c) who is found guilty of misconduct by the prescribed authority; or  
(d) who has been adjudged as an insolvent,  
shall be qualified to represe nt any person under sub -section ( 1)— 
(i) for all times in case of persons referred to in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c); and  
(ii) for the period during which the insolvency continues in the case of a person referred to in 
clause ( d). 
(4) Any person who has been disqualified under the provisions of the State Goods and Services Tax 
Act or the Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act shall be deemed to be disqualified under this Act.  
117. Appeal to High Court. —(1) Any person aggrieved by any order passed by the State Bench or 
Area Benches of the Appellate Tribunal may file an appeal to the High Court and the High Court may admit 
such appeal, if it is satisfied that the case involves a substantial question of law.  
(2) An appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed  within a period of one hundred and eighty days from 
the date on which the order appealed against is received by the aggrieved person and it shall be in such 
form, verified in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period if it is 
satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within such period.  
(3) Where the High Court is satisfied that a substantial question of law is involved in any case, it shall 
formulate that question and the appeal shall be heard only on the question so formulated, and the 
respondents shall, at the hearing of the appeal, be allowed to argue that the case does not involve such 
question:  78 
 Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall be deemed to take away or abridge the power of the court 
to hear, for reasons to be recorded, the appeal on any other substantial question of law not formulated by it, 
if it is satisfied that the case involves such question.  
(4) The High Court shall decide the quest ion of law so formulated and deliver such judgment thereon 
containing the grounds on which such decision is founded and may award such cost as it deems fit.  
(5) The High Court may determine any issue which –– 
(a) has not been determined by the State Bench o r Area Benches; or  
(b) has been wrongly determined by the State Bench or Area Benches, by reason of a decision on 
such question of law as herein referred to in sub -section ( 3). 
(6) Where an appeal has been filed before the High Court, it shall be heard by a Bench of not less 
than two Judges of the High Court, and shall be decided in accordance with the opinion of such Judges or 
of the majority, if any, of such Judges.  
(7) Where there is no such majority, the Judges shall state the point of law upon which th ey differ and the 
case shall, then, be heard upon that point only, by one or more of the other Judges of the High Court and such 
point shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of the Judges who have heard the case 
including those who first  heard it.  
(8) Where the High Court delivers a judgment in an appeal filed before it under this section, effect 
shall be given to such judgment by either side on the basis of a certified copy of the judgment.  
(9) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the  provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908           
(5 of 1908), relating to appeals to the High Court shall, as far as may be, apply in the case of appeals 
under this section.  
118. Appeal to Supreme Court. ––(1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court — 
(a) from any order passed by the National Bench or Regional Benches of the Appellate 
Tribunal; or  
(b) from any judgment or order passed by the High Court in an appeal made under section 117 
in any case which, on its own motion or on an application made by or on behalf of the party 
aggrieved, immediately after passing of the judgment or order, the High Court certifies to be a fit 
one for appeal to the Supreme Court.  
(2) The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 19 08 (5 of 1908), relating to appeals to the 
Supreme Court shall, so far as may be, apply in the case of appeals under this section as they apply in the 
case of appeals from decrees of a High Court.  
(3) Where the judgment of the High Court is varied or rever sed in the appeal, effect shall be given to 
the order of the Supreme Court in the manner provided in section 117 in the case of a judgment of the 
High Court.  
119. Sums due to be paid notwithstanding appeal, etc. ––Notwithstanding that an appeal has been 
preferred to the High Court or the Supreme Court, sums due to the Government as a result of an order 
passed by the National or Regional Benches of the Appellate Tribunal under sub -section ( 1) of               
section 113 or an order passed by the State Bench or Area Benches of the Appellate Tribunal under                          
sub-section ( 1) of section 113 or an order passed by the High Court under section 117, as the case may be, 
shall be payable in accordance with the order so passed.  
120. Appeal not to be filed in certain cases .––(1) The Board may, on the recommendations of the 
Council, from time to time, issue orders or instructions or directions fixing such monetary limits, as it 
may deem fit, for the purposes of regulating the filing of appeal or application by the officer of the central 
tax under the provisions of this Chapter.  79 
 (2) Where, in pursuance of the orders or instructions or directions issued under sub -section ( 1), the 
officer of the central tax has not filed an appeal or application agai nst any decision or order passed under 
the provisions of this Act, it shall not preclude such officer of the central tax from filing appeal or 
application in any other case involving the same or similar issues or questions of law.  
(3) Notwithstanding the f act that no appeal or application has been filed by the officer of the central 
tax pursuant to the orders or instructions or directions issued under sub -section ( 1), no person, being a 
party in appeal or application shall contend that the officer of the ce ntral tax has acquiesced in the 
decision on the disputed issue by not filing an appeal or application.  
(4) The Appellate Tribunal or court hearing such appeal or application shall have regard to the 
circumstances under which appeal or application was not f iled by the officer of the central tax in 
pursuance of the orders or instructions or directions issued under sub -section ( 1). 
121. Non-appealable decisions and orders .––Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any 
provisions of this Act, no appeal shall  lie against any decision taken or order passed by an officer of central tax 
if such decision taken or order passed relates to any one or more of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) an order of the Commissioner or other authority empowered to direct transf er of proceedings 
from one officer to another officer; or  
(b) an order pertaining to the seizure or retention of books of account, register and other 
documents; or  
(c) an order sanctioning prosecution under this Act; or  
(d) an order passed under section 80.  
CHAPTER XIX  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
122. Penalty for certain offences .––(1) Where a taxable person who –– 
(i) supplies  any goods or services or both without issue of any invoice or issues an incorrect or 
false invoice with regard to any such supply;  
(ii) issues any invoice or bill without supply of goods or services or both in violation of the 
provisions of this Act or th e rules made thereunder;  
(iii) collects any amount as tax but fails to pay the same to the Government beyond a period of three 
months from the date on which such payment becomes due;  
(iv) collects any tax in contravention of the provisions of this Act but fails to pay the same to the 
Government beyond a period of three months from the date on which such payment becomes due;  
(v) fails to deduct the tax in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 51, or 
deducts an amount which is less than  the amount required to be deducted under the said sub -section, 
or where he fails to pay to the Government under sub -section ( 2) thereof, the amount deducted as tax;  
(vi) fails to collect tax in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 52, or 
collects an amount which is less than the amount required to be collected under the said sub -section 
or where he fails to pay to the Government the amount collected as tax under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 52;  
(vii) takes or utilises input tax credit  without actual receipt of goods or services or both either 
fully or partially, in contravention of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder;  
(viii) fraudulently obtains refund of tax under this Act;  
(ix) takes or distributes input tax credi t in contravention of section 20, or the rules made 
thereunder;  
(x) falsifies or substitutes financial records or produces fake accounts or documents or furnishes 
any false information or return with an intention to evade payment of tax due under this Act;  80 
 (xi) is liable to be registered under this Act but fails to obtain registration;  
(xii) furnishes any false information with regard to registration particulars, either at the time of 
applying for registration, or subsequently;  
(xiii) obstructs  or prevents any officer in discharge of his duties under this Act;  
(xiv) transports any taxable goods without the cover of documents as may be specified in this 
behalf;  
(xv) suppresses his turnover leading to evasion of tax under this Act;  
(xvi) fails to keep, maintain or retain books of account and other documents in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder;  
(xvii) fails to furnish information or documents called for by an officer in accordance with the 
provisions of this Ac t or the rules made thereunder or furnishes false information or documents 
during any proceedings under this Act;  
(xviii) supplies, transports or stores any goods which he has reasons to believe are liable to 
confiscation under this Act;  
(xix) issues any i nvoice or document by using the registration number of another registered 
person;  
(xx) tampers with, or destroys any material evidence or document;  
(xxi) disposes of or tampers with any goods that have been detained, seized, or attached under this 
Act,  
shall be liable to pay a penalty of ten thousand rupees or an amount equivalent to the tax evaded or the tax not 
deducted under section 51 or short deducted or deducted but not paid to the Government or tax not collected 
under section 52 or short collected o r collected but not paid to the Government or input tax credit availed of or 
passed on or distributed irregularly, or the refund claimed fraudulently, whichever is higher.  
(2) Any registered person who supplies any goods or services or both on which any tax has not been 
paid or short -paid or erroneously refunded, or where the input tax credit has been wrongly availed or 
utilised, — 
(a) for any reason, other than the reason of fraud or any wilful misstatement or suppression of 
facts to evade tax, shall be l iable to a penalty of ten thousand rupees or ten per cent. of the tax due 
from such person, whichever is higher;  
(b) for reason of fraud or any wilful misstatement or suppression of facts to evade tax, shall be 
liable to a penalty equal to ten thousand rup ees or the tax due from such person, whichever is higher.  
(3) Any person who –– 
(a) aids or abets any of the offences specified in clauses ( i) to ( xxi) of sub -section ( 1); 
(b) acquires possession of, or in any way concerns himself in transporting, removing,  depositing, 
keeping, concealing, supplying, or purchasing or in any other manner deals with any goods which he 
knows or has reasons to believe are liable to confiscation under this Act or the rules made thereunder;  
(c) receives or is in any way concerned with the supply of, or in any other manner deals with any 
supply of services which he knows or has reasons to believe are in contravention of any provisions of 
this Act or the rules made thereunder;  
(d) fails to appear before the officer of central tax, wh en issued with a summons for appearance to 
give evidence or produce a document in an inquiry;  
(e) fails to issue invoice in accordance with the provisions of this Act or the rules made 
thereunder or fails to account for an invoice in his books of account,  81 
 shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to twenty -five thousand rupees.  
123. Penalty for failure to furnish information return. ––If a person who is required to furnish an 
information return under section 150 fails to do so within the period specified  in the notice issued under          
sub-section ( 3) thereof, the proper officer may direct that such person shall be liable to pay a penalty of one 
hundred rupees for each day of the period during which the failure to furnish such return continues:  
Provid ed that the penalty imposed under this section shall not exceed five thousand rupees.  
124. Fine for failure to furnish statistics .—If any person required to furnish any information or return 
under section 151, — 
(a) without  reasonable cause fails to furnish such information or return as may be required under 
that section, or  
(b) wilfully furnishes or causes to furnish any information or return which he knows to be false,  
he shall be punishable with a fine which may extend to  ten thousand rupees and in case of a continuing 
offence to a further fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for each day after the first day during 
which the offence continues subject to a maximum limit of twenty -five thousand rupees.  
125. General pe nalty. —Any person, who contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or any 
rules made thereunder for which no penalty is separately provided for in this Act, shall be liable to a 
penalty which may extend to twenty -five thousand rupees.  
126. General disciplines related to penalty .—(1) No officer under this Act shall impose any penalty 
for minor breaches of tax regulations or procedural requirements and in particular, any omission or 
mistake in documentation which is easily rectifiable and made without  fraudulent intent or gross 
negligence.  
Explanation .––For the purpose of this sub -section, –– 
(a) a breach shall be considered a ‗minor breach‘ if the amount of tax involved is less than five 
thousand rupees;  
(b) an omission or mistake in documentation shal l be considered to be easily rectifiable if the 
same is an error apparent on the face of record.  
(2) The penalty imposed under this Act shall depend on the facts and circumstances of each case and 
shall be commensurate with the degree and severity of the b reach.  
(3) No penalty shall be imposed on any person without giving him an opportunity of being heard.  
(4) The officer under this Act shall while imposing penalty in an order for a breach of any law, 
regulation or procedural requirement, specify the nature  of the breach and the applicable law, regulation 
or procedure under which the amount of penalty for the breach has been specified.  
(5) When a person voluntarily discloses to an officer under this Act the circumstances of a breach of the 
tax law, regulation or procedural requirement prior to the discovery of the breach by the officer under this 
Act, the proper officer may consider this fact as a mitigating factor when quantifying a penalty for that 
person.  
(6) The provisions of this section shall n ot apply in such cases where the penalty specified under this 
Act is either a fixed sum or expressed as a fixed percentage.  
127. Power to impose penalty in certain cases .—Where the proper officer is of the view that a person is 
liable to a penalty and the same is not covered under any proceedings under section 62 or section 63 or section 
64 or section 73 or section 74 or section 129 or section 130, he may issue an order levying such penalty 
after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to such person . 
128. Power to waive penalty or fee or both .—The Government may, by notification, waive in part or 
full, any penalty referred to in section 122 or section 123 or section 125 or any late fee referred to in section 82 
 47 for such class of taxpayers and under s uch mitigating circumstances as may be specified therein on the 
recommendations of the Council.  
129. Detention, seizure and release of goods and conveyances in transit. ––(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, where any person transports any go ods or stores any goods while they are in 
transit in contravention of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, all such goods and 
conveyance used as a means of transport for carrying the said goods and documents relating to such goods 
and c onveyance shall be liable to detention or seizure and after detention or seizure, shall be released, –– 
(a) on payment of the applicable tax and penalty equal to one hundred per cent. of  the tax payable 
on such goods and, in case of exempted goods, on payment of an amount equal to two per cent. of the 
value of goods or twenty -five thousand rupees, whichever is less, where the owner of the goods 
comes forward for payment of such tax and pe nalty;  
(b) on payment of the applicable tax and penalty equal to the fifty per cent. of the value of the 
goods reduced by the tax amount paid thereon and, in case of exempted goods, on payment of an 
amount equal to five per cent. of the value of goods or t wenty -five thousand rupees, whichever is less, 
where the owner of the goods does not come forward for payment of such tax and penalty;  
(c) upon furnishing a security equivalent to the amount payable under clause ( a) or clause ( b) in 
such form and manner as  may be prescribed:  
Provided that no such goods or conveyance shall be detained or seized without serving an order of 
detention or seizure on the person transporting the goods.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 6) of section 67 shall, mutatis mutandis , apply for detention and 
seizure of goods and conveyances.  
(3) The proper officer detaining or seizing goods or conveyances shall issue a notice specifying the 
tax and penalty payable and thereafter, pass an order for payment of tax and penalty under clause ( a) or 
clause ( b) or clause ( c). 
(4) No tax, interest or penalty shall be determined under sub -section ( 3) without giving the person 
concerned an opportunity of being heard.  
(5) On payment of amount referred in sub -section ( 1), all proceedings in respect of  the notice 
specified in sub -section ( 3) shall be deemed to be concluded.  
(6) Where the person transporting any goods or the owner of the goods fails to pay the amount of tax 
and penalty as provided in sub -section ( 1) within 1[fourteen  days] of such detent ion or seizure, further 
proceedings shall be initiated in accordance with the provisions of section 130:  
Provided that where the detained or seized goods are perishable or hazardous in nature or are likely to 
depreciate in value with passage of time, the s aid period of seven days may be reduced by the proper 
officer.  
130. Confiscation of goods or conveyances and levy of penalty. ––(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act, if any person — 
(i) supplies or receives any goods in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or the rules 
made thereunder with intent to evade payment of tax; or  
(ii) does not account for any goods on which he is liable to pay tax under this Act; or  
(iii) supplies any goods liable to tax under this Act without having app lied for registration; or  
(iv) contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder with intent to 
evade payment of tax; or  
(v) uses any conveyance as a means of transport for carriage of goods in contravention of the 
provisions of th is Act or the rules made thereunder unless the owner of the conveyance proves that it 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31  of 2018, s. 27 for ― seven days ‖ (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   83 
 
 was so used without the knowledge or connivance of the owner himself, his agent, if any, and the 
person in charge of the conveyance,  
then, all such goods or conveyances shall be liable to confiscation and the person shall be liable to penalty 
under section 122.  
(2) Whenever confiscation of any goods or conveyance is authorised  by this Act, the officer 
adjudging it shall give to the owner of the goods an option to pay in lieu of confiscation, such fine as the 
said officer thinks fit:  
Provided that such fine leviable shall not exceed the market value of the goods confiscated, les s the 
tax chargeable thereon:  
Provided further that the aggregate of such fine and penalty leviable shall not be less than the amount 
of penalty leviable under sub -section ( 1) of section 129:  
Provided also that where any such conveyance is used for the car riage of the goods or passengers for 
hire, the owner of the conveyance shall be given an option to pay in lieu of the confiscation of the 
conveyance a fine equal to the tax payable on the goods being transported thereon.  
(3) Where any fine in lieu of confi scation of goods or conveyance is imposed under sub -section ( 2), 
the owner of such goods or conveyance or the person referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall, in addition, be 
liable to any tax, penalty and charges payable in respect of such goods or conveyanc e. 
(4) No order for confiscation of goods or conveyance or for imposition of penalty shall be issued 
without giving the person an opportunity of being heard.  
(5) Where any goods or conveyance are confiscated under this Act, the title of such goods or 
conve yance shall thereupon vest in the Government.  
(6) The proper officer adjudging confiscation shall take and hold possession of the things confiscated 
and every officer of Police, on the requisition of such proper officer, shall assist him in taking and hold ing 
such possession.  
(7) The proper officer may, after satisfying himself that the confiscated goods or conveyance are not 
required in any other proceedings under this Act and after giving reasonable time not exceeding three 
months to pay fine in lieu of c onfiscation, dispose of such goods or conveyance and deposit the sale 
proceeds thereof with the Government.  
131. Confiscation or penalty not to interfere with other punishments. ––Without prejudice to the 
provisions contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 ( 2 of 1974) , no confiscation made or penalty 
imposed under the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall prevent the infliction of any other 
punishment to which the person affected thereby is liable under the provisions of t his Act or under any other 
law for the time being in force.  
132. Punishment for certain offences. ––(1) Whoever commits any of the following offences, 
namely: — 
(a) supplies  any goods or services or both without issue of any invoice, in violation of the 
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, with the intention to evade tax;  
(b) issues any invoice or bill without supply of goods or services or both in violation o f the 
provisions of this Act, or the rules made thereunder leading to wrongful availment or utilisation of 
input tax credit or refund of tax;  
(c) avails input tax credit using such invoice or bill referred to in clause ( b); 
(d) collects any amount as tax b ut fails to pay the same to the Government beyond a period of three 
months from the date on which such payment becomes due;  
(e) evades tax, fraudulently avails input tax credit or fraudulently obtains refund and where such 
offence is not covered under clau ses (a) to ( d); 84 
 (f) falsifies or substitutes financial records or produces fake accounts or documents or furnishes 
any false information with an intention to evade payment of tax due under this Act;  
(g) obstructs or prevents any officer in the discharge of  his duties under this Act;  
(h) acquires possession of, or in any way concerns himself in transporting, removing, depositing, 
keeping, concealing, supplying, or purchasing or in any other manner deals with, any goods which he 
knows or has reasons to believ e are liable to confiscation under this Act or the rules made thereunder;  
(i) receives or is in any way concerned with the supply of, or in any other manner deals with any 
supply of services which he knows or has reasons to believe are in contravention of any provisions of this 
Act or the rules made thereunder;  
(j) tampers with or destroys any material evidence or documents;  
(k) fails to supply any information which he is required to supply under this Act or the rules made 
thereunder or (unless with a reaso nable belief, the burden of proving which shall be upon him, that 
the information supplied by him is true) supplies false information; or  
(l) attempts to commit, or abets the commission of any of the offences mentioned in clauses ( a) to 
(k) of this section,  
shall be punishable –– 
(i) in cases where the amount of tax evaded or the amount of input tax credit wrongly availed or utilised 
or the amount of refund wrongly taken exceeds five hundred lakh rupees, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to five years and with fine;  
(ii) in cases where the amount of tax evaded or the amount of input tax credit wrongly availed or 
utilised or the amount of refund wrongly taken exceeds two hundred lakh rupees but does not exceed five 
hundred lakh rupees, with  imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with fine;  
(iii) in the case of any other offence where the amount of tax evaded or the amount of input tax credit 
wrongly availed or utilised or the amount of refund wrongly taken exceeds one hu ndred lakh rupees but 
does not exceed two hundred lakh rupees, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and 
with fine;  
(iv) in cases where he commits or abets the commission of an offence specified in clause ( f) or  
clause ( g) or clause ( j), he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months or with fine or with both.  
(2) Where any person convicted of an offence under this section is again convicted of an offence 
under this section, then, he shall be punishab le for the second and for every subsequent offence with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and with fine.  
(3) The imprisonment referred to in clauses ( i), (ii) and ( iii) of sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2) 
shall, in the absence of sp ecial and adequate reasons to the contrary to be recorded in the judgment of the 
Court, be for a term not less than six months.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), all 
offences under this Act, except the offences referred to in sub -section ( 5) shall be non -cognizable and 
bailable.  
(5) The offences specified in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) or clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) and 
punishable under clause ( i) of that sub -section shall be cognizable and non -bailable.  
(6) A person shall not be prosecuted for any offence under this section except with the previous 
sanction of the Commissioner.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the term ―tax‖ shall include the amount of tax evaded or 
the amo unt of input tax credit wrongly availed or utilised or refund wrongly taken under the provisions of 
this Act, the State Goods and Services Tax Act, the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union 85 
 Territory Goods and Services Tax Act and cess levied under the Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to 
States) Act.  
133. Liability of officers and certain other persons. —(1) Where any person engaged in connection 
with the collection of statistics under section 151 or compilation or computerisation thereof or  if any 
officer of central tax having access to information specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 150, or if any 
person engaged in connection with the provision of service on the common portal or the agent of common 
portal, wilfully discloses any info rmation or the contents of any return furnished under this Act or rules 
made thereunder otherwise than in execution of his duties under the said sections or for the purposes of 
prosecution for an offence under this Act or under any other Act for the time b eing in force, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend 
to twenty -five thousand rupees, or with both.  
(2) Any person — 
(a) who is a Government servant shall not be prosecuted for any of fence under this section except 
with the previous sanction of the Government;  
(b) who is not a Government servant shall not be prosecuted for any offence under this section 
except with the previous sanction of the Commissioner.  
134. Cognizance of offences. —No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this 
Act or the rules made thereunder except with the previous sanction of the Commissioner, and no court 
inferior to that of a Magistrate of the First Class, shall try any such offence.  
135. Presumption of culpable mental state. —In any prosecution for an offence under this Act 
which requires a culpable mental state on the part of the accused, the court shall presume the existence of 
such mental state but it shall be a defence for the accused t o prove the fact that he had no such mental 
state with respect to the act charged as an offence in that prosecution.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, –– 
(i) the expression ―culpable mental state‖ includes intention, motive, knowledge of a fact , and 
belief in, or reason to believe, a fact;  
(ii) a fact is said to be proved only when the court believes it to exist beyond reasonable doubt 
and not merely when its existence is established by a preponderance of probability.  
136. Relevancy of statement s under certain circumstances. —A statement made and signed by a 
person on appearance in response to any summons issued under section 70 during the course of any 
inquiry or proceedings under this Act shall be relevant, for the purpose of proving, in any pro secution for 
an offence under this Act, the truth of the facts which it contains, –– 
(a) when the person who made the statement is dead or cannot be found, or is incapable of giving 
evidence, or is kept out of the way by the adverse party, or whose presence  cannot be obtained 
without an amount of delay or expense which, under the circumstances of the case, the court 
considers unreasonable; or  
(b) when the person who made the statement is examined as a witness in the case before the court and 
the court is of the opinion that, having regard to the circumstances of the case, the statement should be 
admitted in evidence in the interest of justice.  
137. Offences by companies. —(1) Where an offence committed by a person under this Act is a 
company, every person who,  at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and pun ished accordingly.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any negligence on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 86 
 officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accor dingly.  
(3) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a taxable person being a partnership firm 
or a Limited Liability Partnership or a Hindu Undivided Family or a trust, the partner or karta or 
managing trustee shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly and the provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall, mutatis mutandis , apply to such 
persons.  
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall render any such person liable to any punishm ent provided 
in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this section, –– 
(i) ―company‖ means a body c orporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(ii) ―director‖, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
138. Compounding of offences. —(1) Any offence under this Act may, either before or after the 
institution of prosecution, be compounded by the Commissioner on payment, by the person accused of the 
offence, to the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, of such compounding 
amount in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that nothing co ntained in this section shall apply to — 
(a) a person who has been allowed to compound once in respect of any of the offences specified 
in clauses ( a) to ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of section 132 and the offences specified in clause ( l) which are 
relatable to offences specified in clauses ( a) to ( f) of the said sub -section;  
(b) a person who has been allowed to compound once in respect of any offence, other than those 
in clause ( a), under this Act or under the provisions of any State Goods and Services Tax Act o r the 
Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act or the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act in respect 
of supplies of value exceeding one crore rupees;  
(c) a person who has been accused of committing an offence under this Act which is also an 
offence und er any other law for the time being in force;  
(d) a person who has been convicted for an offence under this Act by a court;  
(e) a person who has been accused of committing an offence specified in clause ( g) or clause ( j) 
or clause ( k) of sub -section ( 1) of section 132; and  
(f) any other class of persons or offences as may be prescribed:  
Provided further that any compounding allowed under the provisions of this section shall not affect 
the proceedings, if any, instituted under any other law:  
Provided also th at compounding shall be allowed only after making payment of tax, interest and 
penalty involved in such offences.  
(2) The amount for compounding of offences under this section shall be such as may be prescribed, 
subject to the minimum amount not being less  than ten thousand rupees or fifty per cent. of the tax 
involved, whichever is higher, and the maximum amount not being less than thirty thousand rupees or one 
hundred and fifty per cent. of the tax, whichever is higher.  
(3) On payment of such compounding amount as may be determined by the Commissioner, no further 
proceedings shall be initiated under this Act against the accused person in respect of the same offence and 
any criminal proceedings, if already initiated in respect of the said offence, shall sta nd abated.  87 
 CHAPTER XX  
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS  
139. Migration of existing taxpayers. —(1) On and from the appointed day, every person registered 
under any of the existing laws and having a valid Permanent Account Number shall be issued a certificate 
of registration on provisional basis, subject to such conditions and in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed, which unless replaced by a final certificate of registration under sub -section ( 2), shall be liable 
to be cancelled if the conditions so prescri bed are not complied with.  
(2) The final certificate of registration shall be granted in such form and manner and subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed.  
(3) The certificate of registration issued to a person under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to have not 
been issued if the said registration is cancelled in pursuance of an application filed by such person that he 
was not liable to registration under section 22 or section 24.  
140. Transitional arrangements for input tax credit. —(1) A registered p erson, other than a person 
opting to pay tax under section 10, shall be entitled to take, in his electronic credit ledger, the amount of 
CENVAT credit  1[of eligible duties ] carried forward in the return relating to the period ending with the day 
immediatel y preceding the appointed day, furnished by him under the existing law in such manner as may be 
prescribed:  
Provided that the registered person shall not be allowed to take credit in the following 
circumstances, namely: — 
(i) where the said amount of credit  is not admissible as input tax credit under this Act; or  
(ii) where he has not furnished all the returns required under the existing law for the period of six 
months immediately preceding the appointed date; or  
(iii) here the said amount of credit relates  to goods manufactured and cleared under such 
exemption notifications as are notified by the Government.  
(2) A registered person, other than a person opting to pay tax under section 10, shall be entitled to 
take, in his electronic credit ledger, credit of the unavailed CENVAT credit in respect of capital goods, 
not carried forward in a return, furnished under the existing law by him, for the period ending with the 
day immediately preceding the appointed day in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that  the registered person shall not be allowed to take credit unless the said credit was admissible 
as CENVAT credit under the existing law and is also admissible as input tax credit under this Act.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression ―unavailed CENVAT credit‖ 
means the amount that remains after subtracting the amount of CENVAT credit already availed in respect 
of capital goods by the taxable person under the existing law from the aggregate amount of CENVAT 
credit to which th e said person was entitled in respect of the said capital goods under the existing law.  
(3) A registered person, who was not liable to be registered under the existing law, or who was engaged 
in the manufacture of exempted goods or provision of exempted se rvices, or who was providing works 
contract service and was availing of the benefit of notification No. 26/2012 —Service Tax, dated the 20th 
June, 2012 or a first stage dealer or a second stage dealer or a registered importer or a depot of a 
manufacturer, s hall be entitled to take, in his electronic credit ledger, credit of eligible duties in respect of 
inputs held in stock and inputs contained in semi -finished or finished goods held in stock on the appointed 
day subject to the following conditions, namely: –– 
(i) such inputs or goods are used or intended to be used for making taxable supplies under this 
Act; 
(ii) the said registered person is eligible for input tax credit on such inputs under this Act;  
                                                           
1.  Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 28 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).  88 
 (iii) the  said registered person is in possession of invoice or other prescribed documents 
evidencing payment of duty under the existing law in respect of such inputs;  
(iv) such invoices or other prescribed documents were issued not earlier than twelve months 
immed iately preceding the appointed day; and  
(v) the supplier of services is not eligible for any abatement under this Act:  
Provided that where a registered person, other than a manufacturer or a supplier of services, is not in 
possession of an invoice or any o ther documents evidencing payment of duty in respect of inputs, then, 
such registered person shall, subject to such conditions, limitations and safeguards as may be prescribed, 
including that the said taxable person shall pass on the benefit of such credit  by way of reduced prices to 
the recipient, be allowed to take credit at such rate and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(4) A registered person, who was engaged in the manufacture of taxable as well as exempted goods 
under the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) or provision of taxable as well as exempted services under 
Chapter V of the Finance Act, 1994 (32 of 1994), but which are liable to tax under this Act, shall be 
entitled to take, in his electronic credit ledger, — 
(a) the amount of CENVAT credit  carried forward in a return furnished under the existing law by 
him in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1); and  
(b) the amount of CENVAT credit of eligible duties in respect of inputs held in stock and inputs 
contained in semi -finished or fi nished goods held in stock on the appointed day, relating to such 
exempted goods or services, in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 3). 
(5) A registered person shall be entitled to take, in his electronic credit ledger, credit of eligible dutie s 
and taxes in respect of inputs or input services received on or after the appointed day but the duty or tax in 
respect of which has been paid by the supplier under the existing law, subject to the condition that the 
invoice or any other duty or tax payin g document of the same was recorded in the books of account of 
such person within a period of thirty days from the appointed day:  
Provided that the period of thirty days may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended by the 
Commissioner for a further pe riod not exceeding thirty days:  
Provided further that said registered person shall furnish a statement, in such manner as may be 
prescribed, in respect of credit that has been taken under this sub -section.  
(6) A registered person, who was either paying tax  at a fixed rate or paying a fixed amount in lieu of 
the tax payable under the existing law shall be entitled to take, in his electronic credit ledger, credit of 
eligible duties in respect of inputs held in stock and inputs contained in semi -finished or fi nished goods 
held in stock on the appointed day subject to the following conditions, namely: –– 
(i) such inputs or goods are used or intended to be used for making taxable supplies under this 
Act; 
(ii) the said registered person is not paying tax under section 10;  
(iii) the said registered person is eligible for input tax credit on such inputs under this Act;  
(iv) the said registered person is in possession of invoice or other prescribed documents 
evidencin g payment of duty under the existing law in respect of inputs; and  
(v) such invoices or other prescribed documents were issued not earlier than twelve months 
immediately preceding the appointed day.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in  this Act, the input tax credit on account of 
any services received prior to the appointed day by an Input Service Distributor shall be eligible for 
distribution as credit under this Act even if the invoices relating to such services are received on or aft er 
the appointed day.  89 
 (8) Where a registered person having centralised registration under the existing law has obtained a 
registration under this Act, such person shall be allowed to take, in his electronic credit ledger, credit of 
the amount of CENVAT cre dit carried forward in a return, furnished under the existing law by him, in 
respect of the period ending with the day immediately preceding the appointed day in such manner as 
may be prescribed:  
Provided that if the registered person furnishes his return for the period ending with the day 
immediately preceding the appointed day within three months of the appointed day, such credit shall be 
allowed subject to the condition that the said return is either an original return or a revised return where the 
credi t has been reduced from that claimed earlier:  
Provided further that the registered person shall not be allowed to take credit unless the said amount is 
admissible as input tax credit under this Act:  
Provided also that such credit may be transferred to any of the registered persons having the same 
Permanent Account Number for which the centralised registration was obtained under the existing law.  
(9) Where any CENVAT credit availed for the input services provided under the existing law has 
been reversed due to non -payment of the consideration within a period of three months, such credit can be 
reclaimed subject to the condition that the registered person has made the payment of the consideration 
for that supply of services within a period of three months from  the appointed day.  
(10) The amount of credit under sub -sections ( 3), (4) and ( 6) shall be calculated in such manner as 
may be prescribed.  
Explanation  1.—For the purposes of sub -sections ( 3), (4) and ( 6), the expression ―eligible duties‖ 
means –– 
(i) the  additional duty of excise leviable under section 3 of the Additional Duties of Excise 
(Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 (58 of 1957);  
(ii) the additional duty leviable under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 
(51 of 1975);  
(iii) the additional duty leviable under sub -section ( 5) of section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act, 
1975 (51 of 1975);  
1*** 
(v) the duty of excise specified in the First Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985                 
(5 of 1986);  
(vi) the dut y of excise specified in the Second Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985           
(5 of 1986); and  
(vii) the National Calamity Contingent Duty leviable under section 136 of the Finance Act, 2001 
(14 of 2001),  
in respect of inputs held in stock and inputs contained in semi -finished or finished goods held in stock on 
the appointed day.  
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of sub -section ( 5), the expression ―eligible duties and taxes‖ 
means –– 
(i) the additional duty of excise leviable under section 3 of  the Additional Duties of Excise 
(Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 (58 of 1957);  
(ii) the additional duty leviable under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 
(51 of 1975);  
(iii) the additional duty leviable under sub -section ( 5) of section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act, 
1975 (51 of 1975);  
                                                           
1. Clause ( iv) omitted by Act 31 of 2018, s. 28 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).   90 
 1*** 
(v) the duty of excise specified in the First Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985             
(5 of 1986);  
(vi) the duty of excise specified in the Second Schedule to the Centra l Excise Tariff Act, 1985           
(5 of 1986);  
(vii) the National Calamity Contingent Duty leviable under section 136 of the Finance Act, 2001 
(14 of 2001); and  
(viii) the service tax leviable under section 66B of the Finance Act, 1994 (32 of 1994),  
in respect of inputs and input services received on or after the appointed day.  
 2[‘Explanation 3.—For removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the  expression ―eligible 
duties  and taxes‖ excludes any cess which has not been  specified in Explanation 1 or Explanation 2 and 
any cess which is collected as  additional duty of customs under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the 
Customs  Tariff Act, 1975  (51 of 1975) .] 
141. Transitional provisions relating to job work .––(1) Where any inputs received at a place of 
business had been removed as such or removed after being partially processed to a job worker for further 
processing, testing, repair, reconditioning or any other purpose in accordance with the provisions of 
existing law prior to the appointed day and su ch inputs are returned to the said place on or after the 
appointed day, no tax shall be payable if such inputs, after completion of the job work or otherwise, are 
returned to the said place within six months from the appointed day:  
Provided that the period  of six months may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended by the 
Commissioner for a further period not exceeding two months:  
Provided further that if such inputs are not returned within the period specified in this sub -section, the 
input tax credit shall be liable to be recovered in accordance with the provisions of clause ( a) of           
sub-section ( 8) of section 142.  
(2) Where any semi -finished goods had been removed from the place of business to any other 
premises for carrying out certain manufa cturing processes in accordance with the provisions of existing 
law prior to the appointed day and such goods (hereafter in this section referred to as ―the said goods‖) 
are returned to the said place on or after the appointed day, no tax shall be payable,  if the said goods, after 
undergoing manufacturing processes or otherwise, are returned to the said place within six months from 
the appointed day:  
Provided that the period of six months may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended by the 
Commissioner  for a further period not exceeding two months:  
Provided further that if the said goods are not returned within the period specified in this                    
sub-section, the input tax credit shall be liable to be recovered in accordance with the provisi ons of clause 
(a) of sub -section ( 8) of section 142:  
Provided also that the manufacturer may, in accordance with the provisions of the existing law, 
transfer the said goods to the premises of any registered person for the purpose of supplying therefrom on 
payment of tax in India or without payment of tax for exports within the period specified in this                 
sub-section.  
(3) Where any excisable goods manufactured at a place of business had been removed without 
payment of duty for carrying out tests  or any other process not amounting to manufacture, to any other 
premises, whether registered or not, in accordance with the provisions of existing law prior to the appointed 
day and such goods, are returned to the said place on or after the appointed day,  no tax shall be payable if 
                                                           
1. Clause ( iv) omitted by s. 28, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).  
2. The explanation ins. by s. 28, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017) .   91 
 the said goods, after undergoing tests or any other process, are returned to the said place within six months 
from the appointed day:  
Provided that the period of six months may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended by th e 
Commissioner for a further period not exceeding two months:  
Provided further that if the said goods are not returned within the period specified in this                
sub-section, the input tax credit shall be liable to be recovered in accordance with t he provisions of  
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 8) of section 142:  
Provided also that the manufacturer may, in accordance with the provisions of the existing law, 
transfer the said goods from the said other premises on payment of tax in India or without payme nt of tax 
for exports within the period specified in this sub -section.  
(4) The tax under sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3) shall not be payable, only if the manufacturer and the 
job worker declare the details of the inputs or goods held in stock by the job wor ker on behalf of the 
manufacturer on the appointed day in such form and manner and within such time as may be prescribed.  
142. Miscellaneous transitional provisions. ––(1) Where any goods on which duty, if any, had been 
paid under the existing law at the ti me of removal thereof, not being earlier than six months prior to the 
appointed day, are returned to any place of business on or after the appointed day, the registered person shall 
be eligible for refund of the duty paid under the existing law where such goods are returned by a person, other 
than a registered person, to the said place of business within a period of six months from the appointed day 
and such goods are identifiable to the satisfaction of the proper officer:  
Provided that if the said goods ar e returned by a registered person, the return of such goods shall be 
deemed to be a supply.  
(2) (a) where, in pursuance of a contract entered into prior to the appointed day, the price of any goods 
or services or both is revised upwards on or after the appointed day, the registered person who had 
removed or provided such goods or services or both shall issue to the recipient a supplementary invoice or 
debit note, containing such particulars as may be prescribed, within thirty days of such price revision and 
for the purposes of this Act such supplementary invoice or debit note shall be deemed to have been issued 
in respect of an outward supply made under this Act;  
(b) where, in pursuance of a contract entered into prior to the appointed day, the price of a ny goods or 
services or both is revised downwards on or after the appointed day, the registered person who had removed 
or provided such goods or services or both may issue to the recipient a credit note, containing such 
particulars as may be prescribed, wi thin thirty days of such price revision and for the purposes of this Act 
such credit note shall be deemed to have been issued in respect of an outward supply made under this Act:  
Provided that the registered person shall be allowed to reduce his tax liabil ity on account of issue of 
the credit note only if the recipient of the credit note has reduced his input tax credit corresponding to 
such reduction of tax liability.  
(3) Every claim for refund filed by any person before , on or after the appointed day, for  refund of any 
amount of CENVAT credit, duty, tax, interest or any other amount paid under the existing law, shall be 
disposed of in accordance with the provisions of existing law and any amount eventually accruing to him 
shall be paid in cash, notwithstan ding anything to the contrary contained under the provisions of existing law 
other than the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 11B of the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) : 
Provided that where any claim for refund of CENVAT credit is fully or part ially rejected, the amount 
so rejected shall lapse:  
Provided further that no refund shall be allowed of any amount of CENVAT credit where the balance 
of the said amount as on the appointed day has been carried forward under this Act.  92 
 (4) Every claim for re fund filed after the appointed day for refund of any duty or tax paid under existing 
law in respect of the goods or services exported before or after the appointed day, shall be disposed of in 
accordance with the provisions of the existing law:  
Provided th at where any claim for refund of CENVAT credit is fully or partially rejected, the amount 
so rejected shall lapse:  
Provided further that no refund shall be allowed of any amount of CENVAT credit where the balance 
of the said amount as on the appointed day has been carried forward under this Act.  
(5) Every claim filed by a person after the appointed day for refund of tax paid under the existing law in 
respect of services not provided shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of existing law and 
any amount eventually accruing to him shall be paid in cash, notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained under the provisions of existing law other than the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 11B 
of the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) . 
(6) (a) every proceeding of appeal, review or reference relating to a claim for CENVAT credit initiated 
whether before, on or after the appointed day under the existing law shall be disposed of in accordance with 
the provisions of existing law, and any amoun t of credit found to be admissible to the claimant shall be 
refunded to him in cash, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained under the provisions of existing 
law other than the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 11B of the Central Excise A ct, 1944 (1 of 1944)  
and the amount rejected, if any, shall not be admissible as input tax credit under this Act:  
Provided that no refund shall be allowed of any amount of CENVAT credit where the balance of the 
said amount as on the appointed day has been  carried forward under this Act;  
(b) every proceeding of appeal, review or reference relating to recovery of CENVAT credit initiated 
whether before, on or after the appointed day under the existing law shall be disposed of in accordance with 
the provisions  of existing law and if any amount of credit becomes recoverable as a result of such appeal, 
review or reference, the same shall, unless recovered under the existing law, be recovered as an arrear of tax 
under this Act and the amount so recovered shall not  be admissible as input tax credit under this Act.  
(7) (a) every proceeding of appeal, review or reference relating to any output duty or tax liability 
initiated whether before, on or after the appointed day under the existing law, shall be disposed of in 
accordance with the provisions of the existing law, and i f any amount becomes recoverable as a result of 
such appeal, review or reference, the same shall, unless recovered under the existing law, be recovered 
as an arrear of duty or tax under this Act and the amount so recovered shall not be admissible as input 
tax credit under this Act.  
(b) every proceeding of appeal, review or reference relating to any output duty or tax liability initiated 
whether before, on or after the appointed day under the existing law, shall be disposed of in accordance with 
the provisio ns of the existing law, and any amount found to be admissible to the claimant shall be refunded to 
him in cash, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained under the provisions of existing law other 
than the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 11B of the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) and the 
amount rejected, if any, shall not be admissible as input tax credit under this Act.  
(8) (a) where in pursuance of an assessment or adjudication proceedings instituted, whether before, 
on or after the  appointed day, under the existing law, any amount of tax, interest, fine or penalty becomes 
recoverable from the person, the same shall, unless recovered under the existing law, be recovered as an 
arrear of tax under this Act and the amount so recovered s hall not be admissible as input tax credit under 
this Act;  
(b) where in pursuance of an assessment or adjudication proceedings instituted, whether before, on or after 
the appointed day, under the existing law, any amount of tax, interest, fine or penalty b ecomes refundable to the 
taxable person, the same shall be refunded to him in cash under the said law, notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in the said law other than the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 11B of the Central 93 
 Excise Act,  1944 (1 of 1944) and the amount rejected, if any, shall not be admissible as input tax credit under 
this Act.  
(9) (a) where any return, furnished under the existing law, is revised after the appointed day and if, 
pursuant to such revision, any amount is found to be recoverable or any amount of CENVAT credit is found to 
be inadmissible, the same shall, unless recovered under the existing law, be recovered as an arrear of tax under 
this Act and the amount so recovered shall not be admissible as input tax cr edit under this Act;  
(b) where any return, furnished under the existing law, is revised after the appointed day but within the 
time limit specified for such revision under the existing law and if, pursuant to such revision, any amount is 
found to be refund able or CENVAT credit is found to be admissible to any taxable person, the same shall be 
refunded to him in cash under the existing law, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the said 
law other than the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 11B of the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) and 
the amount rejected, if any, shall not be admissible as input tax credit under this Act.  
(10) Save as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the goods or services or both supplied on or after the 
appointed day in pursuance of a contract entered into prior to the appointed day shall be liable to tax 
under the provisions of this Act.  
(11) (a) notwithstanding anything contained in section 12, no tax shall be payable on goods under this 
Act to the extent the tax was leviable on the said goods under the Value Added Tax Act of the State;  
(b) notwithstanding anything contained in section 13, no tax shall be payable on services under this 
Act to the extent the tax was leviable on the said services under Chapte r V of the Finance Act, 1994                
(32 of 1994);  
(c) where tax was paid on any supply both under the Value Added Tax Act and under Chapter V of the 
Finance Act, 1994 (32 of 1994) , tax shall be leviable under this Act and the taxable person shall b e entitled to 
take credit of value added tax or service tax paid under the existing law to the extent of supplies made after 
the appointed day and such credit shall be calculated in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(12) Where any goods sent on approval ba sis, not earlier than six months before the appointed day, 
are rejected or not approved by the buyer and returned to the seller on or after the appointed day, no tax 
shall be payable thereon if such goods are returned within six months from the appointed d ay: 
Provided that the said period of six months may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended by the 
Commissioner for a further period not exceeding two months:  
Provided further that the tax shall be payable by the person returning the goods if such go ods are 
liable to tax under this Act, and are returned after a period specified in this sub -section:  
Provided also that tax shall be payable by the person who has sent the goods on approval basis if such 
goods are liable to tax under this Act, and are not returned within a period specified in this sub -section.  
(13) Where a supplier has made any sale of goods in respect of which tax was required to be deducted 
at source under any law of a State or Union territory relating to Value Added Tax and has also issu ed an 
invoice for the same before the appointed day, no deduction of tax at source under section 51 shall be 
made by the deductor under the said section where payment to the said supplier is made on or after the 
appointed day.  
Explanation .––For the purpose s of this Chapter, the expressions ―capital goods‖, ―Central Value 
Added Tax (CENVAT) credit‖, ―first stage dealer‖, ―second stage dealer‖, or ―manufacture‖ shall have 
the same meaning as respectively assigned to them in the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) or the 
rules made thereunder.  
CHAPTER XXI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
143. Job work procedure .––(1) A registered person (hereafter in this section referred to as the 
―principal‖) may under intimation and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, send any inputs or 94 
 capital goods, without payment of tax, to a job worker for job work and from there  subsequently send to 
another job worker and likewise, and shall, –– 
(a) bring back inputs, after completion of job work or otherwise, or capital goods, other than moulds 
and dies, jigs and fixtures, or tools, within one year and three years, respectively, of their being sent out, 
to any of his place of business, without payment of tax;  
(b) supply such inputs, after completion of job work or otherwise, or capital goods, other than moulds 
and dies, jigs and fixtures, or tools, within one year and three years,  respectively, of their being sent out 
from the place of business of a job worker on payment of tax within India, or with or without payment of 
tax for export, as the case may be:  
Provided that the principal shall not supply the goods from the place of bus iness of a job worker in 
accordance with the provisions of this clause unless the said principal declares the place of business of the 
job worker as his additional place of business except in a case — 
(i) where the job worker is registered under section 25;  or 
(ii) where the principal is engaged in the supply of such goods as may be notified by the 
Commissioner.  
1[Provided further that the period of one year and three years may, on sufficient  cause being 
shown, be extended by the Commissioner for a further period not exceeding  one year and two years  
respectively .] 
(2) The responsibility for keeping proper accounts for the inputs or capital goods shall lie with the 
principal.  
(3) Where the inputs sent for job work are not received back by the principal after completion of job 
work or otherwise in accordance with the provisions of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) or are not supplied from 
the place of business of the job worker in accordance with the provisions of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) 
within a period of on e year of their being sent out, it shall be deemed that such inputs had been supplied 
by the principal to the job worker on the day when the said inputs were sent out.  
(4) Where the capital goods, other than moulds and dies, jigs and fixtures, or tools, se nt for job work 
are not received back by the principal in accordance with the provisions of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) or 
are not supplied from the place of business of the job worker in accordance with the provisions of    
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) within a period of three years of their being sent out, it shall be deemed that 
such capital goods had been supplied by the principal to the job worker on the day when the said capital 
goods were sent out.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2), any waste and scrap generated 
during the job work may be supplied by the job worker directly from his place of business on payment of 
tax, if such job worker is registered, or by the principal, if the job worker is not registered.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of job work, input includes intermediate goods arising from any treatment 
or process carried out on the inputs by the principal or the job worker.  
144. Presumption as to documents in certain cases .––Where any document –– 
(i) is produced by any person under this Act or any other law for the time being in force; or  
(ii) has been seized from the custody or control of any person under this Act or any other law for 
the time being in force; or  
(iii) has been received from any place outside India in the course of any proceedings under this 
Act or any other law for the time being in force,  
and such document is tendered by the prosecution in evidence against him or any other person who is 
tried jointly with him, the court shall — 
(a) unless the contrary is proved by such person, presume — 
                                                           
1. The proviso ins.  by Act 31 of 2018 (1 -2-2019).      95 
 (i) the truth of the contents of such document;  
(ii) that the signature and every other part of such document which purports to be in the 
handwriting of any particular person or which the court may reason ably assume to have been 
signed by, or to be in the handwriting of, any particular person, is in that person‘s 
handwriting, and in the case of a document executed or attested, that it was executed or 
attested by the person by whom it purports to have been so executed or attested;  
(b) admit the document in evidence notwithstanding that it is not duly stamped, if such 
document is otherwise admissible in evidence.  
145. Admissibility of micro films, facsimile copies of documents and computer printouts as 
documents and as evidence .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, — 
(a) a micro film of a document or the reproduction of the image or images embodied in such 
micro film (whether enlarged or not); or  
(b) a facsimile copy of a document; or  
(c) a statement contained in a document and included in a printed material produced by a 
computer, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed; or  
(d) any information stored electronically in any device or media, inclu ding any hard copies made 
of such information,  
shall be deemed to be a document for the purposes of this Act and the rules made thereunder and shall be 
admissible in any proceedings thereunder, without further proof or production of the original, as eviden ce 
of any contents of the original or of any fact stated therein of which direct evidence would be admissible.  
(2) In any proceedings under this Act or the rules made thereunder, where it is desired to give a 
statement in evidence by virtue of this section , a certificate, — 
(a) identifying the document containing the statement and describing the manner in which it was 
produced;  
(b) giving such particulars of any device involved in the production of that document as may be 
appropriate for the purpose of showi ng that the document was produced by a computer,  
shall  be evidence of any matter stated in the certificate and for the purposes of this sub -section it shall be 
sufficient for a matter to be stated to the best of the knowledge and belief of the person stating it.  
146. Common Portal. —The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, notify the 
Common Goods and Services Tax Electronic Portal for facilitating registration, payment of tax, furnishing of 
returns, computation and settlement of integrated tax, electronic way bill and for carrying out such oth er 
functions and for such purposes as may be prescribed.  
147. Deemed exports. —The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, notify 
certain supplies of goods as deemed exports, where goods supplied do not leave India, and payment for 
such suppl ies is received either in Indian rupees or in convertible foreign exchange, if such goods are 
manufactured in India.  
148. Special procedure for certain processes. —The Government may, on the recommendations of 
the Council, and subject to such conditions and  safeguards as may be prescribed, notify certain classes of 
registered persons, and the special procedures to be followed by such persons including those with regard 
to registration, furnishing of return, payment of tax and administration of such persons.  
149. Goods and services tax compliance rating. —(1) Every registered person may be assigned a 
goods and services tax compliance rating score by the Government based on his record of compliance 
with the provisions of this Act.  
(2)The goods and services tax compliance rating score may be determined on the basis of such 
parameters as may be prescribed.  96 
 (3) The goods and services tax compliance rating score may be updated at periodic intervals and 
intimated to the registered person and also placed in the public  domain in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
150. Obligation to furnish information return. —(1) Any person, being — 
(a) a taxable person; or  
(b) a local authority or other public body or association; or  
(c) any authority of the State Government responsible for the collection of value added tax or 
sales tax or State excise duty or an authority of the Central Government responsible for the collection 
of excise duty or customs duty; or  
(d) an income -tax authority appointed under the provisions of the Income -tax Act, 1961                      
(43 of 1961) ; or 
(e) a banking company within the meaning of clause ( a) of section 45A of the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934); or  
(f) a State Electricity Board or an electricity distribution or transmission licen see under the 
Electricity Act, 2003 ( 36 of 2003) , or any other entity entrusted with such functions by the Central 
Government or the State Government; or  
(g) the Registrar or Sub -Registrar appointed under section 6 of the Registration Act, 1908                
(16 of 1908); or  
(h) a Registrar within the meaning of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013); or  
(i) the registering authority empowered to register motor vehicles under the Motor Vehicles Act, 
1988 (59 of 1988); or  
(j) the Collector referred to in clau se (c) of section 3 of the Right to Fair Compensation and 
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (30 of 2013); or  
(k) the recognised stock exchange referred to in clause ( f) of section 2 of the Securities Contracts 
(Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956); or  
(l) a depository referred to in clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Depositories Act, 
1996 (22 of 1996); or  
(m) an officer of the Reserve Bank of India as constituted under section 3 of the Reserve Bank  of 
India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934); or  
(n) the Goods and Services Tax Network, a company registered under the Companies Act, 2013 
(18 of 2013); or  
(o) a person to whom a Unique Identity Number has been granted under sub -section ( 9) of  
section 25; or  
(p) any other person as may be specified, on the recommendations of the Council, by the 
Government,  
who is responsible for maintaining record of registration or statement of accounts or any periodic return or 
document containing details of payment of tax and other  details of transaction of goods or services or both or 
transactions related to a bank account or consumption of electricity or transaction of purchase, sale or 
exchange of goods or property or right or interest in a property under any law for the time bei ng in force, shall 
furnish an information return of the same in respect of such periods, within such time, in such form and 
manner and to such authority or agency as may be prescribed.  
(2) Where the Commissioner, or an officer authorised by him in this beh alf, considers that the 
information furnished in the information return is defective, he may intimate the defect to the person who 
has furnished such information return and give him an opportunity of rectifying the defect within a period of 
thirty days fro m the date of such intimation or within such further period which, on an application made in 
this behalf, the said authority may allow and if the defect is not rectified within the said period of thirty days 97 
 or, the further period so allowed, then, notwith standing anything contained in any other provisions of this 
Act, such information return shall be treated as not furnished and the provisions of this Act shall apply.  
(3) Where a person who is required to furnish information return has not furnished the sa me within 
the time specified in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the said authority may serve upon him a notice 
requiring furnishing of such information return within a period not exceeding ninety days from the date of 
service of the notice and such per son shall furnish the information return.  
151. Power to collect statistics. —(1) The Commissioner may, if he considers that it is necessary so 
to do, by notification, direct that statistics may be collected relating to any matter dealt with by or in 
connect ion with this Act.  
(2) Upon such notification being issued, the Commissioner, or any person authorised by him in this 
behalf, may call upon the concerned persons to furnish such information or returns, in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed, relating  to any matter in respect of which statistics is to be collected.  
152. Bar on disclosure of information. —(1) No information of any individual return or part thereof with 
respect to any matter given for the purposes of section 150 or section 151 shall, without the previous consent in 
writing of the concerned person or his authorised representative, be published in such manner so as to enable 
such particulars to be identified as referring to a particular person and no such information shall be used for the 
purpose of any proceedings under this Act.  
(2) Except for the purposes of prosecution under this Act or any o ther Act for the time being in force, no 
person who is not engaged in the collection of statistics under this Act or compilation or computerisation 
thereof for the purposes of this Act, shall be permitted to see or have access to any information or any 
individual return referred to in section 151.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to the publication of any information relating to a class of taxable 
persons or class of transactions, if in the opinion of the Commissioner, it is desirable in the public i nterest to 
publish such information.  
153. Taking assistance from an expert. —Any officer not below the rank of Assistant Commissioner 
may, having regard to the nature and complexity of the case and the interest of revenue, take assistance of 
any expert at any stage of scrutiny, inquiry, investigation or any other proceedings before him.  
154. Power to take samples. —The Commissioner or an officer authorised by him may take samples 
of goods from the possession of any taxable person, where he considers it neces sary, and provide a receipt 
for any samples so taken.  
155. Burden of proof. —Where any person claims that he is eligible for input tax credit under this 
Act, the burden of proving such claim shall lie on such person.  
156. Persons deemed to be public servant s.—All persons discharging functions under this Act shall 
be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code ( 45 of 1860).  
157. Protection of action taken under this Act. —(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings 
shall lie against the President, State President, Members, officers or other employees of the Appellate 
Tribunal or any other person authorised by the said Appellate Tribunal for anything which is in good f aith 
done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules made thereunder.  
(2) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any officer appointed or 
authorised under this Act for anything which is done or intended to be done in good  faith under this Act 
or the rules made thereunder.  
158. Disclosure of information by a public servant. —(1) All particulars contained in any statement 
made, return furnished or accounts or documents produced in accordance with this Act, or in any record of  
evidence given in the course of any proceedings under this Act (other than proceedings before a criminal 
court), or in any record of any proceedings under this Act shall, save as provided in sub -section ( 3), not be 
disclosed.  98 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), no court shall, 
save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 3), require any officer appointed or authorised under this Act 
to produce before it or to give evidence before it in respect of particulars r eferred to in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the disclosure of, –– 
(a) any particulars in respect of any statement, return, accounts, documents, evidence, affidavit or 
deposition, for the purpose of any prosecution under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or the 
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (49 of 1988), or any other law for the time being in force; or  
(b) any particulars to the Central Government or the State Government or to any person acting in 
the implement ation of this Act, for the purposes of carrying out the objects of this Act; or  
(c) any particulars when such disclosure is occasioned by the lawful exercise under this Act of any 
process for the service of any notice or recovery of any demand; or  
(d) any particulars to a civil court in any suit or proceedings, to which the Government or any 
authority under this Act is a party, which relates to any matter arising out of any proceedings under 
this Act or under any other law for the time being in force author ising any such authority to exercise 
any powers thereunder; or  
(e) any particulars to any officer appointed for the purpose of audit of tax receipts or refunds of 
the tax imposed by this Act; or  
(f) any particulars where such particulars are relevant for t he purposes of any inquiry into the 
conduct of any officer appointed or authorised under this Act, to any person or persons appointed as 
an inquiry officer under any law for the time being in force; or  
(g) any such particulars to an officer of the Central Government or of any State Government, as may 
be necessary for the purpose of enabling that Government to levy or realise any tax or duty; or  
(h) any particulars when such disclosure is occasioned by the lawful exercise by a public servant 
or any other sta tutory authority, of his or its powers under any law for the time being in force; or  
(i) any particulars relevant to any inquiry into a charge of misconduct in connection with any 
proceedings under this Act against a practising advocate, a tax practitioner , a practising cost accountant, a 
practising chartered accountant, a practising company secretary to the authority empowered to take 
disciplinary action against the members practising the profession of a legal practitioner, a cost 
accountant, a chartered a ccountant or a company secretary, as the case may be; or  
(j) any particulars to any agency appointed for the purposes of data entry on any automated 
system or for the purpose of operating, upgrading or maintaining any automated system where such 
agency is contractually bound not to use or disclose such particulars except for the aforesaid 
purposes; or  
(k) any particulars to an officer of the Government as may be necessary for the purposes of any 
other law for the time being in force; or  
(l) any information relating to any class of taxable persons or class of transactions for publication, 
if, in the opinion of the Commissioner, it is desirable in the public interest, to publish such 
information.  
159. Publication of information in respect of persons in certain  cases .—(1) If the Commissioner, 
or any other officer authorised  by him in this behalf, is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient in 
the public interest to publish the name of any person and any other particulars relating to any proceedings 
or prosecution under this Act in respect of such person, it may cause  to be published such name and 
particulars in such manner as it thinks fit.  
(2) No publication under this section shall be made in relation to any penalty imposed under this Act 
until the time for presenting an appeal to the Appellate Authority under secti on 107 has expired without 
an appeal having been presented or the appeal, if presented, has been disposed of.  99 
 Explanation .––In the case of firm, company or other association of persons, the names of the partners 
of the firm, directors, managing agents, sec retaries and treasurers or managers of the company, or the 
members of the association, as the case may be, may also be published if, in the opinion of the 
Commissioner, or any other officer authorised by him in this behalf, circumstances of the case justif y it. 
160. Assessment proceedings, etc., not to be invalid on certain grounds .—(1) No assessment, re -
assessment, adjudication, review, revision, appeal, rectification, notice, summons or other proceedings done, 
accepted, made, issued, initiated, or purport ed to have been done, accepted, made, issued, initiated in 
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act shall be invalid or deemed to be invalid merely by reason of 
any mistake, defect or omission therein, if such assessment, re -assessment, adjudication,  review, revision, 
appeal, rectification, notice, summons or other proceedings are in substance and effect in conformity with or 
according to the intents, purposes and requirements of this Act or any existing law.  
(2) The service of any notice, order or co mmunication shall not be called in question, if the notice, order 
or communication, as the case may be, has already been acted upon by the person to whom it is issued or 
where such service has not been called in question at or in the earlier proceedings co mmenced, continued or 
finalised pursuant to such notice, order or communication.  
161. Rectification of errors apparent on the face of record. —Without prejudice to the provisions of 
section 160, and notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions  of this Act, any authority, who 
has passed or issued any decision or order or notice or certificate or any other document, may rectify any 
error which is apparent on the face of record in such decision or order or notice or certificate or any other 
docume nt, either on its own motion or where such error is brought to its notice by any officer appointed under 
this Act or an officer appointed under the State Goods and Services Tax Act or an officer appointed under the 
Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Ac t or by the affected person within a period of three months from 
the date of issue of such decision or order or notice or certificate or any other document, as the case may be:  
Provided that no such rectification shall be done after a period of six months from the date of issue of 
such decision or order or notice or certificate or any other document:  
Provided further that the said period of six months shall not apply in such cases where the 
rectification is purely in the nature of correction of a clerical o r arithmetical error, arising from any 
accidental slip or omission:  
Provided also that where such rectification adversely affects any person, the principles of natural justice 
shall be followed by the authority carrying out such rectification.  
162. Bar on jurisdiction of civil courts. —Save as provided in sections 117 and 118, no civil court 
shall have jurisdiction to deal with or decide any question arising from or relating to anything done or 
purported to be done under this Act.  
163. Levy of fee. —Wherever a copy of any order or document is to be provided to any person on an 
application made by him for that purpose, there shall be paid such fee as may be prescribed.  
164. Power of Government to make rules. —(1) The Government may, on the recommendations of 
the Council, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Government may make 
rules for all or any of the matters which by this Act are required to b e, or may be, prescribed or in respect of 
which provisions are to be or may be made by rules.  
(3) The power to make rules conferred by this section shall include the power to give retrospective 
effect to the rules or any of them from a date not earlier tha n the date on which the provisions of this Act 
come into force.  
(4) Any rules made under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) may provide that a contravention thereof 
shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding ten thousand rupees.  100 
 165. Power to make regulations. —The Board may, by notification, make regulations consistent with 
this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
166. Laying of rules, regulations and notifications. —Every rule made by the Government, every 
regulation made by the Board and every notification issued by the Government under this Act, shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be co mprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or in the notification, as the case may 
be, or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation or the notification should not be made, the rule or 
regulation or notification, as the case may be, shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effec t, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation or notification, as the 
case may be.  
167. Delegation of powers .—The Commissione r may, by notification, direct that subject to such 
conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, any power exercisable by any authority or officer 
under this Act may be exercisable also by another authority or officer as may be specified in  such 
notification.  
168. Power to issue instructions or directions. —(1) The Board may, if it considers it necessary or 
expedient so to do for the purpose of uniformity in the implementation of this Act, issue such orders, 
instructions or directions to the central tax officers as it may deem fit, and thereupon all such officers and 
all other persons employed in the implementation of this Act shall observe and follow such orders, 
instructions or directions.  
(2) The Commissioner specified in clause ( 91) of sec tion 2, sub -section ( 3) of section 5, clause ( b) 
of sub -section ( 9) of section 25, sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) of section 35, sub -section ( 1) of section 37, 
sub-section ( 2) of section 38, sub -section ( 6) of section 39, sub -section ( 5) of section 66,                      
sub-section ( 1) of section 143, sub -section ( 1) of section 151, clause ( l) of sub -section ( 3) of section 
158 and section 167 shall mean a Commissioner or Joint Secretary posted in the Board and such 
Commissioner or Joint Secretary shall exercis e the powers specified in the said sections with the 
approval of the Board.  
169. Service of notice in certain circumstances .—(1) Any decision, order, summons, notice or other 
communication under this Act or the rules made thereunder shall be served by any one of the following 
methods, namely: — 
(a) by giving or tendering it directly or by a messenger including a courier to the addressee or the 
taxable person or to his manager or authorised representative or an advocate or a tax practitioner 
holding authority  to appear in the proceedings on behalf of the taxable person or to a person regularly 
employed by him in connection with the business, or to any adult member of family residing with the 
taxable person; or  
(b) by registered post or speed post or courier wi th acknowledgment due, to the person for whom 
it is intended or his authorised representative, if any, at his last known place of business or residence; 
or 
(c) by sending a communication to his e-mail address provided at the time of registration or as 
amen ded from time to time; or  
(d) by making it available on the common portal; or  
(e) by publication in a newspaper circulating in the locality in which the taxable person or the 
person to whom it is issued is last known to have resided, carried on business or  personally worked 
for gain; or  101 
 (f) if none of the modes aforesaid is practicable, by affixing it in some conspicuous place at his last 
known place of business or residence and if such mode is not practicable for any reason, then by affixing a 
copy thereof  on the notice board of the office of the concerned officer or authority who or which passed 
such decision or order or issued such summons or notice.  
(2) Every decision, order, summons, notice or any communication shall be deemed to have been 
served on the  date on which it is tendered or published or a copy thereof is affixed in the manner provided 
in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) When such decision, order, summons, notice or any communication is sent by registered post or 
speed post, it shall be deemed to have been  received by the addressee at the expiry of the period normally 
taken by such post in transit unless the contrary is proved.  
170. Rounding off of tax, etc. —The amount of tax, interest, penalty, fine or any other sum payable, 
and the amount of refund or any  other sum due, under the provisions of this Act shall be rounded off to 
the nearest rupee and, for this purpose, where such amount contains a part of a rupee consisting of paise, 
then, if such part is fifty paise or more, it shall be increased to one rupe e and if such part is less than fifty 
paise it shall be ignored.  
171. Anti -profiteering measure. —(1) Any reduction in rate of tax on any supply of goods or 
services or the benefit of input tax credit shall be passed on to the recipient by way of commensura te 
reduction in prices.  
(2) The Central Government may, on recommendations of the Council, by notification, constitute an 
Authority, or empower an existing Authority constituted under any law for the time being in force, to 
examine whether input tax credit s availed by any registered person or the reduction in the tax rate have 
actually resulted in a commensurate reduction in the price of the goods or services or both supplied by him.  
(3) The Authority referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall exercise such power s and discharge such 
functions as may be prescribed.  
172. Removal of difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any provisions of this 
Act, the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by a general or a special order 
published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or 
the rules or regulations made thereunder, as may be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing 
the said difficulty:  
Provided that no such or der shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
173.  Amendment of Act 32 of 1994. —Save as otherwise provided in this Act, Chapter V of the 
Finance Act, 1994 shall be omitted.  
174. Repeal and saving. —(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, on and from the date of 
commencement of this Act, the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) (except as respects goods included in 
entry 84 of the Union List of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution), the Medicinal and Toilet 
Preparations (Excise Duties) Act, 1955 (16 of 1955), the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special 
Importance)  Act, 1957 (58 of 1957), the Additional Duties of Excise (Textiles and Textile Articles)         
Act, 1978 (40 of 1978), and the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 (5 of 1986) (hereafter referred to as the 
repealed Acts) are hereby repealed.  
(2) The repeal of  the said Acts and the amendment of the Finance Act, 1994 (32 of 1994) (hereafter 
referred to as ―such amendment‖ or ―amended Act‖, as the case may be) to the extent mentioned in the 
sub-section ( 1) or section 173 shall not — 
(a) revive anything not in forc e or existing at the time of such amendment or repeal; or  102 
 (b) affect the previous operation of the amended Act or repealed Acts and orders or anything duly 
done or suffered thereunder; or  
(c) affect any right, privilege, obligation, or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the 
amended Act or repealed Acts or orders under such repealed or amended Acts:  
Provided that any tax exemption granted as an incentive against investment through a notification 
shall not continue as privilege if the said notifica tion is rescinded on or after the appointed day; or  
(d) affect any duty, tax, surcharge, fine, penalty, interest as are due or may become due or any 
forfeiture or punishment incurred or inflicted in respect of any offence or violation committed against 
the provisions of the amended Act or repealed Acts; or  
(e) affect any investigation, inquiry, verification (including scrutiny and audit), assessment proceedings, 
adjudication and any other legal proceedings or recovery of arrears or remedy in respect of any such duty, 
tax, surcharge, penalty, fine, interest, right, privilege, obligation, liability, forfeiture or punishment, as 
aforesaid, and any such investigation, inquiry, verification (including scrutiny and audit), assessment 
proceedings, adjudication and other legal proceedings or recovery of arrears or remedy may be instituted, 
continued or enforced, and any such tax, surcharge, penalty, fine, interest, forfeiture or punishment may be 
levied or imposed as if these Acts had not been so amended or repealed;  or 
(f) affect any proceedings including that relating to an appeal, review or reference, instituted before on, 
or after the appointed day under the said amended Act or repealed Acts and such proceedings shall be 
continued under the said amended Act or repealed Acts as if this Act had not come into force and the said 
Acts had not been amended or repealed.  
(3) The mention of the particular matters referred to in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall not be held to 
prejudice or affect the general application of s ection 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) with 
regard to the effect of repeal.  103 
 SCHEDULE I  
[See section 7]  
ACTIVITIES TO BE TREATED AS SUPPLY EVEN IF MADE WITHOUT CONSIDERATION  
1. Permanent transfer or disposal of business assets where input tax credit has been availed on such 
assets.  
2. Supply of goods or services or both between related persons or between distinct persons as 
specified in section 25, when made in the course or furtherance of business:  
Provided that gifts not exceeding fifty t housand rupees in value in a financial year by an employer to an 
employee shall not be treated as supply of goods or services or both.  
3. Supply of goods — 
(a) by a principal to his agent where the agent undertakes to supply such goods on behalf of the 
principal; or  
(b) by an agent to his principal where the agent undertakes to receive such goods on behalf of the 
principal.  
4. Import of services by a 1[person ] from a related person or from any of his other establishments 
outside India, in the course or furth erance of business.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 30 for ―taxable person‖ (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   104 
 SCHEDULE II  
[See section 7]  
ACTIVITIES 1[OR TRANSACTIONS] TO BE TREATED AS SUPPLY OF GOODS OR SUPPLY OF SERVICES  
1. Transfer  
(a) any transfer of the title in goods is a supply of goods;  
(b) any  transfer of right in goods or of undivided share in goods without the transfer of title 
thereof, is a supply of services;  
(c) any transfer of title in goods under an agreement which stipulates that property in goods shall 
pass at a future date upon paymen t of full consideration as agreed, is a supply of goods.  
2. Land and Building  
(a) any lease, tenancy, easement, licence to occupy land is a supply of services;  
(b) any lease or letting out of the building including a commercial, industrial or residential 
complex            for business or commerce, either wholly or partly, is a supply of services.  
3. Treatment or process  
           Any treatment or process which is applied to another person's goods is a supply of services.  
4. Transfer of business assets  
(a) where goods forming part of the assets of a business are transferred or disposed of by or under 
the directions of the person carrying on the business so as no longer to form part of those assets, 
whether or not for a consideration, such transfer or dispos al is a supply of goods by the person;  
(b) where, by or under the direction of a person carrying on a business, goods held or used for the 
purposes of the business are put to any private use or are used, or made available to any person for use, 
for any pur pose other than a purpose of the business, whether or not for a consideration, the usage or 
making available of such goods is a supply of services;  
(c) where any person ceases to be a taxable person, any goods forming part of the assets of any 
business car ried on by him shall be deemed to be supplied by him in the course or furtherance of his 
business immediately before he ceases to be a taxable person, unless — 
(i) the business is transferred as a going concern to another person; or  
(ii) the business is car ried on by a personal representative who is deemed to be a taxable person.  
5. Supply of services  
The following shall be treated as supply of services, namely: — 
(a) renting of immovable property;  
(b) construction of a complex, building, civil structure or a  part thereof, including a complex or 
building intended for sale to a buyer, wholly or partly, except where the entire consideration has been 
received after issuance of completion certificate, where required, by the competent authority or after 
its first o ccupation, whichever is earlier.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 31 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).   105 
 Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause — 
(1) the expression ―competent authority‖ means the Government or any authority authorised  to 
issue completion certificate under any law for the time being in force and in case of non -requirement 
of such certificate from such authority, from any of the following, namely: — 
(i) an architect registered with the Council of Architecture constituted under the Architects 
Act, 1972 (20 of 1972); or  
(ii) a chartered engineer registered with the Institution of Engineers (India); or  
(iii) a licensed surveyor of the respective local body of the city or town or village or 
development or planning authority;  
(2) the expression ―construction‖ includes additions, alterations, replacements or remodelling of 
any existing civil structure;  
 (c) temporary transfer or permitting the use or enjoyment of any intellectual property right;  
 (d) development, design, programm ing, customisation, adaptation, upgradation, enhancement, 
implementation of information technology software;  
 (e) agreeing to the obligation to refrain from an act, or to tolerate an act or a situation, or to do an 
act; and  
 (f) transfer of the right to us e any goods for any purpose (whether or not for a specified period) 
for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration.  
6. Composite supply  
The following composite supplies shall be treated as a supply of services, namely: — 
(a) works  contract as defined in clause (119) of section 2; and  
(b) supply, by way of or as part of any service or in any other manner whatsoever, of goods, being 
food or any other article for human consumption or any drink (other than alcoholic liquor for human 
consumption), where such supply or service is for cash, deferred payment or other valuable 
consideration.  
7. Supply of Goods  
The following shall be treated as supply of goods, namely: — 
Supply of goods by any unincorporated association or body of persons to a  member thereof for 
cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration.  106 
 SCHEDULE III  
[See section 7]  
ACTIVITIES OR TRANSACTIONS WHICH SHALL BE TREATED NEITHER AS A SUPPLY OF GOODS NOR A 
SUPPLY OF SERVICES  
1. Services by an employee to the employer in the course of or in relation to his employment.  
2. Services by any court or Tribunal established under any law for the time being in force.  
3. (a) the functions performed by the Members of Parliament, Members of State Legislature, 
Members of Panchayats, Members of Municipalities and Members of other local authorities;  
(b) the duties performed by any person who holds any post in pursuance of the provisions of the 
Constitution in that capacity; or  
(c) the duties per formed by any person as a Chairperson or a Member or a Director in a body 
established by the Central Government or a State Government or local authority and who is not 
deemed as an employee before the commencement of this clause.  
4. Services of funeral, bu rial, crematorium or mortuary including transportation of the deceased.  
5. Sale of land and, subject to clause ( b) of paragraph 5 of Schedule II, sale of  building.  
6. Actionable claims, other than lottery, betting and gambling.  
1[7. Supply of goods from a  place in the non -taxable territory to another  place in the non -taxable 
territory without such goods entering into India.  
8. (a) Supply of warehoused goods to any person before clearance for  home consumption;  
(b) Supply of goods by the consignee to any other person, by endorsement  of documents of title to 
the goods, after the goods have been dispatched from  the port of origin located outside India but before 
clearance for home  consumption.; ] 
2[Explanation  1.]—For the purposes of paragraph 2, the term ―co urt‖ includes District Court, High 
Court and Supreme Court.  
3[Explanation 2 .––For the purposes of paragraph 8, the expression  ―warehoused goods‖ shall have  
the same meaning as assigned to it in the  Customs Act, 1962.]  
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 32 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).    
2. Explanation renumbered as Explanation 1 by s. 32, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  
3. Explanation 2 ins. by s. 32, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  
--------------------------The Footwear Design and Development Institute Act, 2017--------------------------
1 
              THE FOOTWEAR DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT INSTITUTE ACT, 2017  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration of Footwear Design and Development Institute as an institution of national importance.  
3. Definition s. 
CHAPTER II  
THE INSTITUTE  
4. Establishment of Institute.  
5. Vesting of properties.  
6. Effect of incorporation  of Institute . 
7. Functions of Institute.  
8. Power of Governing Council.  
9. Institute be open to all races, creeds and classes.  
10. Teaching at Institute.  
11. Visitor.  
12. Authorities of Institute . 
13. The Senate.  
14. Functions of Senate.  
15. Functions, powers and duties of Chairperson.  
16. Managing Director.  
17. Secretary.  
18. Executive Director.  
19. Power  and duties of other authorities and officers.  
20. Grants by Central Government.  
21. Funds  of Institute.  
22. Setting up of endowment fund.  
23. Accounts and audit . 
24. Pension and provident fund.  
25. Appointment . 
26. Statutes . 
27. Statutes how made . 
28. Ordinances.  
29. Ordinance how made.  
30. Tribunal of Arbitration . 
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
31. Act and pr oceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies.  
32. Sponsored schemes.  
33. Power of Institute to grant degree, etc.  
34. Institute to be public authority under the Right to Information Act, 2005.  
35. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
36. Returns and information to be provided to Central Government.  
37. Transitional provisions.  
38. Statute and Ordinance to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before Parliament.  
39. Power to remove difficulties.  
THE SCHEDULE  
 
  2 
 THE FOOTWEAR DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT INSTITUTE  ACT, 2017  
ACT NO. 20 OF 2017  
[4th August, 2017.]  
An Act to establish and declare the Footwear Design and Development Institute as an institution of 
national importance for the promotion and development of quality and excellence in education, 
research and training in all disciplines relating to footwear and leather products design and 
development and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Footwear Design and 
Development Institute Act, 2017.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint; and different d ates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference to 
the commencement in any such provision of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the commencement 
of that provision.  
2. Declaration of Footwear Design and Development Institute as an institution of national 
importance. —Whereas the objects of the institution known as the Footwear Design and Development 
Institute, are such as to make it the institution of national importance, it is hereby declared that the 
Footwear Design  and Development Institute is an institution of national importance.  
3. Definition. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Chairperson ” means the Chairperson of the Institute nominated under clause ( a) of                    
sub-section ( 3) of section 4;  
(b) “design ” means a rational, logical and sequential innovation process for the purposes of 
transferring culture to viable products and services in footwear and leather products, including fashion 
and retail thereof and for providing a co mpetitive edge to products and services;  
(c) “development ” means the systematic use of scientific and technical knowledge to meet specific 
objective or requirements and includes an extension of the theoretical or practical aspects of concepts, 
design, disc overy and invention including business thereof;  
(d) “Executive Director ” means the Executive Director of the Institute campus appointed under 
section 18;  
(e) “Fund ” means the Fund of the institute to be maintained under section 21;  
(f) “Governing Council ” means the Governing Council of the Institute constituted under                 
sub-section ( 3) of section 4;  
(g) “Institute ” means the Footwear Design and Development Institute established under                
sub-section ( 1) of section  4; 
(h) “Institute campus ” means an Institute campus specified in the Schedule;  
(i) “leather products ” includes a product made of leather or any other material or combination 
thereof;  
(j) “Managing Director ” means the Managing Director of the Institute appointed under section 16;  
(k) “Member ” means a Member of the Governing Council and includes the Chairperson;  
(l) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(m) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(n) “Schedule ” means the Schedule appended to this Act;  
                                                   
1. 16th October, 2017 vide notification No . S.O. 3248 (E) dated the 5th October, 2017, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,              
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 3 
 (o) “Secretary ” means the Secretary of the Institute appointed under section 17;  
(p) “Senate ” means the Senate of the Institute referred to in section 13;  
(q) “Society ” means the Footwear Design and Development Institute registered under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860  (21 of 1860) ; 
(r) “Statutes ” and “Ordinances ” mean respectively the Statutes and the Ordinances of the Institute made 
under this Act.  
CHAPTER II   
THE INSTITUTE  
4. Establishment of Institute. —(1) On and from the date of commencement of this Act, the Footwear 
Design and Development Institute shall be established as a body corporate by the name aforesaid.  
(2) The Institute shall have perpetual succession and a common seal with power, s ubject to the 
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract, and shall, by that name, 
sue or be sued.  
(3) The Institute shall consist of a Governing Council having the following Members, namely: — 
(a) a Chairperson, who sh all be an eminent academician, scientist, or industrialist from leather 
sector, to be nominated by the Central Government;  
(b) the Managing Director, ex officio ; 
(c) the Joint Secretary in the Ministry or Department in the Government of India dealing with 
Footwear Design and Development Institute, ex officio ; 
(d) the Joint Secretary in the Ministry or Department in the Government of India dealing with the 
leather, reta il or fashion sector, ex officio ;  
(e) the Director Finance of the Ministry or the Department in the Government of India dealing with 
Footwear Design and Development Institute, ex officio ; 
(f) a representative of Ministry or Department in the Government of  India dealing with skill 
development and entrepreneurship, ex officio ; 
(g) four professionals or industrialists to represent the Council for Leather Exports, the Indian 
Leather Garments Association, the Indian Footwear Components Manufacturers Association , and the 
Confederation of Indian Industry National Committee on Leather, Footwear and Leather Products, to 
be nominated by the Central Government; and  
(h) one person each from the National Institute of Fashion Technology, National Institute of 
Design, the  Central Leather Research Institute, the Indian Institute of Technology and the Indian 
Institute of Management, to be nominated by the Central Government.  
(4) The term of office of the Chairperson and other Members, other than ex officio  Members thereof, 
shall be three years and they shall be entitled for such allowances as may be determined by the Central 
Government.  
(5) The term of office of the Members nominated to fill a casual vacancy shall continue for the remainder 
of the term of the Member in whose place he has been nominated.  
(6) The Governing Council shall meet at least two times in a year at such place and time and observe 
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be determined by 
the Governing Council.  
(7) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of office of an ex officio member shall 
continue as long as he holds the office by virtue of which he is a member.  
5. Vesting of properties. —On and from the date of commencement  of this Act, subject to the other 
provisions of this Act, all properties which had vested in the Society, immediately before the 
commencement of this Act, shall on and from such commencement, vest in the Institute.  
  4 
 6. Effect of incorporation of Institute.  —On and from the date of commencement of this Act, — 
(a) any reference to the Society in any contract or other instrument shall be deemed as a refer ence 
to the Institute;  
(b) all the rights and liabilities of the Society shall be transferred to, and be the rights and liabilities 
of, the Institute;  
(c) every person employed by the Society, immediately before the appointed day, shall hold office 
or service in the Institute by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and 
conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension, leave, gratuity, provident fund and 
other matters as he would have held the same, if this Act had not been passed, and shall continue to be 
so, unless and until his employment is terminated or until such tenure, remuneration, terms and 
conditions are duly altered by the Statutes:  
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee, his employment may be 
terminated by the Institute in accordance with the terms of the con tract with the employee or, if no 
provision is made therein in this behalf, on payment to him by the Institute of compensation equivalent 
to three months ’ remuneration in the case of permanent employee and one month ’s remuneration in 
the case of other empl oyee;  
(d) every person pursuing, before the date of commencement o f this Act, any academic or research 
course in existing Institute campus, shall be deemed to have migrated and registered with the 
corresponding Institute campus on such commencement at the same level of study in the Institute 
campus from which such person migrated; and  
(e) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or against 
the Society, immediately before the commencement of this Act shall be co ntinued or instituted by or 
against the Institute.  
7. Functions of Institute. —The functions of the Institute shall be — 
(i) to nurture and promote quality and excellence in education and research in the areas of footwear 
and leather products design and deve lopment and allied fields thereof;  
(ii) develop and conduct courses leading to graduate and post -graduate degrees, doctoral and          
post-doctoral courses and research in the areas of footwear and leather products design and 
development and allied fields thereof;  
(iii) to hold examinations and grant degrees, diplomas, certificates, or any other qualification;  
(iv) to institute fellowships, scholarships and confer awards, honorary degrees or other academic 
distinctions or titles;  
(v) to co-operate, associate and collaborate with educational or other institutions, research 
organisations or bodies corporate in any part of the world having objects wholly or partly similar to 
those of the Institute by exchange of faculty members, students, staff and scho lars and generally in 
such manner as may be conducive to their common objective;  
(vi) to conduct courses for teachers, technologists and other professionals in the areas of footwear 
and leather products design and development and allied fields thereof;  
(vii) to undertake research, survey, and studies and application thereof, for improved quality and 
design, testing, and international marketing;  
(viii) to provide consultancy, testing, inspection, certification, project implementation and design 
support to th e institutions and industries in any part of the world;  
(ix) to develop an international centre for creation and transmission of information, with focus on 
educational, professional and industrial commitments;  
(x) to conduct skill development programs and to provide technical assistance to artisans, 
craftsmen, manufacturers, designers and exporters;  
(xi) to design, develop, amend, update curriculums of the academic programs and training materials 
as per the sector ’s requirement and change of technology;  5 
 (xii) to acquire any patent or license relating to such invention, improvement or design or 
standardisation marks whether for general or specific purposes;  
(xiii) to establish, form and maintain museums, libraries and collections of literature and films, 
slides, photographs, prototypes and other information;  
(xiv) to function as a National resource centre for curriculum development, training the trainers and 
support skill development in the leather sector overall;  
(xv) to frame the Statutes  and the Ordinances and to alter, modify or rescind the same; and  
(xvi) to do all such things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment of all or 
any of the objects of the Institute.  
8. Power s of Governing Council. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Governing Council, 
under overall control of the Central Government, shall be responsible for the general superintendence, 
direction and control of the affairs of the Institute and shall exercise all the powers not otherwise prov ided 
for by this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, and shall have the power to review the acts of the Senate.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Governing Council shall — 
(a) take decisions on questions of policy relating to  the administration and working of the Institute;  
(b) institute academic and other posts and to make appointments thereto (except in the case of the 
Managing Director, Secretary and Executive Director);  
(c) frame the Statutes and the Ordinances and to alte r, modify or rescind the same;  
(d) consider and pass resolutions on the annual report, the annual audited accounts and the budget 
estimates of the Institute for the next financial year as it thinks fit together with a statement of its 
development plans;  
(e) receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from the Government and to receive bequests, 
donations and transfers of movable or immovable properties from the testators, donors or transferors, 
as the case may be; and  
(f) do all such things as may be n ecessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment of all or any of 
the aforesaid powers.  
(3) The Governing Council shall have the power to appoint such committees, as it considers necessary 
for the exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties  under this Act.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2) of section 4, the Governing Council shall 
not dispose of in any manner any immovable property without the prior approval of the Central 
Government.  
(5) The Central Government may appoint one or more persons to review the work and   progress of the 
Institute and to hold inquiries into the affairs thereof and to report thereon in such manner as the Central 
Government may direct.  
(6) Upon receipt of any such report, the Central Governm ent may take such action and issue such 
directions as it considers necessary in respect of any of the matters dealt within the report and the Institute 
shall be bound to comply with such directions.  
(7) The Central Government shall have the power to remove  Chairperson or other Members or 
reconstitute the Governing Council, if it considers it appropriate to do so.  
(8) No Chairperson or Member shall be removed under sub -section ( 7) unless he has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter . 
9. Institute be open to all races, creeds and classes .—(1) The Institute shall be open to persons of all 
sex and of whatever race, creed, caste or class, and no test or condition shall be imposed as to religious 
belief or profession in admitting or appoi nting members, students, teachers or workers or in any other 
connection whatsoever.  6 
 (2) No bequest, donation or transfer of any property shall be accepted by the Institute, which in the 
opinion of the Governing Council involves conditions or obligations op posed to the spirit and object of 
this section.  
10. Teaching at Institute .—All teaching at the campuses of the Institute shall be conducted by or in 
the name of the Institute in accordance with the Statutes and the Ordinances made in this behalf.  
11.  Visitor.—The President of India shall be the Visitor of the Institute.  
12. Authorities of Institute. —The following shall be the authorities of the Institute, namely: — 
(a) a Governing council;  
(b) a Senate; and  
(c) such other authorities as may be declared  by the Statutes to be the authorities of the Institute.  
13. The Senate. —The Senate of the Institute shall consist of the following persons, namely: — 
(a) the Managing Director, ex officio  who shall be the Chairperson of the Senate;  
(b) the Secretary, ex of ficio; 
(c) the Executive Directors of all Institute campus, ex officio ; 
(d) all Senior Professors of the Institute;  
(e) three persons, not being employees of the Institute, to be nominated by the Chairperson in 
consultation with the Managing Director, from  among st educationists of repute, from the fields of footwear, 
science, engineering and humanities and one of them shall be woman;  
(f) one alumnus of the Institute to be nominated by the Chairperson in consultation with the Managing 
Director by rotation; a nd 
(g) such other members of the staff as may be laid down in the Statutes.  
14. Functions of Senate. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Senate of 
the Institute shall be the principal academic body of the Institute and shall have the control and general regulation, and be 
responsible for the maintenance of standards of instruction, education and examinations in the Institute and shall exercise 
such other powers and perform such other duties as may be confer red or imposed upon it by the Statutes.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Senate shall have the following powers, namely: — 
(a) to specify the criteria and process for admission to courses or programmes of study by the Institute;  
(b) to recommend to the Governing Council for creation of teaching and other academic posts, 
determination of number and emoluments of such posts and defining the duties and conditions of 
service of teachers and other academic posts;  
(c) to reco mmend to the Governing Council for commencement of new programmes and course of 
study;  
(d) to specify academic contents of programmes and course of study and to undertake 
modifications therein;  
(e) to specify the academic calendar and approve grant of degrees, diplomas and other academic 
distinctions or titles; and  
(f) to exercise such other powers and discharge such other functions as may be assigned to it, by 
Statutes or by the Governing Council.  
15. Functions, powers and duties of Chairperson. —(1) The Chairperson shall ordinarily preside at 
the meetings of the Governing Council and at the Convocations of the Institute.  
(2) The Chairperson shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be 
assigned to him by this Act or the Statut es. 
(3) The Chairperson shall have the authority to review periodically the work and progress of the 
Institute and to order enquiries into the affairs of the Institute.  7 
 16. Managing Director. —(1) The Managing Director of the Institute shall be appointed by  the 
Central Government for a tenure of five years and on such terms and conditions of services as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) The Managing Director shall be the principal executive officer of the Institute and shall be 
responsible for the proper administration  of the Institute and for imparting of instruction and maintenance 
of discipline therein.  
(3) The Managing Director shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be 
assigned to him by this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances or del egated by the Governing Council or the 
Senate.  
(4) The Managing Director shall submit annual reports and accounts to the Governing Council.  
(5) The Central Government shall have the power to remove the Managing Director before the tenure of 
five years, if it considers it appropriate to do so on the grounds of misconduct or incapacity after giving him 
an opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
(6) The Managing Director shall be responsible for the implementation of the decision of the 
Governing Council and  the Senate.  
17. Secretary. —(1) The Secretary of the Institute shall be appointed by the Central Government. for a 
tenure of five years and on such terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Secretary shall act as the Secretary of the Go verning Council, the Senate and such committees 
as may be specified by the Statutes.  
(3) The Secretary shall be responsible to the Managing Director for the proper discharge of his 
functions.  
(4) The Secretary shall exercise such other powers and perform s uch other duties as may be assigned 
to him by this Act or the Statutes or the Managing Director.  
18. Executive Director. —(1) The Executive Director of each Institute campus shall be appointed by 
the Central Government for a tenure of five years and on such  terms and conditions as may be prescribed 
and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to him by this Act or the 
Statutes or by the Managing Director.  
(2) The Executive Director shall be the principal academic and executive of ficer of the Institute 
campus and shall be responsible for the implementation of the decision of the Governing Council and the 
Senate and the day -to-day administration of the Institute campus in consultation with the Managing 
Director.  
19. Power  and duties of other authorities and officers. —The powers and duties of authorities and 
officers, other than those hereinbefore mentioned, shall be determined by the Statutes.  
20. Grants by Central Government. —For the purpose of enabling the Institute to d ischarge its 
functions efficiently under this Act, the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Institute in each financial year such sums of money and in 
such manner as it may think fit.  
21. Fund s of Institute. —(1) The Institute shall maintain a Fund to which shall be credited — 
(a) all moneys provided by the Central Government;  
(b) all fees and other charges received by the Institute;  
(c) all moneys received by the Institute by way of loans, grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, 
bequests or transfers; and  
(d) all moneys received by the Institute in any other manner or from any other source.  
(2) All moneys credited to the Fund shall be deposited in such banks or invested in such manner as the  
Institute may, with the approval of the Governing Council decide.  
(3) The Fund shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of the Institute, including expenses incurred 
in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its duties under this Act.  8 
 22. Setting up of endowment fund. —Notwithstanding anything contained in section 21, the Central 
Government may direct the Institute to — 
(a) set-up an endowment fund and any other fund for specified purpose; and  
(b) transfer money from its Fund to endowment fu nd or any other fund.  
23. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Institute shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the balance sheet, in such form as may be 
specified, in accordance with such general directions as may be issued by the Central Government in 
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Institute shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and 
any expenditure incurred  by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Institute to the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the In stitute shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India, generally has in connection 
with the audit of the Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to d emand the 
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of 
the offices of the Institute.  
(4) The accounts of the Institute as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India  any other 
person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually 
to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House of 
Parliament.  
24. Pension and provident fund .—(1) The Institute shall constitute, for the benefit of its employees, 
including the Managing Director in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be specified by 
the Statutes, such pension, insurance and provident funds as it may consider necessary.  
(2) Where any such provident fund has been so constituted, the Central Government may declare that 
the provisions of the Provident Funds Act , 1925 ( 19 of  1925 ), shall apply to such fund as if it were a 
Government Provident Fund .  
25.  Appointmen t.—All appointments of the staff of the Institute, except that of the Managing Director, 
Secretary and Executive Director shall be made in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Statutes 
by— 
(a) the Governing Council, if the appointment is made on the aca demic staff in the post of Assistant 
Professor or above or if the appointment is made on the non -academic staff in any cadre, the 
maximum of the pay scale for which is the same or higher than that of Assistant Professor; and  
(b) the Managing Director, in any other case.  
26. Statutes. — Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely: — 
(a) the formation of departments of teaching, centre of research, establishment of workshops, 
laboratories, studios;  
(b) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes;  
(c) the classification, term of office, qualification, the method of appointment and the determination 
of the terms and conditions of service of officers, teachers and other staff of the Institute;  
(d) the reservation of posts for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and other backward categories 
of person as may be determined by the Central Government;  
(e) the constitution of pension, insurance and provident funds for the benefit of the officers, 
teachers and other staff of the Institute;  
(f) the constitution, powers and duties of the authorities of the Institute;  
(g) the manner of filling up of vacancies among members of the Governing Council;  
(h) the authent ication of the orders and decisions of the Governing Council;  9 
 (i) the meetings of the Governing Council, Senate or any Committee, the quorum at such meetings and 
the procedure to be followed in the conduct of their business;  
(j) conferment of honorary degree;  
(k) the establishment and maintenance of halls and hostels;  
(l) the conditions of residence of students of the Institute and the levying of the fees for residence in 
the halls and hostels and other charges; and  
(m) any other matter which by this Ac t is to be or may be specified by the Statutes.  
27. Statutes how made. —(1) The first Statutes of the Institute shall be framed by the Governing 
Council with the previous approval of the Visitor and shall be laid as soon as may be before each House 
of Parliament.  
(2) The Governing Council may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend or 
repeal the Statutes in the manner hereafter in this section provided.  
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statute or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require 
the previous approval of the Visitor who may remit it to the Governing Council for consideration.  
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless it 
has been assented to by t he Visitor.  
28. Ordinances. —Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances of the 
Institute may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of the students to the Institute;  
(b) the reservation for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and other backward categories 
of persons;  
(c) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of the Institute;  
(d) the conditions under which students shall be admitted to the degr ee, diploma and certificate 
courses and to the examinations of the Institute and award of degrees, diplomas and certificates;  
(e) the conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes;  
(f) the conditions and mode of appointm ent and duties of examining body, examiners and 
moderators;  
(g) the conduct of examinations;  
(h) the maintenance of discipline among the students of the Institute;  
(i) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the Institute and for admission to the ex aminations of 
degrees, diplomas and certificates of the Institute; and  
(j) any other matter which by this Act or the Statutes is to be or may be provided for by the 
Ordinances.  
29. Ordinance how made. —(1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, Ordinances shall be made 
by the Senate.  
(2) All Ordinances made by the Senate shall have effect from such date as it may direct, but every 
Ordinance so made shall be submitted, as soon as may be, to the Governing Council and shall be considered 
by the Gove rning Council at its next succeeding meeting.  
(3) The Governing Council shall have power by resolution to modify or cancel any such Ordinance 
and such Ordinance shall from the date of such resolution stand modified accordingly or cancelled, as the 
case may  be. 
30.  Tribunal of Arbitration. —(1) Any dispute arising out of a contract between the Institute and any of 
its employees shall, at the request of the employee concerned or at the instance of the Institute, be referred to 
a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by the Institute, one member nominated by the 
employee and an umpire appointed by the Visitor.  
(2) The decision of the Tribunal of Arbitration shall be final and shall not be questioned in any court.  10 
 (3) No suit or procee ding shall lie in any court in respect of any matter which is required by              
sub-section ( 1) to be referred to the Tribunal of Arbitration.  
(4) The Tribunal of Arbitration shall have power to regulate its own procedure.  
(5) Nothing in any law for  the time being in force relating to arbitration shall apply to arbitration under 
this section.  
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
31. Act and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies. —No act of the Institute or Governing 
Council or Senate or any other body set -up under this Act or the Statutes, shall be invalid merely by 
reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution thereof;  or 
(b) any defect in the election, nomination or appointment of a person acting as a member thereof; 
or 
(c) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the case.  
32. Sponsored schemes. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, when ever the Institute receives 
funds from any Government, the University Grants Commission or any other agency, including industry 
sponsoring a research scheme or a consultancy assignment or a teaching programme or a chaired professorship 
or a scholarship, et c., to be executed or endowed at the Institute — 
(a) the amount received shall be kept by the Institute separately from the Fund of the Institute and 
utilised only for the purpose of the scheme; and  
(b) the staff required to execute the same shall be recruited in accordance with the terms and 
conditions stipulated by the sponsoring organisations:  
Provided that any money remaining unutilised shall be transferred to the endowment fund created 
under section 22 of this Act.  
33. Power of Institute to grant degree, etc. —The Institute shall have the power to grant degrees, 
diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions under this Act, which shall be equivalent to such 
corresponding degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions granted  by any University or 
Institute established or incorporated under any other law for the time being in force.  
34. Institute to be public authority under the Right to Information Act, 2005 .—The provisions of 
the Right to Information Act, 2005  (22 of 2005)  shall apply to the Institute, as if it were a public authority 
as defined in clause ( h) of section 2 of the Right to Information Act, 2005.  
35. Power of Central Government to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make rules to carry  out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of appointment of the Managing Director, Secretary and Executive Director and 
terms and conditions of his services;  
(b) the terms and conditions of service of the Managing Director, Secretary and the Executive 
Director under sub -section ( 1) of section 16, sub -section ( 1) of section 17 and sub -section ( 1) of 
section 18;  
(c) the form and manner in which the books of account of the Institute shall be maintained under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 23; and  
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or 
in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session im mediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of  11 
 no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
36. Returns and information to be provided to Central Government .—The Institute shall furnish to the 
Central Government such returns or other information with respect to policies or activities as the Central 
Government may, for the purpose of reporting to Parliament or for the making of policy, from time to time, 
requi re. 
37. Transitional provisions. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act — 
(a) the Governing Council of the Society functioning as such, immediately before the commencement 
of this Act shall continue to so function until a new Governing Council is constituted for the Institute under 
this Act, but on the constitution of a new Governing Council under this Act the members of the Governing 
Council holding office before such constitution shall cease to hold office;  
(b) until the first Statutes and the Or dinances are made under this Act, the rules and regulations, 
instructions and guidelines of the Society as in force, immediately before the commencement of this 
Act, shall continue to apply to the Institute insofar as they are not inconsistent with the pro visions of 
this Act; and  
(c) any student who joined classes of the existing Institute on or after the academic year 2012 -2013 or 
completed the course on or after the academic year 2013 -2014 shall for  the purposes of clause ( iii) of section 7, 
be deemed to have pursued a course of study in the existing Institute if such student has not already been awarded 
degree or diploma for the same course of study.  
38.  Statute and Ordinance to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before 
Parliament. —(1) Every Statute or Ordinance made under this Act shall be published in the Official 
Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute or Ordinance made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modifi cation in 
the Statute or Ordinance or both Houses agree that the Statute or Ordinance should not be made, the Statute or 
Ordinance shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such mo dification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that Statute or Ordinance.  
(3) The power to make Statutes or Ordinances shall include the power to give retrospective effect with 
the approval of the Centr al Government from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act 
to Statutes or Ordinances or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any Statute or 
Ordinance so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to who m such Statutes or Ordinances may 
be applicable.  
39. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) lf any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provision or 
give such direction not inconsistent with the purposes of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or 
expedient for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act . 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  12 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 3( h)] 
INSTITUTE CAMPUSES  
 
 
Sl. No.  Name of the  
State  Name and address of the existing Institute campus and 
its location  
(1) (2) (3) 
1.  Uttar Pradesh  Footwear Design and Development Institute, A -10/A,             
Sector -24, Noida, Gautam Budh Nagar, Pin -201301.  
2.  Tamil Nadu  Footwear Design and Development Institute, Plot No: E -1, 
SIPCOT Industrial Park, Irrungattukotai, Kancheepuram.  
3.  West Bengal  Footwear Design and Development Institute, Kolkata Leather 
Complex, Mouzakariadanga, J.L No -32 and Gangapur, J.L 
No-35, Kolkata.  
4.  Haryana  Footwear Design and Development Institute, Plot No- 1, 
Sector -31 B, IMT Rohtak.  
5.  Rajasthan  Footwear Design and Development Institute,Village Mandor, 
Tehsil Jodhpur, District - Jodhpur.  
6.  Uttar Pradesh  Footwear Design and Development Institute, Sultanpur Road, 
Fursatganj, Raebareli, Pin -229302.  
7.  Madhya Pradesh  Footwear Design and Development Institute, Corner Plot, 
Khasara No:  31, Nagpur -Batil Road, Immlikhera Chowk, 
Chhindwara.  
8.  Madhya Pradesh  Footwear Design and Development Institute,  Gram Maharajpura 
Panchayat, Hari Pur, Phawa No -42, Survey No.571/158, 61/1/1/1 
on Gram Puraposar Road, Guna.  
9.  Bihar  Footwear Design and Development Institute, Plot No P -6, 
Megha Industrial Area, Moza Dumri, Arra Road, Patna.  
10.  Telengana  Footwear Design and Development Institute, LIDCAP 
Campus, HS Durga, Gachibowli, Bidar -Hyderabad Road, 
Hyderabad.  
11.  Gujarat  Footwear Design and Development Institute, Plot No H -3301, 
Near ESIC Hospital, Ankleshwar Industrial Estate, 
Ankleshwar.  
 
12.  Punjab  Footwear Design and Development Institute, District SAS 
Nagar (Mohali), Chandigarh -Patiala Highway, Chandigarh.  
 
--------------------------The Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to States) Act, 2017--------------------------
1 THE GOODS AND SERVICES TAX (COMPENSATION TO STATES) ACT, 2017 
___________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
__________ 
SECTIONS
1.Short title, extent and commencement. 
2.Definitions. 
3.Projected growth rate. 
4.Base year. 
5.Base year revenue. 
6.Projected revenue for any year. 
7.Calculation and release of compensation. 
8.Levy and collection of cess. 
9.Returns, payments and refunds. 
10.Crediting proceeds of cess to Fund 
11.Other provisions relating to cess. 
12.Power to make rules. 
13.Laying of rules before Parliament. 
14.Power to remove difficulties. 
THE SCHEDULE  2 THE GOODS AND SERVICES TAX (COMPENSATION TO STATES) ACT, 2017 
ACT NO. 15 OF 2017 
[12th April , 2017.] 
An Act to provide for compensation to the States for the loss of revenue arising on account of 
implementation of the goods and services tax in pursuance of the provisions of the Constitution (One 
Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Goods and Services Tax 
(Compensation to States) Act, 2017. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. Definitions. — (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “central tax” means the central goods and services tax levied and collected under the Central 
Goods and Services Tax Act; 
(b) “Central Goods and Services Tax Act” means the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 
(12 of 2017); 
(c) “cess” means the goods and services tax compensation cess levied under section 8; 
(d) “compensation” means an amount, in the form of goods and services tax compensation, as 
determined under section 7; 
(e) “Council” means the Goods and Services Tax Council constituted under the provisions of 
article 279A of the Constitution; 
(f) “Fund” means the Goods and Services Tax Compensation Fund referred to in section 10; 
(g) “input tax” in relation to a taxable person, means,–– 
(i) cess charged on any supply of goods or services or both made to him; 
(ii) cess charged on import of goods and includes the cess payable on reverse charge basis; 
(h) “Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act” means the Integrated Goods and Services Tax            
Act, 2017 (13 of 2017); 
(i) “integrated tax” means the integrated goods and services tax levied and collected under the 
Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act; 
(j) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made, on the recommendations of the Council, under 
this Act; 
(k) “projected growth rate” means the rate of growth projected for the transition period as per 
section 3; 
(l) “Schedule” means the Schedule appended to this Act; 
(m) “State” means,–– 
(i) for the purposes of sections 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 the States as defined under the Central Goods 
and Services Tax Act; and 
(ii) for the purposes of sections 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14 the States as defined under the Central 
Goods and Services Tax Act and the Union territories as defined under the Union Territories Goods 
and Services Tax Act; 
1. 1st July, 2017 vide notification No. G.S.R.700(E), dated the 28th June, 2017, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,  
Sec. 3( i). 3 (n) “State tax” means the State goods and services tax levied and collected under the respective 
State Goods and Services Tax Act; 
(o) “State Goods and Services Tax Act” means the law to be made by the State Legislature for 
levy and collection of tax by the concerned State on supply of goods or services or both; 
(p) “taxable supply” means a supply of goods or services or both which is chargeable to the cess 
under this Act; 
(q) “transition date” shall mean, in respect of any State, the date on which the State Goods and 
Services Tax Act of the concerned State comes into force; 
(r) “transition period” means a period of five years from the transition date; and 
(s) “Union Territories Goods and Services Tax Act” means the Union Territories Goods and 
Services Tax Act, 2017 (14 of 2017). 
(2) The words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Central Goods and 
Services Tax Act and the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act shall have the meanings respectively 
assigned to them in those Acts. 
3. Projected growth rate. ––The projected nominal growth rate of revenue subsumed for a State 
during the transition period shall be fourteen per cent. per annum.
4. Base year. ––For the purpose of calculating the compensation amount payable in any financial year 
during the transition period, the financial year ending 31st March, 2016, shall be taken as the base year. 
5. Base year revenue .––(1) Subject to the provision of sub-sections ( 2), (3), (4), (5) and ( 6), the base 
year revenue for a State shall be the sum of the revenue collected by the State and the local bodies during 
the base year, on account of the taxes levied by the respective State or Union and net of refunds, with 
respect to the following taxes, imposed by the respective State or Union, which are subsumed into goods 
and services tax, namely:–– 
(a) the value added tax, sales tax, purchase tax, tax collected on works contract, or any other tax 
levied by the concerned State under the erstwhile entry 54 of List-II (State List) of the Seventh 
Schedule to the Constitution; 
(b) the central sales tax levied under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956); 
(c) the entry tax, octroi, local body tax or any other tax levied by the concerned State under the 
erstwhile entry 52 of List-II (State List) of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution; 
(d) the taxes on luxuries, including taxes on entertainments, amusements, betting and gambling or 
any other tax levied by the concerned State under the erstwhile entry 62 of List-II (State List) of the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution; 
(e) the taxes on advertisement or any other tax levied by the concerned State under the erstwhile 
entry 55 of List-II (State List) of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution; 
(f) the duties of excise on medicinal and toilet preparations levied by the Union but collected and 
retained by the concerned State Government under the erstwhile article 268 of the Constitution; 
(g) any cess or surcharge or fee leviable under entry 66 read with entries 52, 54, 55 and 62 of 
List-II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution by the State Government under any Act notified 
under sub-section ( 4), 
prior to the commencement of the provisions of the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) 
Act, 2016: 
Provided that the revenue collected during the base year in a State, net of refunds, under the following 
taxes shall not be included in the calculation of the base year revenue for that State, namely:— 
(a) any taxes levied under any Act enacted under the erstwhile entry 54 of List-II (State List) of the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, prior to the coming into force of the provisions of the Constitution 
(One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, on the sale or purchase of petroleum crude, high speed 
diesel, motor spirit (commonly known as petrol), natural gas, aviation turbine fuel and alcoholic liquor 
for human consumption; 4 (b) tax levied under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956), on the sale or purchase of 
petroleum crude, high speed diesel, motor spirit (commonly known as petrol), natural gas, aviation 
turbine fuel and alcoholic liquor for human consumption; 
(c) any cess imposed by the State Government on the sale or purchase of petroleum crude, high 
speed diesel, motor spirit (commonly known as petrol), natural gas, aviation turbine fuel and 
alcoholic liquor for human consumption; and 
(d) the entertainment tax levied by the State but collected by local bodies, under any Act enacted 
under the erstwhile entry 62 of List-II (State List) of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, prior 
to coming into force of the provisions of the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 
2016. 
(2) In respect of the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the base year revenue shall include the amount of 
tax collected on sale of services by the said State Government during the base year. 
(3) In respect of the States mentioned in sub-clause ( g) of clause (4) of article 279A of the Constitution, 
the amount of revenue foregone on account of exemptions or remission given by the said State 
Governments to promote industrial investment in the State, with respect to such specific taxes referred to in 
sub-section ( 1), shall be included in the total base year revenue of the State, subject to such conditions as 
may be prescribed. 
(4) The Acts of the Central Government and State Governments under which the specific taxes are 
being subsumed into the goods and services tax shall be such as may be notified. 
(5) The base year revenue shall be calculated as per sub-sections ( 1), (2), (3) and ( 4) on the basis of 
the figures of revenue collected and net of refunds given in that year, as audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India. 
(6) In respect of any State, if any part of revenues mentioned in sub-sections ( 1), (2), (3) and ( 4) are 
not credited in the Consolidated Fund of the respective State, the same shall be included in the total base 
year revenue of the State, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed. 
6. Projected revenue for any year .—The projected revenue for any year in a State shall be 
calculated by applying the projected growth rate over the base year revenue of that State. 
Illustration. —If the base year revenue for 2015-16 for a concerned State, calculated as per section 5 
is one hundred rupees, then the projected revenue for financial year 2018-19 shall be as follows—
Projected Revenue for 2018-19=100 (1+14/100)3.
7. Calculation and release of compensation .––(1) The compensation under this Act shall be payable 
to any State during the transition period. 
(2) The compensation payable to a State shall be provisionally calculated and released at the end of 
every two months period, and shall be finally calculated for every financial year after the receipt of final 
revenue figures, as audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India: 
Provided that in case any excess amount has been released as compensation to a State in any financial 
year during the transition period, as per the audited figures of revenue collected, the excess amount so 
released shall be adjusted against the compensation amount payable to such State in the subsequent financial 
year. 
(3) The total compensation payable for any financial year during the transition period to any State 
shall be calculated in the following manner, namely:–– 
(a) the projected revenue for any financial year during the transition period, which could have 
accrued to a State in the absence of the goods and services tax, shall be calculated as per section 6; 
(b) the actual revenue collected by a State in any financial year during the transition period shall 
be— 
(i) the actual revenue from State tax collected by the State, net of refunds given by the said 
State under Chapters XI and XX of the State Goods and Services Tax Act; 
(ii) the integrated goods and services tax apportioned to that State; and 5 (iii) any collection of taxes on account of the taxes levied by the respective State under the 
Acts specified in sub-section ( 4) of section 5, net of refund of such taxes, 
as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India; 
 (c) the total compensation payable in any financial year shall be the difference between the 
projected revenue for any financial year and the actual revenue collected by a State referred to in 
clause ( b). 
(4) The loss of revenue at the end of every two months period in any year for a State during the 
transition period shall be calculated, at the end of the said period, in the following manner, namely:–– 
(a) the projected revenue that could have been earned by the State in absence of the goods and 
services tax till the end of the relevant two months period of the respective financial year shall be 
calculated on a pro-rata basis as a percentage of the total projected revenue for any financial year 
during the transition period, calculated in accordance with section 6. 
Illustration.— If the projected revenue for any year calculated in accordance with section 6 is one 
hundred rupees, for calculating the projected revenue that could be earned till the end of the period of 
ten months for the purpose of this sub-section shall be 100x(5/6) = Rs. 83.33; 
(b) the actual revenue collected by a State till the end of relevant two months period in any 
financial year during the transition period shall be— 
(i) the actual revenue from State tax collected by the State, net of refunds given by the State 
under Chapters XI and XX of the State Goods and Services Tax Act; 
(ii) the integrated goods and services tax apportioned to that State, as certified by the 
Principal Chief Controller of Accounts of the 1[Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs]; 
and 
(iii) any collection of taxes levied by the said State, under the Acts specified in 
sub-section ( 4) of section 5, net of refund of such taxes; 
(c) the provisional compensation payable to any State at the end of the relevant two months period 
in any financial year shall be the difference between the projected revenue till the end of the relevant 
period in accordance with clause ( a) and the actual revenue collected by a State in the said period as 
referred to in clause ( b), reduced by the provisional compensation paid to a State till the end of the 
previous two months period in the said financial year during the transition period. 
(5) In case of any difference between the final compensation amount payable to a State calculated in 
accordance with the provisions of sub-section ( 3) upon receipt of the audited revenue figures from the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, and the total provisional compensation amount released to a State 
in the said financial year in accordance with the provisions of sub-section ( 4), the same shall be adjusted 
against release of compensation to the State in the subsequent financial year. 
(6) Where no compensation is due to be released in any financial year, and in case any excess amount 
has been released to a State in the previous year, this amount shall be refunded by the State to the Central 
Government and such amount shall be credited to the Fund in such manner as may be prescribed. 
8. Levy  and collection of cess .—(1) There shall be levied a cess on such intra-State supplies of goods 
or services or both, as provided for in section 9 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, and such inter-
State supplies of goods or services or both as provided for in section 5 of the Integrated Goods and Services 
Tax Act, and collected in such manner as may be prescribed, on the recommendations of the Council, for the 
purposes of providing compensation to the States for loss of revenue arising on account of implementation of 
the goods and services tax with effect from the date from which the provisions of the Central Goods and 
Services Tax Act is brought into force, for a period of five years or for such period as may be prescribed on 
the recommendations of the Council: 
Provided that no such cess shall be leviable on supplies made by a taxable person who has decided to 
opt for composition levy under section 10 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act. 
1. Subs. by Act 34 of 2018, s. 2 for the words “Central Board of Excise and Customs” (w.e.f. 1-2-2019).   6 (2) The cess shall be levied on such supplies of goods and services as are specified in column (2) of 
the Schedule, on the basis of value, quantity or on such basis at such rate not exceeding the rate set forth 
in the corresponding entry in column (4) of the Schedule, as the Central Government may, on the 
recommendations of the Council, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify: 
Provided that where the cess is chargeable on any supply of goods or services or both with reference 
to their value, for each such supply the value shall be determined under section 15 of the Central Goods 
and Services Tax Act for all intra-State and inter-State supplies of goods or services or both: 
Provided further that the cess on goods imported into India shall be levied and collected in 
accordance with the provisions of section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 (51 of 1975), at the point 
when duties of customs are levied on the said goods under section 12 of the Customs Act, 1962               
(52 of 1962), on a value determined under the Customs Tariff Act, 1975. 
9. Returns, payments and refunds .—(1) Every taxable person, making a taxable supply of goods or 
services or both, shall— 
(a) pay the amount of cess as payable under this Act in such manner; 
(b) furnish such returns in such forms, along with the returns to be filed under the Central Goods 
and Services Tax Act; and 
(c) apply for refunds of such cess paid in such form,  
as may be prescribed. 
(2) For all purposes of furnishing of returns and claiming refunds, except for the form to be filed, the 
provisions of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act and the rules made thereunder, shall, as far as may 
be, apply in relation to the levy and collection of the cess leviable under section 8 on all taxable supplies 
of goods or services or both, as they apply in relation to the levy and collection of central tax on such 
supplies under the said Act or the rules made thereunder.  
10. Crediting proceeds of cess to Fund .—(1) The proceeds of the cess leviable under section 8 and 
such other amounts as may be recommended by the Council, shall be credited to a non-lapsable Fund 
known as the Goods and Services Tax Compensation Fund, which shall form part of the public account of 
India and shall be utilised for purposes specified in the said section. 
(2) All amounts payable to the States under section 7 shall be paid out of the Fund. 
(3) Fifty per cent. of the amount remaining unutilised in the Fund at the end of the transition period 
shall be transferred to the Consolidated Fund of India as the share of Centre, and the balance fifty          
per cent. shall be distributed amongst the States in the ratio of their total revenues from the State tax or 
the Union territory goods and services tax, as the case may be, in the last year of the transition period. 
1[(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 3), fifty per cent. of such amount, as may 
be recommended by the Council, which remains unutilised in the Fund, at any point of time in any 
financial year during the transition period shall be transferred to the Consolidated Fund of India as the 
share of Centre, and the balance fifty per cent. shall be distributed amongst the States in the ratio of their 
base year revenue determined in accordance with the provisions of section 5: 
Provided that in case of shortfall in the amount collected in the Fund against the requirement of 
compensation to be released under section 7 for any two months’ period, fifty per cent. of the same, but 
not exceeding the total amount transferred to the Centre and the States as recommended by the Council, 
shall be recovered from the Centre and the balance fifty per cent. from the States in the ratio of their base 
year revenue determined in accordance with the provisions of section 5.] 
(4) The accounts relating to Fund shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or 
any person appointed by him at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure in 
connection with such audit shall be payable by the Central Government to the Comptroller and            
Auditor-General of India. 
1. Ins. by Act 34 of 2018, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-2-2019).  7 (5) The accounts of the Fund, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be laid before 
each House of Parliament. 
11. Other provisions relating to cess. —(1) The provisions of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 
and the rules made thereunder, including those relating to assessment, input tax credit, non-levy, short-levy, 
interest, appeals, offences and penalties, shall, as far as may be, mutatis mutandis , apply, in relation to the 
levy and collection of the cess leviable under section 8 on the intra-State supply of goods and services, as 
they apply in relation to the levy and collection of central tax on such intra-State supplies under the said Act 
or the rules made thereunder.
(2) The provisions of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, and the rules made thereunder, 
including those relating to assessment, input tax credit, non-levy, short-levy, interest, appeals, offences and 
penalties, shall, mutatis mutandis , apply in relation to the levy and collection of the cess leviable under 
section 8 on the inter-State supply of goods and services, as they apply in relation to the levy and collection 
of integrated tax on such inter-State supplies under the said Act or the rules made thereunder: 
Provided that the input tax credit in respect of cess on supply of goods and services leviable under 
section 8, shall be utilised only towards payment of said cess on supply of goods and services leviable 
under the said section. 
12. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government shall, on the recommendations of the 
Council, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the conditions which were included in the total base year revenue of the States, referred to in 
sub-clause ( g) of clause (4) of article 279A of the Constitution, under sub-section ( 3) of section 5; 
(b) the conditions subject to which any part of revenues not credited in the Consolidated Fund of 
the respective State shall be included in the total base year revenue of the State, under sub-section ( 6) 
of section 5; 
(c) the manner of refund of compensation by the States to the Central Government under 
sub-section ( 6) of section 7; 
(d) the manner of levy and collection of cess and the period of its imposition under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 8;  
(e) the manner and forms for payment of cess, furnishing of returns and refund of cess under           
sub-section ( 1) of section 9; and 
(f) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to be 
made, by rules. 
13. Laying of rules before Parliament .—Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for 
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as 
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule.
14. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by order published in the Official 
Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary 
or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from the 
commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament. 8 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 8 ( 2)] 
1. In this Schedule, reference to a “tariff item”, “heading”, “sub-heading” and “Chapter”, wherever 
they occur, shall mean respectively a tariff item, heading, sub-heading and Chapter in the First Schedule 
to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 (51 of 1975). 
2. The rules for the interpretation of the First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975   (51 of 1975), 
the section and Chapter Notes and the General Explanatory Notes of the First Schedule shall, so far as 
may be, apply to the interpretation of this Schedule. 
S. No.  Description of supply of goods or 
services Tariff item, heading,          
sub-heading, Chapter, or 
supply of goods or 
services, as the case may 
beThe maximum rate at 
which goods and services 
tax compensation cess 
may be collected  
(1) (2) (3) (4)
1.  Pan Masala. 2106 90 20 One hundred and         
thirty-five per cent.
ad valorem .
2. Tobacco and manufactured tobacco 
substitutes, including tobacco 
products. 24 Four thousand one 
hundred and seventy 
rupees per thousand sticks 
or two hundred and ninety 
per cent. ad valorem or a 
combination thereof, but 
not exceeding four 
thousand one hundred and 
seventy rupees per 
thousand sticks plus two 
hundred and ninety             
percent. ad valorem.
3.  Coal, briquettes, ovoids and similar 
solid fuels manufactured from coal, 
lignite, whether or not agglomerated, 
excluding jet, peat (including peat 
litter), whether or not agglomerated.2701, 2702 or 2703 Four hundred rupees per 
tonne. 
4.  Aerated waters.  2202 10 10 Fifteen per cent.                   
ad valorem.
1[4A. Motor vehicles for the transport of not 
more than thirteen persons, including 
the driver.8702 10, 8702 20, 8702 
30 or 8702 90 Twenty-five per cent. ad 
valorem. ] 
5. Motor cars and other motor vehicles 
principally designed for the transport 
of persons (other than motor vehicles 
for the transport of ten or more 
persons, including the driver), 
including station wagons and racing 
cars.8703 2[Twenty-five per cent.                   
ad valorem. ] 
6.  Any other supplies.  Fifteen per cent.                    
advalorem.
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 2018, s. 2 (w.e.f. 2-9-2017). 
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “fifteen per cent.  ad valorem ”(w.e.f. 2-9-2017). 
--------------------------The Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (Prevention and Control) Act, 2017--------------------------
1THE HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS AND ACQUIRED  
IMMUNE DEFICIENCY SYNDROME (PREVENTION AND  
CONTROL) ACT, 2017 
__________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
___________ 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY
SECTIONS 
1.Short title, extent and commencement. 
2.Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN ACTS
3.Prohibition of discrimination. 
4.Prohibition of certain acts. 
CHAPTER III 
INFORMED CONSENT 
5.Informed consent for undertaking HIV test or treatment. 
6.Informed consent not required for conducting HIV tests in certain cases. 
7.Guidelines for testing centres, etc. 
CHAPTER IV 
DISCLOSURE OF HIV  STATUS
8.Disclosure of HIV status. 
9.Disclosure of HIV-positive status to partner of HIV-positive person. 
10.Duty to prevent transmission of HIV. 
CHAPTER V 
OBLIGATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS 
11.Confidentiality of data. 
12.HIV and AIDS policy for establishments. 
CHAPTER VI 
ANTI-RETROVIRAL THERAPY AND OPPORTUNISTIC  INFECTION  MANAGEMENT FOR PEOPLE  
LIVING WITH HIV 
13.Central Government and State Government to take measures. 
14.Anti-retroviral Therapy and Opportunistic Infection Management by Central Government and 
State Government. 
CHAPTER VII 
WELFARE MEASURES BY THE CENTRAL  GO VERNMENT AND STATE  GOVERNMENT
15.Welfare measures by Central Government and State Government. 
16.Protection of property of children affected by HIV or AIDS. 
17.Promotion of HIV and AIDS related information, education and communication programmes. 
18.Women and children infected with HIV or AIDS. 2CHAPTER VIII 
SAFE WORKING ENVIRONMENT 
SECTIONS 
19.Obligation of establishments to provide safe working environment. 
20.General responsibility of establishments. 
21.Grievance redressal mechanism. 
CHAPTER IX 
PROMOTION OF STRATEGIES FOR REDUCTION OF RISK 
22.Strategies for reduction of risk. 
CHAPTER X 
APPOINTMENT OF OMBUDSMAN
23.Appointment of Ombudsman. 
24.Powers of Ombudsman. 
25.Procedure of complaint. 
26.Orders of Ombudsman. 
27.Authorities to assist Ombudsman. 
28.Report to State Government. 
CHAPTER XI 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS 
29.Right of residence. 
30.HIV-related information, education and communication before marriage. 
31.Persons in care or custody of State. 
32.Recognition of guardianship of older sibling. 
33.Living wills for guardianship and testamentary guardianship. 
CHAPTER XII 
SPECIAL PROCEDURE IN COURT 
34.Suppression of identity. 
35.Maintenance applications. 
36.Sentencing. 
CHAPTER XIII 
PENALTIES 
37.Penalty for contravention. 
38.Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Ombudsman. 
39.Penalty for breach of confidentiality in legal proceeding. 
40.Prohibition of victimisation. 
41.Court to try offences. 
42.Offences to be cognizable and bailable. 
CHAPTER XIV 
MISCELLANEOUS
43.Act to have overriding effect. 
44.Protection of action taken in good faith. 
45.Delegation of powers. 
46.Guidelines. 
47.Power of Central Government to make rules. 
48.Laying of rules before both Houses of Parliament. 
49.Power of State Government to make rules and laying thereof. 
50.Power to remove difficulties. 3THE HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS AND ACQUIRED  
IMMUNE DEFICIENCY SYNDROME (PREVENTION AND  
CONTROL) ACT, 2017 
ACT NO. 16 OF 2017 
[20th April , 2017.]  
An Act to provide for the prevention and control of the spread of Human Immunodeficiency 
Virus and Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome and for the protection of human rights of 
persons affected by the said virus and syndrome and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 
WHEREAS  the spread of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immune Deficiency 
Syndrome is a matter of grave concern to all and there is an urgent need for the prevention and control of 
said virus and syndrome; 
AND WHEREAS there is a need to protect and secure the human rights of persons who are HIV-
positive, affected by Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome and 
vulnerable to the said virus and syndrome; 
AND WHEREAS there is a necessity for effective care, support and treatment for Human 
Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome; 
AND WHEREAS there is a need to protect the rights of healthcare providers and other persons in 
relation to Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome; 
AND WHEREAS the General Assembly of the United Nations, recalling and reaffirming its previous 
commitments on Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome, has 
adopted the Declaration of Commitment on Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immune 
Deficiency Syndrome (2001) to address the problems of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired 
Immune Deficiency Syndrome in all its aspects and to secure a global commitment to enhancing 
coordination and intensification of national, regional and international efforts to combat it in a 
comprehensive manner; 
AND WHEREAS the Republic of India, being a signatory to the aforesaid Declaration, it is expedient to 
give effect to the said Declaration. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:–– 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement .––(1) This Act may be called the Human 
Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (Prevention and Control) Act, 
2017. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. Definitions .––In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “AIDS” means Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome, a condition characterised by a 
combination of signs and symptoms, caused by Human Immunodeficiency Virus, which attacks and 
weakens the body’s immune system making the HIV-positive person susceptible to life threatening 
conditions or other conditions, as may be specified from time to time; 
1. 10th September, 2018 vide Notification No. S.O. 4715(E) dated 10th September 2018, see Gazette of India,  
 Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii).    4(b) “capacity to consent” means ability of an individual, determined on an objective basis, to 
understand and appreciate the nature and consequences of a proposed action and to make an informed 
decision concerning such action; 
(c) “child affected by HIV” means a person below the age of eighteen years, who is HIV-positive 
or whose parent or guardian (with whom such child normally resides) is HIV-positive or has lost a 
parent or guardian (with whom such child resided) due to AIDS or lives in a household fostering 
children orphaned by AIDS; 
(d) “discrimination” means any act or omission which directly or indirectly, expressly or by 
effect, immediately or over a period of time,— 
(i) imposes any burden, obligation, liability, disability or disadvantage on any person or 
category of persons, based on one or more HIV-related grounds; or 
(ii) denies or withholds any benefit, opportunity or advantage from any person or category of 
persons, based on one or more HIV-related grounds, 
and the expression “discriminate” to be construed accordingly. 
Explanation  1.—For the purposes of this clause, HIV-related grounds include— 
(i) being an HIV-positive person; 
(ii) ordinarily living, residing or cohabiting with a person who is HIV-positive person; 
(iii) ordinarily lived, resided or cohabited with a person who was HIV-positive.
Explanation 2.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that adoption of medically 
advised safeguards and precautions to minimise the risk of infection shall not amount to 
discrimination; 
(e) “domestic relationship” means a relationship as defined under clause ( f) of section 2 of the 
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (43 of 2005); 
(f) “establishment” means a body corporate or co-operative society or any organisation or institution 
or two or more persons jointly carrying out a systematic activity for a period of twelve months or more at 
one or more places for consideration or otherwise, for the production, supply or distribution of goods or 
services; 
(g) “guidelines” means any statement or any other document issued by the Central Government 
indicating policy or procedure or course of action relating to HIV and AIDS to be followed by the Central 
Government, State Governments, governmental and non-governmental organisations and establishments 
and individuals dealing with prevention, control and treatment of HIV or AIDS; 
(h) “healthcare provider” means any individual whose vocation or profession is directly or 
indirectly related to the maintenance of the health of another individual and includes any physician, 
nurse, paramedic, psychologist, counsellor or other individual providing medical, nursing, 
psychological or other healthcare services including HIV prevention and treatment services; 
(i) “HIV” means Human Immunodeficiency Virus; 
(j) “HIV-affected person” means an individual who is HIV-positive or whose partner (with whom 
such individual normally resides) is HIV-positive or has lost a partner (with whom such individual 
resided) due to AIDS; 
(k) “HIV-positive person” means a person whose HIV test has been confirmed positive; 
(l) “HIV-related information” means any information relating to the HIV status of a person and 
includes— 
(i) information relating to the undertaking performing the HIV test or result of an HIV test; 
(ii) information relating to the care, support or treatment of that person; 
(iii) information which may identify that person; and 5(iv) any other information concerning that person, which is collected, received, accessed or 
recorded in connection with an HIV test, HIV treatment or HIV-related research or the HIV status 
of that person; 
(m) “HIV test” means a test to determine the presence of an antibody or antigen of HIV; 
(n) “informed consent” means consent given by any individual or his representative specific to a 
proposed intervention without any coercion, undue influence, fraud, mistake or misrepresentation and such 
consent obtained after informing such individual or his representative, as the case may be, such 
information, as specified in the guidelines, relating to risks and benefits of, and alternatives to, the 
proposed intervention in such language and in such manner as understood by that individual or his 
representative, as the case may be; 
(o) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette; 
(p) “partner” means a spouse, de facto spouse or a person with whom another person has 
relationship in the nature of marriage; 
(q) “person” includes an individual, a Hindu Undivided Family, a company, a firm, an association 
of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated or not, in India or outside India, any 
corporation established by or under any Central or State Act or any company including a Government 
company incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), any Limited Liability Partnership 
under the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009), any body corporate incorporated by or 
under the laws of a country outside India, a co-operative society registered under any law relating to 
co-operative societies, a local authority, and every other artificial juridical person ; 
(r) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be; 
(s) “protected person” means a person who is— 
(i) HIV-Positive; or 
(ii) ordinarily living, residing or cohabiting with a person who is HIV-positive person; or 
(iii) ordinarily lived, resided or cohabited with a person who was HIV-positive; 
(t) “reasonable accommodation” means minor adjustments to a job or work that enables an  
HIV-positive person who is otherwise qualified to enjoy equal benefits or to perform the essential 
functions of the job or work, as the case may be; 
(u) “relative”, with reference to the protected person, means— 
(i) spouse of the protected person; 
(ii) parents of the protected person; 
(iii) brother or sister of the protected person; 
(iv) brother or sister of the spouse of the protected person; 
(v) brother or sister of either of the parents of the protected person; 
(vi) in the absence of any of the relatives mentioned at sub-clauses ( i) to ( v), any lineal 
ascendant or descendant of the protected person; 
(vii) in the absence of any of the relatives mentioned at sub-clauses ( i) to ( vi), any lineal 
ascendant or descendant of the spouse of the protected person; 
(v) “significant-risk” means— 
(a) the presence of significant-risk body substances; 
(b) a circumstance which constitutes significant-risk for transmitting or contracting HIV 
infection; or 
(c) the presence of an infectious source and an uninfected person. 6Explanation .—For the purpose of this clause,— 
(i) “significant-risk body substances” are blood, blood products, semen, vaginal secretions, 
breast milk, tissue and the body fluids, namely, cerebrospinal, amniotic, peritoneal, synovial, 
pericardial and pleural; 
(ii) ‘‘circumstances which constitute significant-risk for transmitting or contracting HIV 
infection” are— 
(A) sexual intercourse including vaginal, anal or oral sexual intercourse which exposes an 
uninfected person to blood, blood products, semen or vaginal secretions of an HIV-positive 
person; 
(B) sharing of needles and other paraphernalia used for preparing and injecting drugs 
between HIV-positive persons and uninfected persons; 
(C) the gestation, giving birth or breast feeding of an infant when the mother is an  
HIV-positive person; 
(D) transfusion of blood, blood products, and transplantation of organs or other tissues 
from an HIV-positive person to an uninfected person, provided such blood, blood products, 
organs or other tissues have not been tested conclusively for the antibody or antigen of HIV 
and have not been rendered non-infective by heat or chemical treatment; and 
(E) other circumstances during which a significant-risk body substance, other than breast 
milk, of an HIV-positive person contacts or may contact mucous membranes including eyes, 
nose or mouth, nonintact-skin including open wounds, skin with a dermatitis condition or 
abraded areas or the vascular system of an uninfected person, and including such 
circumstances not limited to needle-stick or puncture wound injuries and direct saturation or 
permeation of these body surfaces by the significant-risk body substances: 
Provided that “significant-risk” shall not include— 
(i) exposure to urine, faeces, sputum, nasal secretions, saliva, sweat, tears or vomit 
that does not contain blood that is visible to the naked eye; 
(ii) human bites where there is no direct blood to blood, or no blood to mucous 
membrane contact; 
(iii) exposure of intact skin to blood or any other blood substance; and 
(iv) occupational centres where individuals use scientifically accepted Universal 
Precautions, prohibitive techniques and preventive practices in circumstances which 
would otherwise pose a significant-risk and such techniques are not breached and remain 
intact; 
(w) “State AIDS Control Society” means the nodal agency of the State Government responsible 
for implementing programmes in the field of HIV and AIDS; 
(x) “State Government”, in relation to a Union territory, means the Administrator of that Union 
territory appointed by the President under article 239 of the Constitution; and 
(y) “Universal Precautions” means control measures that prevent exposure to or reduce, the risk 
of transmission of pathogenic agents (including HIV) and includes education, training, personal 
protective equipment such as gloves, gowns and masks, hand washing, and employing safe work 
practices. 7CHAPTER II 
PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN ACTS
3. Prohibition of discrimination .—No person shall discriminate against the protected person on any 
ground including any of the following, namely:— 
(a) the denial of, or termination from, employment or occupation, unless, in the case of 
termination, the person, who is otherwise qualified, is furnished with— 
(i) a copy of the written assessment of a qualified and independent healthcare provider 
competent to do so that such protected person poses a significant risk of transmission of HIV to 
other person in the workplace, or is unfit to perform the duties of the job; and 
(ii) a copy of a written statement by the employer stating the nature and extent of 
administrative or financial hardship for not providing him reasonable accommodation; 
(b) the unfair treatment in, or in relation to, employment or occupation; 
(c) the denial or discontinuation of, or, unfair treatment in, healthcare services; 
(d) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment in, educational, establishments and 
services thereof; 
(e) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment with regard to, access to, or provision or 
enjoyment or use of any goods, accommodation, service, facility, benefit, privilege or opportunity 
dedicated to the use of the general public or customarily available to the public, whether or not for a 
fee, including shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public entertainment or the use of wells, 
tanks, bathing ghats , roads, burial grounds or funeral ceremonies and places of public resort; 
(f) the denial, or, discontinuation of, or unfair treatment with regard to, the right of movement; 
(g) the denial or discontinuation of, or, unfair treatment with regard to, the right to reside, 
purchase, rent, or otherwise occupy, any property; 
(h) the denial or discontinuation of, or, unfair treatment in, the opportunity to stand for, or, hold 
public or private office; 
(i) the denial of access to, removal from, or unfair treatment in, Government or private 
establishment in whose care or custody a person may be; 
(j) the denial of, or unfair treatment in, the provision of insurance unless supported by actuarial 
studies; 
(k) the isolation or segregation of a protected person; 
(l) HIV testing as a pre-requisite for obtaining employment, or accessing healthcare services or 
education or, for the continuation of the same or, for accessing or using any other service or facility: 
Provided that, in case of failure to furnish the written assessment under sub-clause ( i) of  
clause ( a), it shall be presumed that there is no significant-risk and that the person is fit to perform the 
duties of the job, as the case may be, and in case of the failure to furnish the written statement under 
sub-clause ( ii) of that clause, it shall be presumed that there is no such undue administrative or 
financial hardship. 
4. Prohibition of certain acts .—No person shall, by words, either spoken or written, publish, 
propagate, advocate or communicate by signs or by visible representation or otherwise the feelings of 
hatred against any protected persons or group of protected person in general or specifically or 
disseminate, broadcast or display any information, advertisement or notice, which may reasonably be 
construed to demonstrate an intention to propagate hatred or which is likely to expose protected persons 
to hatred, discrimination or physical violence. 8CHAPTER III 
INFORMED CONSENT 
5. Informed consent for undertaking HIV test or treatment .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this 
Act,— 
 (a) no HIV test shall be undertaken or performed upon any person; or 
(b) no protected person shall be subject to medical treatment, medical interventions or research, 
except with the informed consent of such person or his representative and in such manner, as may be 
specified in the guidelines. 
(2) The informed consent for HIV test shall include pre-test and post-test counselling to the person 
being tested or such person’s representative in the manner as may be specified in the guidelines. 
6. Informed consent not required for conducting HIV tests in certain cases .—The informed 
consent for conducting an HIV test shall not be required— 
(a) where a court determines, by an order that the carrying out of the HIV test of any person 
either as part of a medical examination or otherwise, is necessary for the determination of issues in 
the matter before it; 
(b) for procuring, processing, distribution or use of a human body or any part thereof including 
tissues, blood, semen or other body fluids for use in medical research or therapy: 
Provided that where the test results are requested by a donor prior to donation, the donor shall be 
referred to counselling and testing centre and such donor shall not be entitled to the results of the test 
unless he has received post-test counselling from such centre; 
(c) for epidemiological or surveillance purposes where the HIV test is anonymous and is not for 
the purpose of determining the HIV status of a person: 
Provided that persons who are subjects of such epidemiological or surveillance studies shall be 
informed of the purposes of such studies; and 
(d) for screening purposes in any licensed blood bank. 
7. Guidelines for testing centres, etc .—No HIV test shall be conducted or performed by any testing 
or diagnostic centre or pathology laboratory or blood bank, unless such centre or laboratory or blood bank 
follows the guidelines laid down for such test. 
CHAPTER IV 
DISCLOSURE OF HIV STATUS
8. Disclosure of HIV status .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force,— 
(i) no person shall be compelled to disclose his HIV status except by an order of the court that the 
disclosure of such information is necessary in the interest of justice for the determination of issues in 
the matter before it; 
(ii) no person shall disclose or be compelled to disclose the HIV status or any other private 
information of other person imparted in confidence or in a relationship of a fiduciary nature, except 
with the informed consent of that other person or a representative of such another person obtained in 
the manner as specified in section 5, as the case may be, and the fact of such consent has been 
recorded in writing by the person making such disclosure: 
Provided that, in case of a relationship of a fiduciary nature, informed consent shall be recorded 
in writing. 9(2) The informed consent for disclosure of HIV-related information under clause ( ii) of  
sub-section ( 1) is not required where the disclosure is made— 
(a) by a healthcare provider to another healthcare provider who is involved in the care, treatment 
or counselling of such person, when such disclosure is necessary to provide care or treatment to that 
person;  
(b) by an order of a court that the disclosure of such information is necessary in the interest of 
justice for the determination of issues and in the matter before it; 
(c) in suits or legal proceedings between persons, where the disclosure of such information is 
necessary in filing suits or legal proceedings or for instructing their counsel; 
(d) as required under the provisions of section 9; 
(e) if it relates to statistical or other information of a person that could not reasonably be expected 
to lead to the identification of that person; and 
(f) to the officers of the Central Government or the State Government or State AIDS Control 
Society of the concerned State Government, as the case may be, for the purposes of monitoring, 
evaluation or supervision. 
9. Disclosure of HIV-positive status to partner of HIV-positive person .—(1) No healthcare 
provider, except a physician or a counsellor, shall disclose the HIV-positive status of a person to his or 
her partner. 
(2) A healthcare provider, who is a physician or counsellor, may disclose the HIV-positive status of a 
person under his direct care to his or her partner, if such healthcare provider— 
(a) reasonably believes that the partner is at the significant risk of transmission of HIV from such 
person; and 
(b) such HIV-positive person has been counselled to inform such partner; and 
(c) is satisfied that the HIV-positive person will not inform such partner; and 
(d) has informed the HIV-positive person of the intention to disclose the HIV positive status to 
such partner:  
Provided that disclosure under this sub-section to the partner shall be made in person after 
counselling: 
Provided further that such healthcare provider shall have no obligation to identify or locate the 
partner of an HIV-positive person: 
Provided also that such healthcare provider shall not inform the partner of a woman where there is a 
reasonable apprehension that such information may result in violence, abandonment or actions which may 
have a severe negative effect on the physical or mental health or safety of such woman, her children, her 
relatives or someone who is close to her. 
(3) The healthcare provider under sub-section ( 1) shall not be liable for any criminal or civil action 
for any disclosure or non-disclosure of confidential HIV-related information made to a partner under this 
section. 
10. Duty to prevent transmission of HIV .—Every person, who is HIV-positive and has been 
counselled in accordance with the guidelines issued or is aware of the nature of HIV and its transmission, 
shall take all reasonable precautions to prevent the transmission of HIV to other persons which may 
include adopting strategies for the reduction of risk or informing in advance his HIV status before any 
sexual contact with any person or with whom needles are shared with: 
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not be applicable to prevent transmission through a 
sexual contact in the case of a woman, where there is a reasonable apprehension that such information 
may result in violence, abandonment or actions which may have a severe negative effect on the physical 
or mental health or safety of such woman, her children, her relatives or someone who is close to her. 10CHAPTER V 
OBLIGATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS
11. Confidentiality of data.— Every establishment keeping the records of HIV-related information of 
protected persons shall adopt data protection measures in accordance with the guidelines to ensure that 
such information is protected from disclosure. 
Explanation .— For the purpose of this section, data protection measures shall include procedures for 
protecting information from disclosure, procedures for accessing information, provision for security 
systems to protect the information stored in any form and mechanisms to ensure accountability and 
liability of persons in the establishment. 
12. HIV and AIDS policy for establishments.— The Central Government shall notify model HIV 
and AIDS policy for establishments, in such manner, as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER VI 
ANTI-RETROVIRAL THERAPY AND OPPORTUNISTIC  INFECTION  MANAGEMENT FOR PEOPLE  
LIVING WITH  HIV 
13. Central Government and State Government to take measures .—The Central Government and 
every State Government, as the case may be, shall take all such measures as it deems necessary and 
expedient for the prevention of spread of HIV or AIDS, in accordance with the guidelines. 
14. Antiretroviral Therapy and Opportunistic Infection Management by Central Government 
and State Government .—(1) The measures to be taken by the Central Government or the State 
Government under section 13 shall include the measures for providing, as far as possible, diagnostic 
facilities relating to HIV or AIDS, Anti-retroviral Therapy and Opportunistic Infection Management to 
people living with HIV or AIDS. 
(2) The Central Government shall issue necessary guidelines in respect of protocols for HIV and 
AIDS relating to diagnostic facilities, Anti-retroviral Therapy and Opportunistic Infection Management 
which shall be applicable to all persons and shall ensure their wide dissemination. 
CHAPTER VII 
WELFARE MEASURES BY THE  CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT AND STATE  GOVERNMENT
15. Welfare measures by Central Government and State Government .—(1) The Central 
Government and every State Government shall take measures to facilitate better access to welfare 
schemes to persons infected or affected by HIV or AIDS. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the Central Government and State 
Governments shall frame schemes to address the needs of all protected persons. 
16. Protection of property of children affected by HIV or AIDS .—(1) The Central Government or 
the State Government, as the case may be, shall take appropriate steps to protect the property of children 
affected by HIV or AIDS for the protection of property of child affected by HIV or AIDS. 
(2) The parents or guardians of children affected by HIV and AIDS, or any person acting for 
protecting their interest, or a child affected by HIV and AIDS may approach the Child Welfare 
Committee for the safe keeping and deposit of documents related to the property rights of such child or to 
make complaints relating to such child being dispossessed or actual dispossession or trespass into such 
child’s house. 
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, “Child Welfare Committee” means a Committee  
set-up under section 29 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 (56 of 2000). 
17. Promotion of HIV and AIDS related information, education and communication 
programmes .—The Central Government and the State Government shall formulate HIV and AIDS 
related information, education and communication programmes which are age-appropriate,  
gender-sensitive, non-stigmatising and non-discriminatory.  1118. Women and children infected with HIV or AIDS .—(1) The Central Government shall lay 
down guidelines for care, support and treatment of children infected with HIV or AIDS. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section ( 1) and notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the Central Government, or the State 
Government as the case may be, shall take measures to counsel and provide information regarding the 
outcome of pregnancy and HIV-related treatment to the HIV infected women. 
(3) No HIV positive woman, who is pregnant, shall be subjected to sterilisation or abortion without 
obtaining her informed consent. 
CHAPTER VIII 
SAFE WORKING ENVIRONMENT
19. Obligation of establishments to provide safe working environment .—Every establishment, 
engaged in the healthcare services and every such other establishment where there is a significant risk of 
occupational exposure to HIV, shall, for the purpose of ensuring safe working environment,— 
(i) provide, in accordance with the guidelines,— 
(a) Universal Precautions to all persons working in such establishment who may be 
occupationally exposed to HIV; and 
(b) training for the use of such Universal Precautions; 
(c) Post Exposure Prophylaxis to all persons working in such establishment who may be 
occupationally exposed to HIV or AIDS; and 
(ii) inform and educate all persons working in the establishment of the availability of Universal 
Precautions and Post Exposure Prophylaxis. 
20. General responsibility of establishments .—(1) The provisions of this Chapter shall be 
applicable to all establishments consisting of one hundred or more persons, whether as an employee or 
officer or member or director or trustee or manager, as the case may be: 
Provided that in the case of healthcare establishments, the provisions of this sub-section shall have the 
effect as if for the words “one hundred or more”, the words “twenty or more” had been substituted. 
(2) Every person, who is in charge of an establishment, referred to in sub-section ( 1), for the conduct 
of the activities of such establishment, shall ensure compliance of the provisions of this Act. 
21. Grievance redressal mechanism .—Every establishment referred to in sub-section ( 1) of  
section 20 shall designate such person, as it deems fit, as the Complaints Officer who shall dispose of 
complaints of violations of the provisions of this Act in the establishment, in such manner and within 
such time as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER IX 
PROMOTION OF STRATEGIES FOR REDUCTION OF RISK
22. Strategies for reduction of risk .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force any strategy or mechanism or technique adopted or implemented for reducing the risk 
of HIV transmission, or any act pursuant thereto, as carried out by persons, establishments or 
organisations in the manner as may be specified in the guidelines issued by the Central Government shall 
not be restricted or prohibited in any manner, and shall not amount to a criminal offence or attract civil 
liability. 
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, strategies for reducing risk of HIV transmission means 
promoting actions or practices that minimise a person’s risk of exposure to HIV or mitigate the adverse 
impacts related to HIV or AIDS including— 
(i) the provisions of information, education and counselling services relating to prevention of 
HIV and safe practices; 
(ii) the provisions and use of safer sex tools, including condoms; 12(iii) drug substitution and drug maintenance; and 
(iv) provision of comprehensive injection safety requirements. 
Illustrations 
(a) A supplies condoms to B who is a sex worker or to C, who is a client of B. Neither A nor B 
nor C can be held criminally or civilly liable for such actions or be prohibited, impeded, restricted or 
prevented from implementing or using the strategy. 
(b) M carries on an intervention project on HIV or AIDS and sexual health information, 
education and counselling for men, who have sex with men, provides safer sex information, material 
and condoms to N, who has sex with other men. Neither M nor N can be held criminally or civilly 
liable for such actions or be prohibited, impeded, restricted or prevented from implementing or using 
the intervention. 
(c) X, who undertakes an intervention providing registered needle exchange programme services 
to injecting drug users, supplies a clean needle to Y, an injecting drug user who exchanges the same 
for a used needle. Neither X nor Y can be held criminally or civilly liable for such actions or be 
prohibited, impeded, restricted or prevented from implementing or using the intervention. 
(d) D, who carries on an intervention programme providing Opioid Substitution Treatment 
(OST), administers OST to E, an injecting drug user. Neither D nor E can be held criminally or civilly 
liable for such actions or be prohibited, impeded, restricted or prevented from implementing or using 
the intervention. 
CHAPTER X 
APPOINTMENT OF OMBUDSMAN
23. Appointment of Ombudsman .—(1) Every State Government shall appoint one or more 
Ombudsman,— 
(a) possessing such qualification and experience as may be prescribed, or 
(b) designate any of its officers not below such rank, as may be prescribed, by that Government, 
to exercise such powers and discharge such functions, as may be conferred on Ombudsman under this 
Act. 
(2) The terms and condition of the service of an Ombudsman appointed under clause ( a) of  
sub-section ( 1) shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government. 
(3) The Ombudsman appointed under sub-section ( 1) shall have such jurisdiction in respect of such 
area or areas as the State Government may, by notification, specify. 
24. Powers of Ombudsman .—(1) The Ombudsman shall, upon a complaint made by any person, 
inquire into the violations of the provisions of this Act, in relation to acts of discrimination mentioned in 
section 3 and providing of healthcare services by any person, in such manner as may be prescribed by the 
State Government. 
(2) The Ombudsman may require any person to furnish information on such points or matters, as he 
considers necessary, for inquiring into the matter and any person so required shall be deemed to be legally 
bound to furnish such information and failure to do so shall be punishable under sections 176 and 177 of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
(3) The Ombudsman shall maintain records in such manner as may be prescribed by the State 
Government.  
25. Procedure of complaint .—The complaints may be made to the Ombudsman under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 24 in such manner, as may be prescribed, by the State Government.  
26. Orders of Ombudsman.— The Ombudsman shall, within a period of thirty days of the receipt of 
the complaint under sub-section ( 1) of section 24, and after giving an opportunity of being heard to the 
parties, pass such order, as he deems fit, giving reasons therefor: 13Provided that in cases of medical emergency of HIV positive persons, the Ombudsman shall pass 
such order as soon as possible, preferably within twenty-four hours of the receipt of the complaint. 
27. Authorities to assist Ombudsman.— All authorities including the civil authorities functioning in 
the area for which the Ombudsman has been appointed under section 23 shall assist in execution of orders 
passed by the Ombudsman. 
28. Report to State Government.— The Ombudsman shall, after every six months, report to the 
State Government, the number and nature of complaints received, the action taken and orders passed in 
relation to such complaints and such report shall be published on the website of the Ombudsman and a 
copy thereof be forwarded to the Central Government. 
CHAPTER XI 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
29. Right of residence .—Every protected person shall have the right to reside in the shared 
household, the right not to be excluded from the shared household or any part of it and the right to enjoy 
and use the facilities of such shared household in a non-discriminatory manner. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression “shared household” means a household 
where a person lives or at any stage has lived in a domestic relationship either singly or along with 
another person and includes such a household, whether owned or tenanted, either jointly or singly, any 
such household in respect of which either person or both, jointly or singly, have any right, title, interest or 
equity or a household which may belong to a joint family of which either person is a member, irrespective 
of whether either person has any right, title or interest in the shared household.  
30. HIV-related information, education and communication before marriage .—The Central 
Government shall specify guidelines for the provision of HIV-related information, education and 
communication before marriage and ensure their wide dissemination. 
31. Persons in care or custody of State .—(1) Every person who is in the care or custody of the State 
shall have the right to HIV prevention, counselling, testing and treatment services in accordance with the 
guidelines issued in this regard. 
(2) For the purposes of this section, persons in the care or custody of the State include persons 
convicted of a crime and serving a sentence, persons awaiting trial, person detained under preventive 
detention laws, persons under the care or custody of the State under the Juvenile Justice (Care and 
Protection of Children) Act, 2000 (56 of 2000), the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 (104 of 1956) 
or any other law and persons in the care or custody of State run homes and shelters. 
32. Recognition of guardianship of older sibling .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any law 
for the time being in force, a person below the age of eighteen but not below twelve years, who has 
sufficient maturity of understanding and who is managing the affairs of his family affected by HIV and 
AIDS, shall be competent to act as guardian of other sibling below the age of eighteen years for the 
following purposes, namely:— 
(a) admission to educational establishments; 
(b) care and protection; 
(c) treatment; 
(d) operating bank accounts; 
(e) managing property; and 
(f) any other purpose that may be required to discharge his duties as a guardian. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, a family affected by HIV or AIDS means where both 
parents and the legal guardian is incapacitated due to HIV-related illness or AIDS or the legal guardian 
and parents are unable to discharge their duties in relation to such children. 
33. Living wills for guardianship and testamentary guardianship .—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any law for the time being in force, a parent or legal guardian of a child affected by HIV and 14AIDS may appoint, by making a will, an adult person who is a relative or friend, or a person below the 
age of eighteen years who is the managing member of the family affected by HIV and AIDS, as referred 
to in section 33, to act as legal guardian immediately upon incapacity or death of such parent or legal 
guardian, as the case may be. 
(2) Nothing in this section shall divest a parent or legal guardian of their rights, and the guardianship 
referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall cease to operate upon by the parent or legal guardian regaining their 
capacity. 
(3) Any parent or legal guardian of children affected by HIV and AIDS may make a will appointing a 
guardian for care and protection of such children and for the property that such children would inherit or 
which is bequeathed through the will made by such parent or legal guardian. 
CHAPTER XII 
SPECIAL PROCEDURE IN COURT
34. Suppression of identity .—(1) In any legal proceeding in which a protected person is a party or 
such person is an applicant, the court, on an application by such person or any other person on his behalf 
may pass, in the interest of justice, any or all of the following orders, namely:— 
(a) that the proceeding or any part thereof be conducted by suppressing the identity of the 
applicant by substituting the name of such person with a pseudonym in the records of the proceedings 
in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(b) that the proceeding or any part thereof may be conducted in camera; 
(c) restraining any person from publishing in any manner any matter leading to the disclosure of 
the name or status or identity of the applicant. 
(2) In any legal proceeding concerning or relating to an HIV-positive person, the court shall take up 
and dispose of the proceeding on priority basis. 
35. Maintenance applications.— In any maintenance application filed by or on behalf of a protected 
person under any law for the time being in force, the court shall consider the application for interim 
maintenance and, in passing any order of maintenance, shall take into account the medical expenses and 
other HIV-related costs that may be incurred by the applicant. 
36. Sentencing.— In passing any order relating to sentencing, the HIV-positive status of the persons 
in respect of whom such an order is passed shall be a relevant factor to be considered by the court to 
determine the custodial place where such person shall be transferred to, based on the availability of proper 
healthcare services at such place. 
CHAPTER XIII 
PENALTIES
37. Penalty for contravention .—Notwithstanding any action that may be taken under any other law 
for the time being in force, whoever contravenes the provisions of section 4 shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three months but which may extend to two years and 
with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both. 
38. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Ombudsman.— Whoever fails to comply with any 
order given by an Ombudsman within such time as may be specified in such order, under section 26, shall 
be liable to pay a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees and in case the failure continues, with an 
additional fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for every day during which such failure 
continues. 
39. Penalty for breach of confidentiality in legal proceedings.— Notwithstanding any action that 
may be taken under any law for the time being in force, whoever discloses information regarding the HIV 
status of a protected person which is obtained by him in the course of, or in relation to, any proceedings 
before any court, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees unless such 
disclosure is pursuant to any order or direction of a court.  1540. Prohibition of victimisation .—No person shall subject any other person or persons to any 
detriment on the ground that such person or persons have taken any of the following actions, namely:— 
(a) made complaint under this Act; 
(b) brought proceedings under this Act against any person; 
(c) furnished any information or produced any document to a person exercising or performing 
any power or function under this Act; or 
(d) appeared as a witness in a proceeding under this Act. 
41. Court to try offences.— No court other than the court of a Judicial Magistrate First Class shall 
take cognizance of an offence under this Act. 
42. Offences to be cognizable and bailable.— Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), offences under this Act shall be cognizable and bailable. 
CHAPTER XIV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
43. Act to have overriding effect.— The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act. 
44. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government, the State Government, the Central Government or AIDS Control 
Society of the State Government Ombudsman or any member thereof or any officer or other employee or 
person acting under the direction either of the Central Government, the State Government, the Central 
Government, or Ombudsman in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of this Act or any rules or guidelines made thereunder or in respect of the publication by or 
under the authority of the Central Government, the State Government, the Central Government or AIDS 
Control Society of the State Government Ombudsman. 
45. Delegation of powers.— The Central Government and State Government, as the case may be, 
may, by general or special order, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act shall, in such 
circumstances and under such conditions, if any, as may be mentioned in the order, be exercisable also by 
an officer subordinate to that Government or the local authority. 
46. Guidelines .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make guidelines consistent with 
this Act and any rules thereunder, generally to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such guidelines may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) information relating to risk and benefits or alternatives to the proposed intervention under 
clause ( n) of section 2; 
(b) the manner of obtaining the informed consent under sub-section ( 1) and the manner of pre test 
and post test counselling under sub-section ( 2) of section 5; 
(c) guidelines to be followed by a testing or diagnostic centre or pathology laboratory or blood 
bank for HIV test under section 7; 
(d) the manner of taking data protection measures under section 11; 
(e) guidelines in respect of protocols for HIV/AIDS relating to Anti-retroviral Therapy and 
Opportunistic Infections Management under sub-section ( 2) of section 14; 
(f) care, support and treatment of children infected with HIV or AIDS under sub-section ( 1) of 
section 18; 
(g) guidelines for Universal Precautions and post exposure prophylaxis under section 19; 
(h) manner of carrying out the strategy or mechanism or technique for reduction of risk of HIV 
transmission under section 22; 16(i) manner of implementation of a drugs substitution, drug maintenance and needle and syringe 
exchange programme under section 22; 
(j) provision of HIV-related information, education and communication before marriage under 
section 30; 
(k) manner of HIV or AIDS prevention, counselling, testing and treatment of persons in custody 
under section 31; 
(l) any other matter which ought to be specified in guidelines for the purposes of this Act. 
47. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) manner of notifying model HIV or AIDS policy for the establishments under section 12; 
(b) any other matter which may be or ought to be prescribed by the Central Government. 
48. Laying of rules before both Houses of Parliament .—Every rule made under this Act shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and 
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive session aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule. 
49. Power of State Government to make rules and laying thereof .—(1) The State Government 
may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) measures to provide diagnostic facilities relating to HIV or AIDS, Antiretroviral Therapy and 
Opportunistic Infection Management to people living with HIV or AIDS and for the prevention of 
spread of HIV or AIDS in accordance with the guidelines under section 14; 
(b) qualification and experience for the appointment of a person as an Ombudsman under  
clause ( a) or rank of officer of the State Government to be designated as Ombudsman under  
clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 23; 
(c) terms and conditions of services of Ombudsman under sub-section ( 2) of section 23; 
(d) manner of inquiring into complaints by the Ombudsman under sub-section ( 1) and 
maintaining of records by him under sub-section ( 3) of section 24; 
(e) manner of making the complaints to the Ombudsman under section 25; and 
(f) manner of recording pseudonym in legal proceedings under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) of 
section 34. 
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it 
is made before the Legislature of that State. 
50. Power to remove difficulties.—( 1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of the period of two years 
from the date of commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament. 
--------------------------The Indian Institutes of Information Technology (Public-private Partnership) Act, 2017--------------------------
1 
 THE INDIAN INSTITUTES OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(PUBLIC -PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP) ACT, 2017  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration of certain institutions as institutions of national importance.  
3. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
THE INSTITUTES  
4. Incorporation of Institutes.  
5. Effect of incorporation of Institutes.   
6. Objects of Institute.  
7. Powers and functions of Institute.  
8. Institutes to be open to all races, creeds and classes.  
9. Teaching at In stitute.  
10. Institute to be a distinct legal entity not -for-profit.   
11. Establishment of Institute by Central Government, State Government and industry partners.  
CHAPTER III  
AUTHORITIES OF INDIAN  INSTITUTES OF INFORMATION  TECHNOLOGY  
ESTABLISHED IN PUBLIC -PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP  
12. Visitor.  
13. Authorities of Institute.   
14. Board of Governors . 
15. Term of office of , vacancies among and allowances payable to, members of Board.  
16. Resignation of Chairperson.  
17. Powers and functions of Board.   
18. Senate.   
19. Powers and functions of  Senate.   
20. Finance Committee.  
21. Powers and functions of Finance Committee.  
22. Meetings.  
23. Director.  
24. Registrar.   
25. Review of Performance of Institute .  
CHAPTER IV  
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
26. Grants by Central Government and State Governments.   
27. Fund of Institute  
28. Accounts and  audit.  
29. Pension and provident fund.  
30. Appointments.  
31. Statute s. 
32. Statu tes how to be made.  
33. Ordinance s. 2 
 SECTIONS  
34. Ordinance s how to be made.  
35. Tribunal of Arbitration.  
36. Annual report of Director.  
37. Annual report of each Institute . 
CHAPTER V  
CO-ORDINATION FORUM  
38. Co-ordination Forum.  
39. Term of office and allowances payable to members of Co -ordination Forum.  
40. Function s and duties of Co -ordination Forum.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
41. Power to make rules.  
42. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc.  
43. Returns and information to be provided to Central Government or State Government.  
44. Power of Central Government to issue directions.  
45. Institute to be public authority under Right to Information Act.  
46. Transitional provisions.  
47. Power to remove difficulties.  
48. Laying to rules, Statutes, Ordinances and notification.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
  3 
  THE INDIAN INSTITUTES OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(PUBLIC -PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP) ACT, 2017  
NO. 23 OF 2017  
[9th August, 2017.]  
An Act to declare certain Indian Institutes of Information Technology e stablished under public -private 
partnership as institutions of national importance, with a view to develop new knowledge in 
information technology and to provide manpower of global standards for the information technology 
industry and to provide for certai n other matters connected with such institutions or incidental 
thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Indian Institutes of Information 
Technology (Public -private Partnership) Act, 2017.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration of certain institutions as institutions of national importance .—Whereas the objects of 
the Institutes mentioned in the Schedule are such as to make them institutions of national importance, it is 
hereby declared that each such Institute is an institution of national importance.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date of establishment of the Institutes established under            
sub-section ( 2) of section 4;  
(b) “Board ”, in relation to any Institute, means the Board of Governors referred to in                     
sub-section ( 1) of section 14;  
(c) “Chairperson ” means the Chairperson of the Board appointed under sub -section ( 2) of           
section 14;  
(d) “Co-ordination Forum ” means the Co -ordination Forum established under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 38;  
(e) “Director ” means the Director of the Institute;  
(f) “existing Institute ” means the Institute mentioned in column (3) of the Schedule;  
(g) “industry partner ” means an individual, or a trust established under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, 
(2 of 1882) or a company established under the Companies Act, 2013  (18 of 2013)  or society formed 
and registered under the S ocieties Registration Act, 1860  (21 of 1860 ) or a fi nancial institution or a 
combination of one or more of such industry partners;  
(h) “Institute ” means any of the institutions mentioned in column (5) of the Schedule and such 
other Institutes established under section 11;  
(i) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression 
“notify ” shall be construed accordingly;  
(j) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(k) “public -private partnership” means such partnership under a scheme of th e Central 
Government which provides for establishment of Institute involving collaboration between the 
Central Government, the State Government and industry partners;  
 (l)  “Schedule ” means the Schedule to this Act;  
 (m) “Senate ”, in relation to any Institute, means the Senate thereof;  
                                                      
1. 6th September, 2017 vide notification No. S.O. 2928(E) dated the 6 September, 2017, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,        
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 4 
 (n) “Statutes ” and “Ordinances ”, in relation to any Institute, mean the Statutes and Ordinances of 
the Institute made under this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
THE INSTITUTES  
4. Incorporation of Institutes .—(1) On  and from the commencement of this Act, every existing           
Institute, shall be a body corporate by the same name as mentioned in column ( 5) of the Schedule.  
(2) On and from the appointed day, any other Institute of Information Technology as may be 
established under section 11 shall be a body corporate by such name as the Central Government may, by 
notification, specify.  
(3) Every existing Institute or any Institute established under sub -section ( 2) shall have perpetual 
succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and 
dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by its name, sue or be sued . 
5. Effect of incorporation of Institutes. —On and from the date of commencement  of this Act, — 
(a) any reference to any existing Institute in any contract or other instrument shall be deemed to be 
reference to the corresponding Institute mentioned in column (5) of the Schedule;  
(b) all properties, movable and immovable, belonging to e very existing Institute shall vest in the 
corresponding Institute mentioned in column (5) of the Schedule ; 
(c) all rights, debts and other liabilities of every existing Institute shall be transferred to, and be the 
rights and liabilities of, the corresponding Institute mentioned in column (5) of the Schedule;  
(d) every person employed by any existing Institute, immedi ately before such commencement, shall hold 
his office or service in the corresponding Institute mentioned in column (5) of the Schedule, with the same 
tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and 
privileges as to pension, leave, gratuity, provident fund and other matters as he would have held the same if 
this Act had not been enacted and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment is terminated or 
until such tenure, remuneration and the ter ms and conditions are duly altered by the Statutes:  
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee, his employment may be 
terminated by the Institute in accordance with the terms of the contract with the employee or, if no 
provi sion is made therein in this behalf, on payment to him by the Institute of compensation equivalent 
to three months' remuneration in the case of permanent employees and one month's remuneration in 
case of other employees:  
Provided further that any reference , by whatever form of words, to the Director, Registrar and other 
officers of any existing Institute, in any law for the time being in force, or in any instrument or other 
document, shall be deemed to be reference to the Director, Registrar and other offic ers of the 
corresponding Institute mentioned in column (5) of the Schedule;  
(e) every person pursuing, before the commencement of this Act, any academic or research course in 
any existing Institute, shall be deemed to have migrated and registered with the corresponding Institute 
mentioned in column (5) of the Schedule, on such commencement at the same level of course in the 
Institute from which such person migrated;  
(f) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or against an 
existing Institute, immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall be continued or instituted by 
or against the corresponding Institute mentioned in column (5) of the Schedule.  
6. Objects of Institute. —Every Institute shall have the following objectives, namely: — 
(a) to emerge amongst the foremost institutions in information technology and allied fields of 
knowledge in the global context;  
(b) to advance new knowledge and innovation in information technology and allied fields to 
empower the nation to the forefront in the global context;  5 
 (c) to develop competent and capable youth imbued with the spirit of innovation and 
entrepreneurship with the so cial and environmental orientation to meet the knowledge needs of the 
country and provide global leadership in information technology and allied fields;  
(d) to promote and provide transparency of highest order in matters of admission, appointment to 
variou s positions, academic evaluation, administration and finance.  
7. Powers and functions of Institute. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every Institute shall 
exercise the following powers and perform the following functions, namely: — 
(a) to provide instructions in such fields of knowledge relating to information technology and 
allied areas as the Institute may deem fit, for the advancement of learning and dissemination of 
knowledge;  
(b) to lead, organise and conduct research and innovation in informa tion technology and allied 
fields of knowledge in such manner as the Institute may deem fit, including in collaboration or in 
association with any other Institute, educational institution, research organisation, body corporate or 
financial organisations at  national or global level;  
(c) to hold examinations and grant degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions or titles and 
to confer honorary degrees;  
(d) to create academic, administrative, technical, ministerial and other posts under the Institute 
other than the post of Director of the Institute and to make appointments thereto;  
(e) to appoint persons working in any other Institute or educational institution or involved in 
research of significance in any industry as adjunct, guest or visiting faculty o f the Institute on such 
terms and for such duration as the Institute may decide;  
(f) to create administrative and other posts and to make appointments thereto on the basis of 
criteria as may be decided by the Board;  
(g) to make provision for dissemination of knowledge emerging from research and for that purpose 
to enter into such arrangements, including consultancy and advisory services, with other institutions, 
industry, civil society or other organisations, as the Insti tute may deem necessary;  
(h) to create a website, highlight all information not restricted to those related to students, 
admission, fee, administrative structure, policies including recruitment rules, faculty and non -faculty 
posts, annual reports and finan cial details including statement of account of the Institute;  
(i) to determine, specify and receive payment of fees and other charges, as the Institute may deem 
fit, from students and any other person, institution or body corporate for instructions and oth er 
services, including training, consultancy and advisory services, provided by the Institute;  
(j) to deal with any property belonging to, or vested in, the Institute in such manner as the Institute 
may deem fit for advancement of the objectives of the Ins titute:  
Provided that no land or other immovable property shall be disposed of by the Institute without 
the prior approval of the concerned State Government and the Central Government;  
(k) to receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from the Government and to receive 
bequests, donations and transfer of movable or immovable properties from testators, donors or 
transferors, as the case may be;  
(l) to co -operate with educational or other institutions in any part of the world having objects 
wholly or partly similar to those of the Institute by exchange of teachers and scholars and generally in 
such manner as may be conducive to their common objects;  
(m) to establish and maintain such infras tructure as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to 
the attainment of the objectives of the Institute;  
(n) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, prizes and medals; and  
(o) to do all such things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment of all or 
any of the objectives of the Institute.  6 
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every Institute may take up the following works, namely: — 
(a) supporting and col laborating with educational Institutes imparting technical or information 
technology courses located in the zone or region;  
(b) advising the State Governments and Union territory Administrations included in its zone in 
matters of information technology and  other technological issues referred by them to the Institute for 
advice.  
8. Institutes to be open to all races, creeds and classes .—(1) Every Institute shall be open to all 
citizens irrespective of gender, caste, creed, disability, domicile, ethnicity, so cial or economic 
background.  
(2) No bequest, donation or transfer of any property shall be accepted by any Institute which in the 
opinion of the Co -ordination Forum involves conditions or obligations opposed to the spirit and object of 
this section.  
(3) Admissions to every programme of study in each Institute shall be based on merit assessed 
through transparent and reasonable criteria disclosed through its prospectus, prior to the commencement 
of the process of admission by such Institute:  
Provided that eve ry such Institute shall be a Central Educational Institution for the purposes of the 
Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006  (5 of 2007) . 
9. Teaching at Institute .—All teaching at each of the Institute shall be conducted by or  in the name 
of the Institute in accordance with the Statutes and Ordinances made in this behalf.  
10. Institute to be a distinct legal entity not -for-profit . —(1) Every Institute shall be a not -for-profit 
legal entity and no part of the surplus, if any, in  revenue of such Institute, after meeting all expenditure in 
regard to its operations under this Act, shall be invested for any purpose other than for the growth and 
development of such Institute or for conducting research therein.  
(2) Every Institute shall strive to raise funds for creation of a corpus for self -sufficiency, sustainability 
and future development of the Institute.  
11. Establishment of Institute by Central Government, State Government and industry  
partners. —(1) The State Government shall  identify at least one industry partner, and preferably three industry 
partners, for collaboration and submit a proposal to the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Government shall examine the proposal on the basis of such criteria, as may be 
prescribed, w hich shall include the following, namely: — 
(a) the investment of capital required for establishing the proposed Institute to be borne by the 
Central Government, the concerned State Government and industry partners in the ratio 50:35:15 and 
recurring expend iture, as may be considered necessary during the first five years of operation, to be 
made available by the Central Government:  
Provided that the ratio of investment of capital required for establishing the proposed Institute in 
North Eastern States shall be 57.5:35:7.5;  
(b) the expertise and standing of the industry partners proposed in sub -section ( 1) in the field of 
information technology;  
(c) the assessment of the capability, financial and other resources of industry partners to support 
the Institute;  
(d) the suitability of adequate land, to the extent of fifty to hundred acres, to be provided by the 
State Government free of cost;  
(e) the availability of, or the commitment of the State Government to make available, adequate 
physical infrastructure namely , water, electricity, road connectivity and security, at the proposed site.  
(3) The Central Government may, with the concurrence of the concerned  State Government, suggest 
modifications, if any, to the proposal submitted to it under sub -section ( 1).  7 
 (4) Where a proposal submitted by the State Government under sub -section ( 1) is not  acceptable to the 
Central Government, the Central Government shall communicate its decision to that State Government, 
specifying the reasons for such decision.  
(5) The Central Government shall, on acceptance of the proposal with modifications, if any, under          
sub-section ( 3), enter into a memorandum of understanding or an agreement with the concerned State 
Government and the industry partners for the establishment of the proposed Institute.  
(6) The industry partner shall — 
(a) actively participate in the governance of the Institute within the overall framework;  
(b) support  and facilitate joint research projects with the Indian Institutes of Information Technology 
either through funding, collaboration or in any other manner;  
(c) depute experienced individuals as adjunct faculty;  
(d) encourage, enable, support and mentor stud ents to do research project as a part of their course 
curriculum, within their enterprise;  
(e) accept faculty members of the Indian Institutes of Information Technology on a sabbatical to 
work for short period with the industry;  
(f) co-create programs  as per the requirements of the industry with the Institution;  
(g) provide internship to students of the Indian Institutes of Information Technology;  
(h) facilitate for placement of students from the Indian Institutes of Information Technology;  
(i) sponsor  their eligible employees for doctorate studies in the Indian Institutes of Information 
Technology; and  
(j) fund and mentor the startups in the Institution.  
(7) Every memorandum of understanding or agreement referred to in sub -section ( 5) shall contain — 
(a) the investment proposal of capital in establishment of the Institute and the respective shares as 
may be prescribed;  
(b) the first Statutes of the Institute;  
(c) the commitment of the Central Government, the concerned State Government, and the 
industry p artner in ensuring autonomy to the proposed Institute; and  
(d) the conditions, if the industry partners pulls out.  
CHAPT ER III  
AUTHORITIES OF INDIAN INSTITUTES OF INFORMATION  TECHNOLOGY  
ESTABLISHED IN PUBLIC -PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP  
12. Visitor. —(1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of every Institute.  
(2) The Visitor may appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress of  any Institute and 
to hold inquiries into the affairs thereof and to report thereon in such manner as the Visitor may direct.  
(3) Upon receipt of any such report, the Visitor may take such action and issue such directions as 
he considers necessary in respect of any of the matters dealt within the report and the Institute shall be 
bound to comply with such directions w ithin a reasonable time.  
13. Authorities of Institute.  —The following shall be the authorities of an Institute, namely: — 
(a) Visitor;  
(b) Board of Governors;  
(c) Senate;  
(d) Finance Committee;  8 
 (e) such other authorities or posts as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the 
Institute.  
14. Board of Governors .—(1) The Board of Governors of each Institute shall be the principal policy 
making and executive body of the Institute.  
(2) The Bo ard shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) Chairperson, an eminent technologist or industrialist or educationist to be nominated by the 
Visitor on the recommendation of the Central Government;  
(b) one nominee each of the Central Government an d the concerned State Government;  
(c) three eminent persons, of which at least one shall be a woman, appointed by the Board out of 
industry, research laboratories, and civil society, one from each category;  
(d) two eminent academicians appointed by the Board;  
(e) one nominee representing each of the industry partners:  
Provided that if there are more than two industry partners then the number of representatives of 
industry partners at any time would be limited to two, chosen amongst themselves by rotation every 
two years;  
(f) Director of an Indian Institute of Technology or a National Institute of Technology located in 
the region, to be nominated by the Board;  
(g) two members from the faculty of the Institute, pref erably one Professor and one 
Associate/Assistant Professor, to be nominated by the Senate;  
(h) one person from the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes distinguished in the field of 
education or industry or social service or public service, to be nomin ated by the Board, in case any of the 
above do not belong to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes; and  
(i) Director of the Institute, ex officio.  
(3) Registrar of the concerned Institute shall be the ex officio non-member Secretary of the Board.  
(4) The First Board of Governors shall be notified by the Central Government by obtaining nominations 
under sub -section ( 2), other than the members referred to in clauses ( c), (d), (f) and ( h), which shall be 
decided in the first meeting of the Board of Gove rnors.  
15. Term of office of , vacancies among and allowances payable to, members of Board. —(1) Save 
as otherwise provided in this section, the term of office of the Chairperson or any other member of the 
Board, other than an ex officio member, shall be for  a period of three years from the date of nomination.  
(2) The term of office of an ex officio member shall continue so long as the member holds the office 
by virtue of which he is a member.  
(3) A member of the Board, other than an ex officio member, who fa ils to attend three consecutive 
meetings of the Board without the leave of absence, shall cease to be a member of the Board.  
(4) One-third of the members of the Board shall form a quorum of the Board, provided at least three 
members are from members referred to in clauses other than clauses ( e), (g) and ( i) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 14.  
(5) The members of the Board shall be entitled to such allowances, as may be laid down in Statutes, for 
attending meetings of the Board or as may be convened by th e Institute.  
16. Resignation of Chairperson. —(1) The Chairperson may, by writing under his hand addressed to 
the Visitor, resign his office.  
(2) Any member of the Board, except ex officio members, may, by writing under his hand addressed 
to the Chairperson, resign his office.  
17. Powers and functions of Board.  — (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board shall be 
responsible for the general policy making, superintendence, providing direction and shall have the power 
to frame, amend, mod ify or rescind the Statutes and the Ordinances governing the affairs of the Institute 
to achieve the objectives specified in section 6.  9 
 (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Board shall have the following powers, 
namely: — 
(a) to decide questions of policy relating to the Institute;  
(b) to establish departments, faculties or schools of studies and initiate programmes or courses of 
study at the Institute;  
(c) to examine and approve the annual budget estimates of the Institute;  
(d) to examine and approve the plan for development of the Institute and to identify sources of 
finance for implementation of the plan;  
(e) to create teaching, academic, administrative, technical and other posts and to make 
appointments thereto;  
(f) to provide  by the Statutes, the qualifications, criteria and processes for appointment to teaching 
and other posts in the Institute;  
(g) to approve fees and other charges payable for pursuit of studies, courses or programmes in the 
Institute;  
(h) to make Statutes, s ubject to provisions of section 32, governing the administration, 
management and operations of such Institute;  
(i) to grant degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions or titles, and to institute and award 
fellowships, scholarships, prizes and medals ; and  
(j) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed 
by this Act or the Statutes.  
(3) The Board may, subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, delegate such powers and 
functions to the Senate or  the Director, as the Board may deem fit.  
(4) The Board shall put in place policies to make the Institute self -sustaining within a period of five 
years.  
(5) The Board shall periodically conduct a review of the performance of the Director with specific 
reference to the leadership in the achievement of the objectives of the Institute.  
(6) The Board shall in exercise of the powers and discharge of functions strive to provide autonomy 
in academic matters to the Senate and departments of faculties or schools, as  the case may be.  
(7) Wherein the opinion of the Director or the Chairperson, the situation is so emergent  that an 
immediate decision needs to be taken in the interest of the Institute, the Chairperson, in consultation with 
the Director, may issue such orders as may be necessary, recording in writing the grounds for the opinion:  
Provided that such orders shall  be submitted for ratification of the Board in the next meeting.  
18. Senate.  — (1) The Senate of every Institute shall consist of the following persons, namely: — 
(a) the Director of the Institute who shall be the ex officio Chairperson of the Senate;  
(b) all Deans, ex officio ; 
(c) heads of all departments, faculties or schools, ex officio , as the case may be, of the Institute;  
(d) all full -time professors other than the Deans or heads of the Departments;  
(e) three  persons from amongst educationists of repute or persons from another field related to the 
activities of the Institute who are not in service of the Institute, nominated by the Board;  
(f) three persons who are not members of teaching staff co -opted by the Senate for their 
specialised knowledge; and  
(g) Registrar of the Institute, ex officio Secretary.  
(2) The term of office of members nominated under clauses ( e) and ( f) shall be for a period of two 
years from the date of nomination.  10 
 (3) The term of office o f an ex officio member shall continue so long as the member holds the office 
by virtue of which he is a member.  
 19. Powers and functions of Senate. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the 
Ordinances, the Senate shall be the princip al academic body of the Institute and shall have the power to 
enact, amend or modify the Ordinances governing academic matters and the affairs and well -being of 
students.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Senate shall have the  following powers, 
namely: — 
(a) to specify the criteria and procedure for admission to courses or programmes of study offered 
by the Institute;  
(b) to recommend to the Board creation of teaching and other academic posts, determination of 
the number and emo luments of such posts and defining the duties and conditions of service of 
teachers and other academic posts;  
(c) to recommend to the Board about starting of new programmes or courses of study;  
(d) to specify the broad academic content of programmes  and courses of study and undertake 
modifications therein;  
(e) to specify the academic calendar and approve grant of degrees, diplomas and other academic 
distinctions or titles;  
(f) to appoint examiners, moderators, tabulators and such other personnel for different 
examinations;  
(g) to recognise diplomas and degrees of Universities and other Institutes and to determine 
equivalence with the diplomas and degrees of the Institute;  
(h) to suggest measures for departmental co -ordination;  
(i) to make major recomm endations to the Board of Governors on — 
(A) measures for improvement of standard of teaching, training and research;  
(B) institution of chairs, fellowships, s cholarships, studentships, free ships, medals and prizes 
and other related matters;  
(C) establishment or abolition of departments or centres; and  
(D) academic functioning of the Institute, discipline, residence, admissions, examinations, 
award of fellowships and studentships, freeships, concessions, attendance and other related 
matters;  
(j) to appoint sub -committees to advise on such specific matters as may be referred to by the Board 
or by itself;  
(k) to consider the recommendations of the sub -committees and to take such action including 
making of recommendations to the Board as may be requir ed; 
(l) to take periodical review of the activities of the departments or centres and to take appropriate 
action including making of recommendations to the Board with a view to maintain and improve the 
standards of instructions, in the institutions; and  
(m) to exercise such other powers and discharge such other functions as may be assigned to it, by 
Statutes or otherwise, by the Board.  
20. Finance Committee. —(1) The Finance Committee of each Institute shall consist of the following 
persons, namely: — 
(a) the Chairperson of the Board shall be the ex officio Chairperson of the Committee;  11 
 (b) one representative of the Government of India, Ministry of Human Resource Development, 
Department of Higher Education handling the matters relating to finance, ex officio ; 
(c) one representative of the State Government in which the Institute is located, ex officio ; 
(d) one representative of the industry partners chosen from amongst themselves;  
(e) the Director, ex officio ; and  
(f) the officer in -charge of finance and accounts of the Institute, ex officio Secretary.  
(2) The members of the Finance Committee other than ex officio members shall hold office for a term 
of three years.  
21. Powers and functions of Finance Committee. —The Financ e Committee shall examine the accounts, 
scrutinise proposals for expenditure and financial estimates of the Institute and thereafter submit it to the 
Board together with its comments for approval.  
22. Meetings. —(1) The Chairperson shall ordinarily preside over the meetings of the Board, Finance 
Committee and at the convocations of the Institute.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Chairperson to ensure that the decisions taken by the Board are 
implemented.  
(3) The Chairperson shall exercise such other powers an d perform such other duties as may be 
assigned to him by this Act or the Statutes.  
23. Director. —(1) The Director shall be the principal executive officer of the Institute and shall be 
responsible for implementation of the decisions of the Board and Senate  and for day -to-day 
administration of the Institute.  
(2) The Director shall be appointed by the Visitor, on such terms and conditions of service as may be 
laid down by the Statutes.  
(3) The Director shall be appointed out of the panel of names recommended by a search -cum-
selection committee consisting of — 
(a) Chairperson of the Board, who shall be the Chairperson of the search -cum-selection 
committee;  
(b) two members, nominated by the Board, from amongst eminent administrators, industrialists, 
educationists , scientists, technocrats and management specialists;  
(c) nominee of the State Government in which the Institute is located;  
(d) nominee of one of the industry partners by rotation;  
(e) head  of the Bureau, Ministry of Human Resource Development dealing with Indian Institutes 
of Information Technology —Member Secretary, ex officio ; 
(4) The Director shall exercise the powers and perform the duties as may be assigned under this Act or 
the Statutes or Ordinances, or as may be delegated by the Board.  
(5) The Director shall, except on account of resignation or removal, hold office for a period of five 
years from the date of assumption of charge as Director.  
(6) The Director may, by writing und er his hand addressed to the Chairperson, resign his office.  
(7) The Visitor may remov e from office the Director, who — 
(a) has been adjudged as insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Visitor, involves moral 
turpitud e; or 
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Director; or  12 
 (d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially the functions as 
a Director; or  
(e) has so abused the position or so conducted as to render the continuance in office prejudicial to 
the public interest:  
Provided that the Director shall not be removed from office except by an order made by the Visitor, 
after an enquiry instituted by the Board,  in which the Director has been informed of the charges and given 
a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges.  
(8) The Board shall initiate the process of appointment in respect of any vacancy due to arise for the 
post of Director o n completion of tenure before a period of six months from the date of arising of such 
vacancy and that the process of appointment shall be completed before such vacancy arises.  
(9) Where the post of Director falls vacant on account of any reason other than  completion of tenure, 
the process of appointment shall be initiated by the Board within one month of such vacancy and process 
shall be completed as early as possible.  
24. Registrar. —(1) The Registrar of every Institute shall be appoint ed on such terms and  conditions 
as may be laid down by the Statutes.  
(2) The Registrar shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to him by 
the Statutes or by the Director.  
(3) The Registrar shall be responsible to the Director for the proper discha rge of his functions.  
25. Review of performance of Institute .—(1) The Institute shall, within five years from the 
date of establishment and incorporation under this Act and thereafter at the expiration of every fifth 
year, constitute, with the prior approval of the Board, a review committee or shall appoint an agency as a 
third party to evaluate the performance of the Institute and its achievements with respect to its objectives 
during the said period.  
(2) The review committee constituted under sub -section ( 1) shall consist of members  of repute in 
academia or industry, from relevant fields of teaching, learning and research in such Institute.  
(3) The third party agency appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall have past experience of conducting 
such evalua tions.  
(4) The review committee or the third party agency, as the case may be, shall assess the performance 
of Institute and shall submit its report with recommendations on — 
(a) the extent of fulfilment of the objects of the Institute mentioned in section 6, as demonstrated 
by the state of teaching, learning and research, and its contribution to the society;  
(b) the promotion of transformational research and its impact on industry and society;  
(c) the advancement of fundamental research beyond the current frontiers of knowledge;  
(d) the establishment of the Institute as amongst the global leaders in the area of information 
technology;  
(e) such other parameters as the Board may consider necessary and sp ecify.  
(5) The Board shall place the report of the review committee or the third party agency  in the public 
domain and on its website and consider the recommendations referred to in sub -section ( 3) and take such 
action as it may deem fit:  
Provided that the  recommendations of the review committee or the third party agency  along with an 
explanatory memorandum on the action taken or proposed to be taken, specifying the reasons thereof, 
shall be submitted to the Central Government.  
  13 
 CHAPTER IV  
ACCOUNTS AND AUD IT 
26. Grants by Central Government and State Governments. —(1) For the purposes of enabling the 
Institute to discharge their functions efficiently under this Act, the Central Government and the State 
Government may, after due appropriation made by the Parliament and the concerned State Legislature, as 
the case may b e, by law in this behalf, pay to each Institute in every financial year such sums of money in 
such manner as is required to fulfil their obligations under section 11.  
(2) The Central Government and the concerned State Government shall provide to each Insti tute, 
grants of such sums of money as are required to meet the expenditure on scholarships or fellowships 
instituted by it, including scholarships or fellowships for students from socially and educationally 
backward classes of citizens enrolled in such Ins titute.  
27. Fund of Institute .—(1) Every Institute shall maintain a Fund to which shall be credited — 
(a) all monies provided by the Central Government or the State Government or industry partner, 
as the case may be;   
(b) all fees and other charges received by the Institute from students;  
(c) all monies received by the Institute by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests 
or transfers;  
(d) all monies received by the Institute from utilisation of intellectual pro perty  arising from 
research conducted or provision of advisory or consultancy services by it; and  
(e) all monies received by the Institute in any other manner or from any other source.  
(2) The Fund of every Institute shall be applied towards meeting the ex penses of the Institute 
including expenses incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its duties under this Act, 
furtherance of research in the Institute or in collaboration with other educational institutions or industry 
and for capital inves tment aimed at the growth and development of the Institute.  
(3) All monies credited to the Fund of every Institute shall be deposited in such banks or invested in 
such manner as the Institute may, with approval of the Board, decide.  
(4) Each Institute shall create a corpus fund for long term sustainability of the Institute, to which shall 
be credited such per cent. of the net income of the Institute and donations made specifically towards such 
corpus fund as the Central Government may, in accordance wit h the provisions of the Inco me-tax Act, 
1961 (43 of 1961) ,  notify:  
Provided that the Board may also create endowment funds for specific purpose to which donations 
may be specifically made.  
28. Accounts and audit. —(1) Every Institute shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare annual statement of accounts including the balance sheet in such form and accounting 
standard as may be specified by notification, by the Central Government in consultation with the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) Where the statement of income and expenditure and the balance sheet of the Institute do not 
comply with the accounting standards, the Institute shall disclose in its statement of income and 
expenditure and balance sheet, the following, namely: — 
(a) the deviation from the accounting standards;  
(b) the reasons for such deviation; and  
(c) the financial effect, if any, arising out due to such deviation.  
(3) The accounts of every Institute shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or 
any other person in accordance with the provisions of the extant rules and any expenditure incurred by audit 14 
 team in connection with such audit shall be p ayable by the Institute to the Comptroller and Auditor -General 
of India or such person.  
(4) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed in connection with the audit 
of the accounts of any Institute shall have the same rights, priv ileges and authority in connection with such 
audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India has in connection with the audit of the Government 
accounts and, in particular shall have the rights to demand the production of books, accounts, connected 
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the offices of the Institute.  
(5) The accounts of every Institute as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or 
any other person appointed in this behalf together with the audit report  thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government.  
29. Pension and provident fund. —Every Institute may constitute for the benefit of its employees 
such provident or pension fund or provide such insurance scheme as it may deem fit in such manne r and 
subject to such conditions as may be laid down by the Statutes.  
30. Appointments. —All appointments of the staff of every Institute, except that of the Director, shall 
be made in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Statutes.  
31. Statu tes.—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely: — 
(a) the formation of departments of teaching;  
(b) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes;  
(c) the terms of office and the method of appointment of officers of the Institute;  
(d) the qualifications of teachers of the Institute;  
(e) the classification, method of appointment and the determination of the terms and conditions of 
service of teachers and oth er staff of the Institute;  
(f) the constitution of pension, insurance and provident funds for the benefit of the officers, 
teachers and other staff of the Institute as per the provisions existing from time to time;  
(g) the constitution, powers and duties o f the authorities of the Institute;  
(h) the establishment and maintenance of halls and hostels;  
(i) the conditions of residence of students of the Institute and the levying of fees for residence in 
the halls and hostels and of other charges;  
(j) the allowa nces to be paid to the Chairperson and members of the Board;  
(k) the authentication of the orders and decisions of the Board;  
(l) the meetings of the Board, the Senate, or any committee, the quorum at such meetings and the 
procedure to be followed in the c onduct of their business; and  
(m) any other matter as may be considered necessary for the efficient functioning of the Institute.  
32. Statu tes how to be made .—(1) The  first Statute of each Institute shall be framed by the Board 
with the prior approval of the Visitor.  
(2) The Board may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend or repeal the 
Statutes.  
33. Ordinance. —Subject to the provisions of thi s Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances of every 
Institute may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of the students to the Institute;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees and diplomas of the Institu te; 
(c) the conditions under which students shall be admitted to the degree or diploma courses and to 
the examinations of the Institute, and shall be eligible for degrees and diplomas;  15 
 (d) the conditions of award of the fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes;  
(e) the conditions and mode of appointment and duties of examining bodies, examiners and 
moderators;  
(f) the conduct of examinations;  
(g) the maintenance of discipline among the students of the Institute; and  
(h) any other matter which by this Act or the Statutes is to be or may be provided for by the 
Ordinances.  
34. Ordinance how to be made .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, Ordi nances shall be 
made by the Senate.  
(2) All Ordinances made by the Senate shall have effect from such date as it may direct, but every 
Ordinance so made shall be submitted, as soon as may be, to the Board and shall be considered by the 
Board at its next me eting.  
(3) The Board shall have power by resolution to modify or cancel any such Ordinance and such 
Ordinance shall from the date of such resolution stand modified accordingly or cancelled, as the case may 
be. 
35. Tribunal of Arbitration. —(1) (a) Any dispute arising out of a contract between an Institute and any 
of its employees shall, at the request of the employee concerned or at the instance of the Institute, be referred 
to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by the Institut e, one member nominated by 
the employee, and an umpire appointed by the Visitor.  
(b) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final and shall not be questioned in any court.  
(c) No suit or proceeding shall lie in any court in respect of any matter, which is r equired by         
sub-section ( 1) to be referred to the Tribunal of Arbitration.  
(d) The Tribunal of Arbitration shall have power to regulate its own procedure:  
Provided that the Tribunal shall have regard to the principles of natural justice while making  such 
procedure.  
(e) Nothing in any law for the time being in force relating to arbitration shall apply to arbitrations 
under this section.  
(2) Any student or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed from the rolls of the 
Institute by the o rders or resolution of the Director of the Institute and who has been debarred from 
appearing at the examinations of the Institute for more than one year, may within ten days of the date of 
receipt of such resolution by him, appeal to the Board who may con firm, modify or reverse the decision 
of the Director.  
(3) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the Institute against a student shall, at 
the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of sub -section ( 1) 
shall, as far as may be, apply to a reference made under this sub -section.  
(4) Every employee or student of the Institute, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, have a 
right to appeal within such time as may be laid down by the Statut es, to the Board of Governors against 
the decision of any officer or authority of the Institute, as the case may be, and thereupon the Board may 
confirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed against.  
36. Annual report of Director. —(1) There shall be att ached to every statement of accounts laid 
before the Board of each Institute, a report by its Director, with respect to — 
(a) the state of affairs of such Institute;  
(b) the amount, if any, which it proposes to carry forward to any surplus reserves in its balance 
sheet;  16 
 (c) the extent to which understatement or overstatement of any surplus of income over expenditure or 
any shortfall of expenditure over income has been indicat ed in the auditor's report and the reasons for such 
understatement or overstatement;  
(d) the productivity of research projects undertaken by the Institute measured in accordance with 
such norms as may be specified by any statutory regulatory authority;  
(e) appointments of the officers and teachers of the Institute;  
(f) benchmark and internal standards set by the Institute, including the nature of innovations in 
teaching, research and application of knowledge.  
(2) The Director shall also be bound to give the  complete information and explanation in its report on 
every reservation, qualification or adverse remark contained in the auditors' report.  
37. Annual report of each Institute .—(1) The annual report of each Institute shall be prepared under 
the direction of the Board, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the Institute 
towards the fulfilment of its objects and an outcome based assessment of the research being undertaken in 
such Institute, and be submitted to the Board on or before su ch date as may be specified and the Board 
shall consider the report in its annual meeting.  
(2) The annual report as approved by the Board shall be published and placed on the website of the 
Institute.  
(3) The Board shall prepare and release for every year a report, in English and in Hindi, the working 
of the Institute in the previous year on or before the expiry of nine months from the close of financial 
year, and a copy of the same, together with an audited statement of accounts showing the income and 
expe nditure for the previous year shall be submitted to the Central Government and the concerned State 
Government within that stipulated time, and the same may be caused to be laid before each House of 
Parliament and the concerned State Legislature.  
 
CHAPTER V  
CO-ORDINATION FORUM  
38.  Co-ordination Forum .—(1) In order that there may be better co -ordination among the Institutes, 
the Central Government  may, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish, with effect from such date 
as may be specified in the notification, a central body to be called the Co -ordination Forum for all the 
Institutes specified in column (5) of the Schedule.  
(2) The Co -ordination Forum shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(i) the Minister in -charge of the Ministry or Department of the Central Government having 
administrative control of technical education, ex officio , as Chairperson;  
(ii) Secretary to the Govern ment of India, in -charge of the Department of the Central Government 
having administrative control of technical education, ex officio ; 
(iii) four Secretaries in -charge of department looking after Indian Institutes of Information 
Technology of State Governm ents in which the Institutes are located, to be nominated by the 
Chairperson of the Co -ordination Forum, by rotation for two years, ex officio ; 
(iv) four Chairpersons of the Institutes, to be nominated by the Chairperson of the Co -ordination 
Forum, by rota tion for two years;  
(v) the Directors of each of the Institutes, ex officio ; 
(vi) four industry partners, to be nominated by the Chairperson of the Co -ordination Forum, not 
more than one from any Institute, by rotation every two years;  
(vii) three persons of eminence, of which at least one shall be a woman, in academia, industry or 
public service, to be nominated by the Co -ordination Forum; and  
(viii) one representative of All India Council of Technical Education:  17 
 Provided that while nominating under clause s (iii), (iv) and ( vi), care shall be taken to ensure 
representation of as many Institutes as possible by selecting Secretaries of State Governments, 
Chairpersons of the Institutes, and representatives of industry partners from the Board of different 
Institutes to the extent possible.  
(3) An officer of the Department of Higher Education, Government of India, not below the rank of 
Joint Secretary, concerned with technical education, ex officio , to act as the Member -Secretary of the       
Co-ordination Forum.  
(4) The Co -ordination Forum may, at its discretion, constitute a Standing Committee of the Indian 
Institute of Information Technology Co -ordination Forum (Public -private Partnership) to assist the        
Co-ordination Forum in discharge of its duties and responsibilities.  
(5) The expenditure on the Co -ordination Forum shall be met by the resources pooled by all the 
Institutes governed by this Act.  
39. Term of office and allowances payable to members of Co -ordination Forum .—(1) The term 
of office of a member referred to in clause ( viii) of sub -section ( 2) of section 38 shall be three years from 
the date of nomination.  
(2) The term of office of an ex officio member shall continue so long as the member holds the office 
by virtue of which he is a member.  
(3) While nominating members to the Co -ordination Forum under clauses ( iii), (iv) and ( vi) of                    
sub-section ( 2) of section 38, the Chairperson of the Co -ordination Forum shall, to the extent possible, ensure 
maximum possible representation from each Institute.  
(4) The members of the Co -ordination Forum shall be entitled to travelling and such other allowances, 
as may be prescribed, for attending meetings of the Co -ordination Forum or its Committees thereof.  
40.  Function s and duties of Co -ordination Forum. —(1) The Co -ordination Forum shall facilitate 
the sharing of experience, ideas and concerns with a view to enhancing the performance of all the 
Institutes.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the C o-ordination Forum shall perform the 
following functions, namely: — 
(a) advise the Central Government to include a new institution or exclude an existing institution 
from the Schedule;  
(b) deliberate on such matters of common interest to Institutes as may b e referred to it by any 
Institute;  
(c) promote necessary co -ordination and co -operation in the working of the Institutes;  
(d) recommend to the Central Government, the institution of scholarships including for research 
and for the benefit of students belong ing to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and other 
socially and educationally backward classes of citizens; and  
(e) perform such other functions as may be referred to it by the Central Government or any State 
Government:  
Provided that nothing in t his section shall derogate the powers and functions vested by law in the 
Board or Senate or other authorities of each Institute.  
(3) The Chairperson of the Co -ordination Forum shall ordinarily preside at the meetings of the             
Co-ordination Forum and in the absence, the Secretary to the Government of India, in -charge of the 
Department of the Central Government having administrative control of technical education, shall preside at 
the meeting.  
(4) The Co -ordination Forum shall meet at least once in every year, or as and when deemed 
necessary by the Chairperson of the Co -ordination Forum, and follow such procedure in its meetings, as 
may be prescribed.  
  18 
 CHAPTER  VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
41. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, after previous publication, by 
notification make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, name ly:— 
(a) the form and manner in which the State Government shall submit proposal to the Central 
Government under sub -section ( 2) of section 11;  
(b) the investment proposal of capital in establishment of the Institute and the respective shares 
under sub -section ( 7) of section 11;  
(c) the travelling and other allowances payable to members of the Co -ordination Forum under 
sub-section ( 4) of section 39;  
(d) the procedure to be followed in the meetings of the Co -ordination Forum under                     
sub-section ( 4) of section 40.  
42. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc. —No act of the Co -ordination 
Forum, or any Institute or Board or Senate or any other body set up under this Act or the Statutes, shall be 
invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy or defect in the constitution thereof; or  
(b) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the case; or  
(c) any defect in the selection, nomination or appointment of a person acting as a member thereof.  
43. Returns and information to be provided to Central Government or State Government. —(1) 
The Institute shall furnish to the Central Government such returns or other information with respect to its 
policies or activities as the Central Government may, for the purpose of r eporting to Parliament or for the 
making of policy, from time to time require.  
(2) The Institute, shall furnish to the State Government in which such Institute is located, such returns 
or other information with respect to its policies or activities as that  Government may, for the purpose of 
reporting to the concerned State Legislature or for the making of policy, from time to time require.  
44. Power of Central Government to issue directions. —The Institute shall carry out such directions 
as may be issued to it from time to time by the Central Government for the efficient administration of this 
Act. 
45. Institute to be public authority under Right to Information Act .—The provisions of the Right 
to Information Act, 2005  (22 of 2005)  shall apply to each Institut e, as if it were a public authority defined 
in clause ( h) of section 2 of the Right to Information Act, 2005.  
46. Transitional provisions .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act — 
(1) (a) the Board of every Institute functioning as such immediately before the commencement of 
this Act shall continue to function until a new Board is constituted for that Institute under this Act, but 
on the constitution of a new Board under this Act, the members of the Board holding office before such 
commencement of th is Act shall cease to hold office;  
(b) every Senate constituted in relation to every Institute before the commencement of this Act shall 
be deemed to be the Senate constituted under this Act until a Senate is constituted under this Act for that 
Institute, but on the constitution of the new Senate under this Act, the members of the Senate holding 
office before the commencement of this Act shall cease to hold office;  
(c) rules, bye -laws and Ordinances of each existing Institute as in force, immediately, befor e the 
commencement of this Act, shall continue to apply in the corresponding institute in so far as they are 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, until the first Statutes and Ordinances are made under 
this Act;  19 
 (d) in case there are no such ru les, bye -laws or Ordinances, the Statutes, Ordinances, rules and 
regulations of one of the existing centrally funded Indian Institutes of Information Technology as 
adopted by the Board of the concerned Institute, shall apply to the Institute in so far as t hey are not 
inconsistent with the provisions of the Act until the first Statutes and the Ordinances are made under 
this Act.  
(2) The Central Government may, without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), if it 
considers necessary and expedient to do so, by notification, take such measures which may be necessary 
for the transfer of the existing Institute to the corresponding Institute mentioned under column (5) of the 
Schedule.  
47. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving  effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions or give 
such directions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient 
for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of the period of three 
years from the date of commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it  is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
48. Laying of rules, Statutes, Ordinances and notification. —Every rule, Statute, Ordinance made, and 
every notification issued, by the Central Government under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it i s 
made or issued, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the ses sion or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule, Statute, Ordinance or notification or both Houses agree that the rule, Statute, 
Ordinance or notification should not be made or issued, the rule, Statute, Ordinance or notification shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule, Statute, Ordinance or notification.  20 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 4( 1)] 
 
Sl. No. Name of the State  Name of the existing Institute  Locatio n Name of Institute 
Incorporated under this 
Act 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1.   Andhra Pradesh  Indian Institute of Information 
Technology, Sri City Chittoor, 
being a society registered under 
the Societies Registration Act, 
1860   (21 of 1860)  Indian 
Institute of 
Information 
Technology, 
Sri City, 
Chittoor  Indian Institute of 
Information Technology, 
Sri City, Chittoor.  
2.   Assam  Indian Institute of Information 
Technology, Guwahati, being a 
society registered under the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860   
(21 of 1860)  Indian Institute of 
Information 
Technology, 
Guwahati  Indian Institute of 
Information Technology, 
Guwahati.  
3.   Gujarat  Indian Institute of Information 
Technology, Vadodara, being a 
society registered under the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860   
(21 of 1860)  Indian Institute of 
Information 
Technology, 
Vadodara  Indian Institute of 
Information Technology, 
Vadodara.  
4.   Haryana  Indian Institute of Information 
Technology,  Sonepat, being a society 
registered under  the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860)  Indian Institute of 
Information 
Technology, 
Sonepat  Indian Institute of 
Information Technology, 
Sonepat.  
5.   Himachal Pradesh  Indian Institute of Information 
Technology, Una, being a society 
registered under the  Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 
1860)  Indian Institute of 
Information 
Technology, Una  Indian Institute of 
Information Technology, 
Una.  
6.   Jharkhand  Indian Institute of Information 
Technology, Ranchi, being a 
society registered under the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860 
(21 of 1860)  Indian Institute of 
Information 
Technology, 
Ranchi  Indian Institute of 
Information Technology, 
Ranchi.          
7.   Karnataka  Indian Institute of Information 
Technology,  Dharwad, being a 
society registered under  the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860)  Indian Institute of 
Information 
Technology, 
Dharwad  Indian Institute of 
Information Technology, 
Dharwad.  
8.   Kerala  Indian Institute of Information 
Technology, Kottayam, being a 
society registered under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860)  Indian Institute of 
Information 
Technology, 
Kottayam  Indian Institute of 
Information Technology, 
Kottayam.  
9.   Maharashtra  Indian Institute of Information 
Technology, Nagpur, being a 
society registered under the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860  
(21 of 1860)  Indian Institute of 
Information 
Technology, 
Nagpur  Indian Institute of 
Information Technology, 
Nagpur.  
        
10.   Maharashtra  Indian Institute of Information 
Technology, Pune, being a society 
registered under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 
1860)  Indian Institute of 
Information 
Technology, Pune  Indian Institute of 
Information Technology, 
Pune.  21 
 Sl. No. Name of the State  Name of the existing institute  Location  Name of Institute 
Incorporated under this 
Act (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
11.   Manipur  Indian Institute of Information 
Technology, Senapati, being a 
society registered under the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860  
(21 of 1860)  Indian Institute of 
Information 
Technology, 
Senapati  Indian Institute of 
Information Technology, 
Senapati.  
12.   Rajasthan  Indian Institute of Information 
Technology, Kota, being a society 
registered under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 
1860)  Indian Institute of 
Information 
Technology, Kota  Indian Institute of 
Information Technology, 
Kota.  
        
13.   Tamil Nadu  Indian Institute of Information 
Technology, Tiruchirapalli, being 
a society registered under the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860  
(21 of 1860)  Indian Institute of 
Information 
Technology, 
Srirangam, 
Tiruchirapalli  Indian Institute of 
Information  Technology, 
Tiruchirapalli.  
        
14.   Uttar Pradesh  Indian Institute of Information 
Technology,  
Lucknow, being a society registered 
under  
the Societies Registration Act, 1860     
(21 of 1860)  Indian Institute of 
Information 
Technology, 
Lucknow  Indian Institute of 
Information Technology, 
Lucknow.  
15.  West Bengal  Indian Institute of Information 
Technology, Kalyani, being a society 
registered under  the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860)  
 Indian Institute of 
Information  
Technology, 
Kalyani  
 Indian Institute of 
Information  
Technology, Kalyani.  
   
--------------------------The Indian Institutes of Management Act, 2017--------------------------
1 THE INDIAN INSTITUTES OF MANAGEMENT ACT, 2017 
________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
________ 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY 
SECTIONS
1.Short title and commencement. 
2.Declaration of certain institutions as institutions of national importance.
3.Definitions. 
CHAPTER II  
THE INSTITUTES
4.Incorporation of Institutes. 
5.Effect of incorporation of Institutes. 
6.Objects of Institutes. 
7.Powers and functions of Institute. 
8.Institutes to be open to all irrespective of sex, race, creed, caste or class. 
9.Institute to be not-for-profit legal entity. 
CHAPTER III 
THE AUTHORITIES OF INSTITUTES
10.Board of Governors. 
11.Powers and functions of Board. 
12.Term of office of, vacancies among, and allowances payable to members of Board. 
13.Resignation of Chairperson. 
14.Academic Council. 
15.Power and functions of Academic Council. 
16.Director. 
17.Initiation of inquiry. 
18.Custodian of records, etc. 
19.Role of members of Society. 
20.Committees and other authorities. 
CHAPTER IV 
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
21.Grants by Central Government. 
22.Fund of Institute. 
23.Accounts and audit. 
24.Books of account to be maintained by Institute. 
25.Appointment of auditors. 
26.Annual report of Director. 
27.Board to consider statement of accounts .
28.Annual report of Institute .
CHAPTER V 
COORDINATION  FORUM
29.Establishment of Coordination Forum .
30.Functions of Coordination Forum. 2 CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS 
SECTIONS
31.Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc .
32.Return and information to be provided to Central Government. 
33.Institute to be public authority under Right to Information Act. 
34.Power of Central Government to make rules .
35.Power to make regulations 
36.Ordinances how made. 
37.Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament. 
38.Power to remove difficulties. 
39.Transitional provisions .
THE SCHEDULE. 3 THE INDIAN INSTITUTES OF MANAGEMENT ACT, 2017 
ACT NO. 33 OF 2017 
[31st December , 2017.] 
An Act to declare certain Institutes of management to be institutions of national importance with a view to 
empower these institutions to attain standards of global excellence in management, management 
research and allied areas of knowledge and to provide for certain other matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Indian Institutes of Management 
Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint, and different dates1 may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. 
2. Declaration of certain institutions as institutions of national importance.— Whereas the objects of the 
Institutes mentioned in the Schedule are such as to make them institutions of national importance, it is 
hereby declared that each such Institute is an institution of national importance. 
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “Academic Council” means the Academic Council referred to in section 14; 
(b) “Board”, in relation to any Institute, means the Board of Governors referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) of section 10; 
(c) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Board of Governors of the Institutes appointed 
under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) of section 10; 
(d) “Coordination Forum” means the Coordination Forum established under section 29; 
(e) “corresponding Institute”, in relation to an Institute mentioned in column (3) of the Schedule, 
means an Institute as specified against the said Institute in column (5); 
(f) “Director”, means the Director of the Institute appointed under sub-section ( 2) of section 16; 
(g) “existing Institute” means any Institute mentioned in column (3) of the Schedule; 
(h)  “Institute” means any Institute mentioned in column (5) of the Schedule; 
(i) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression “notify” 
with its cognate meanings and grammatical variation shall be construed accordingly; 
(j) “Ordinances” means Ordinances made by the Academic Council under this Act; 
(k) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(l) “regulations” means regulations made by the Board; 
(m) “Schedule” means the Schedule annexed to this Act; 
(n) “society” means any of the societies registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860            
(21 of 1860) or the Mysore Societies' Registration Act, 1960 (17 of 1960) or the Madhya Pradesh 
Societies Registration Act, 1973 (44 of 1973) or the Tamil Nadu Societies Registration Act, 1975            
(27 of 1975) or the Jammu and Kashmir Societies Registration Act, 1998 (VI of 1998) mentioned in 
column (3) of the Schedule. 
1. 31st January 2018, vide notification No. S.O. 149(E), dated 11th January, 2018, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,  
sec. 3(ii)   4 CHAPTER II  
THE INSTITUTES
4. Incorporation of Institutes. —(1) On and from the commencement of this Act, every existing 
Institute shall be a body corporate by the same name as mentioned in column (5) of the Schedule.
(2) Every Institute referred to in column (5) of the Schedule shall have perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, 
both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. 
5. Effect of incorporation of Institutes. —On and from the commencement of this Act,—
(a) any reference to an existing Institute in any contract or other instrument shall be deemed as a 
reference to the corresponding Institute; 
(b) all properties, movable and immovable, of or belonging to every existing Institute shall vest in 
the corresponding Institute; 
(c) all rights and debts and other liabilities of every existing Institute shall be transferred to, and be 
the rights and liabilities of, the corresponding Institute; 
(d) every person employed by every existing Institute immediately before such commencement 
shall hold his office or service in the corresponding Institute, with the same tenure, at the same 
remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to 
pension, leave, gratuity, provident fund and other matters as he would have held had this Act not been 
enacted and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment is terminated or until such tenure, 
remuneration and terms and conditions are duly altered by regulations: 
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee, his employment may be 
terminated by the Institute in accordance with the terms of the contract with the employee, or, if no provision 
is made therein in this behalf, on payment, to him by the Institute, of a compensation equivalent to three 
months' remuneration in case of permanent employee and one months' remuneration in the case of other 
employee: 
Provided further that any reference, by whatever form of words, to the Director, and other officers of 
an existing Institute under any law for the time being in force, or in any instrument or other document, 
shall be construed as a reference to the Director, and other officers of the corresponding Institutes; 
(e) every person pursuing, before commencement of this Act, any academic or research course in 
every existing Institute, shall be deemed to have migrated and registered with the corresponding 
Institute, on such commencement at the same level of course in the Institute from which such person 
migrated; 
(f) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or against an 
existing Institute, immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall be continued or instituted by 
or against the corresponding Institute. 
6. Objects of Institutes.  —Each Institute shall have the following objects, namely:—
(a) to educate and support leaders who can contribute as professional managers, entrepreneurs, and 
stewards of existing and emerging enterprises in the private, public, and social sectors; 
(b) to carry out research, publication, consultancy and advisory work to advance new knowledge 
and innovation and to provide global leadership in management theory and practice: 
Provided that research so conducted shall also be directed towards such areas of study which shall 
enhance inclusive, equitable and sustainable national development goals as enshrined in the objects of the 
Act; 
(c) to provide management education of high quality and to promote allied areas of knowledge as 
well as interdisciplinary studies; 
(d) to sensitise management education to the vision of inclusive, equitable and sustainable national 
development goals in order to contribute holistically to Society; 5 (e) to support and develop programmes promoting social and gender equity; 
(f) to develop educational programmes and faculties that advance the cause of education, teaching 
and learning, across disciplines; 
(g) to set-up centres for management studies and allied areas; 
(h) to support and collaborate with management institutions and other educational institutions in 
India; 
(i) to co-operate and collaborate with educational or management institutions in other countries to 
extend the interests of management education and research.
7. Powers and functions of Institute. —Subject to the provisions of this Act, every Institute shall 
exercise the following powers and perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) to carry out the administration and management of the Institutes; 
(b) to provide by regulations for the admission of candidates to the various courses of study in 
conformity with the laws for the time being in force; 
(c) to specify and conduct courses of study, training and research in management and allied 
subjects and document, and disseminate knowledge thereof; 
(d) to evolve innovative management education pedagogy aligned to dynamic global management 
practices; 
(e) to conduct examinations and to establish processes for evaluation and performance assessment 
through a fair and transparent system; 
(f) to grant degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions or titles and to institute and award 
fellowships, scholarships, prizes and medals, honorary awards and other distinctions; 
(g) to lower the cost of education and to enhance the reach of the education by use of information 
and communication technology and other innovative methods; 
(h) to establish and maintain such infrastructure as may be necessary; 
(i) to determine, specify and receive payment of, fees and other charges as the Institute may deem 
fit, from students and any other person, institution or body corporate for instruction and other services, 
including training, consultancy and advisory services, provided by the Institute; 
(j) to acquire, hold and deal with the property belonging to or vested in the Institute, with the 
approval of the Board, and in case of immovable property, under prior intimation to the Central 
Government, for advancing the objects of the Institute subject to the condition that such property is 
not obtained wholly or partly from the State Government or the Central Government funds: 
Provided that where the land for the Institute has been provided free of cost by a State Government 
or the Central Government such land may be disposed of only with the prior approval of the Central 
Government; 
(k) to create academic, administrative, technical, ministerial and other posts under the Institute 
other than the post of Director of the Institute and to make appointments thereto; 
(l) to appoint committees for the disposal of any business of the Institute or for tendering advice in 
any matter pertaining to the Institute; 
(m) to receive grants, gifts and contributions and to have custody of the funds including internally 
generated funds of the Institute to meet the expenses, including capital expenditure of the Institute 
including expenses incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions; 
(n) to create partnership, affiliation and other classes of professional or honorary or technical 
membership or office as the Institute may consider necessary; 
(o) to perform such other functions as may be necessary for carrying out the objects of the 
Institutes; 6 (p) to do all such things and activities, incidental to the attainment of all or any of the objects 
of the Institute. 
8. Institutes to be open to all irrespective of sex, race, creed, caste or class.— (1) Every Institute 
shall be open to all persons irrespective of sex, race, creed, caste or class, and no test or condition shall be 
imposed as to religious belief or profession in admitting or appointing members, students, teachers or 
workers or in any other connection whatsoever. 
(2) No bequest, donation or transfer of any property shall be accepted by any Institute which in the 
opinion of the Board involves conditions or obligations opposed to the spirit and object of this section. 
(3) The admission to every academic course or programme of study in each Institute shall be based on 
merit assessed through transparent and reasonable criteria disclosed through its prospectus, prior to the 
commencement of the process of admission by such Institute: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the Institute from making special 
provisions for the employment or admission of women, persons with disabilities or for persons belonging 
to any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens and, in particular, for the Scheduled Castes 
and the Scheduled Tribes: 
Provided further that every such Institute shall be a Central Educational Institution for the purposes of 
the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006 (5 of 2007). 
9. Institute to be not-for-profit legal entity. —(1) Every Institute shall be a not-for-profit legal entity 
and no part of the surplus, if any, in revenue of such Institute, after meeting all expenditure in regard to 
its operations under this Act, shall be invested for any purpose other than for the growth and development 
of such Institute or for conducting research therein. 
(2) Every Institute shall strive to raise funds for self-sufficiency and sustainability. 
CHAPTER III 
THE AUTHORITIES OF INSTITUTES
10. Board of Governors.— (1) The Board of Governors of each Institute shall be the principal 
executive body of that Institute. 
(2) The Board of each Institute shall consist of the following members, namely:— 
(a) a Chairperson, from amongst eminent persons distinguished in the field of industry or 
education or science or technology or management or public administration or such other field, to be 
appointed by the Board; 
(b) one nominee of the Central Government having charge of the management education or his 
representative; 
(c) one nominee of the respective State Government or representative of such nominees, within 
whose territorial jurisdiction the Institute is located; 
(d) four eminent persons, of which at least one shall be a woman, distinguished in the field of 
education, industry, commerce, social service or public administration, to be nominated by the Board, 
having such experience and in such manner as may be specified by regulations; 
(e) two members from the faculty of respective Institutes to be nominated by the Chairperson, in 
the manner to be laid down by the Board by regulations; 
(f) one person from the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes to be nominated by the Board from 
amongst the members referred to in clauses ( d), (e) and ( g); 
(g) up to five persons to be co-opted by the Board from the alumni or the members of society of the 
existing Institute who have distinguished themselves in the field of management: 
Provided that out of such five persons, not more than one member shall be from the Society; 7 (h) three women members to be nominated by the Board from amongst the members referred to in 
clauses ( d), (e) and ( g); 
(i) Director of the Institute, ex officio member. 
(3) The Board may nominate a person to fill up any temporary vacancy, of a member referred to in clauses ( d) 
and (g) of sub-section ( 2), for a period which may extend to three months. 
(4) The Board shall designate an officer of the Institute to act as Secretary of the Board. 
 (5) The Chairperson shall have the power to invite any number of experts, not being members of the 
Board, to attend meetings of the Board, but such invitees shall not be entitled to vote at the meeting. 
11. Powers and functions of Board.— (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board of every 
Institute shall be responsible for the general superintendence, direction and control of the affairs of the 
Institute and shall have the power to frame or amend or modify or rescind the regulations governing the 
affairs of the Institute to achieve the objects of the Institute specified in section 6.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the Board shall have the following powers, 
namely:— 
(a) to take decisions on questions of policy relating to the administration and working of the 
Institute; 
(b) to examine and approve the annual budget estimates of the Institute; 
(c) to examine and approve the plan for development of the Institute and to identify sources of 
finance for implementation of the plan; 
(d) to establish departments, faculties or schools of studies and initiate programmes or courses of 
study at the Institute; 
(e) to set-up centres of management studies and allied areas within the country under intimation to 
the Central Government; 
(f) to grant degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions or titles, and to institute and award 
fellowships, scholarships, prizes and medals; 
(g) to confer honorary degrees in such manner as may be specified by the regulations; 
(h) to grant honorary awards and other distinctions; 
(i) to create academic, administrative, technical and other posts and to make appointments thereto: 
Provided that the cadre, the pay scales, allowances and term of employment of such posts shall be 
such as may be determined by the Central Government; 
(j) to determine, by regulations, the number and emoluments of such posts and to define the duties 
and conditions of services of the academic, administrative, technical and other staff; 
(k) to set-up centres of management studies and allied areas outside India in accordance with 
guidelines laid down by the Central Government from time to time and in accordance with the 
provisions of the laws for the time being in force in such foreign country; 
(l) to pay, variable pay to the Director of the Institute on the basis of performance objectives as 
may be specified by the regulations; 
(m) to specify by regulations, the fees to be charged for courses of study and examinations in the 
Institute; 
(n) to specify by regulations the manner of formation of department of teaching; 
(o) to specify by regulations the institution of fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and 
prizes; 
(p) to specify by regulations the qualifications, classification, terms of office and method of 
appointment of the academic, administrative, technical and other staff of the Institute; 8 (q) to specify by regulations the constitution of pension, insurance and provident funds for the 
benefit of the academic, administrative, technical and other staff; 
(r) to specify by regulations, the establishment and maintenance of buildings; 
(s) to specify by regulations, the conditions of residence of students of the Institute and levying of fees 
for residence in the halls and hostels and of other charges; 
(t) to specify by regulations, the manner of authentication of the orders and decisions of the Board; 
(u) to specify by regulations, the quorum for meetings of the Board, the Academic Council or any 
Committee, and the procedures to be followed in the conduct of their business; 
(v) to specify by regulations, the financial accountability of the Institute; and 
(w) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed 
upon it by this Act or the rules made thereunder. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board may by regulations, delegate such powers and 
functions of the Board to the Director as it may deem fit. 
(4) The Board shall conduct an annual review of the performance of the Director, in the context of the 
achievements of objects of the Institute: 
Provided that such review shall include performance reviews of faculty members of the Institute on such 
parameters, periodicity and terms of reference as may be determined by the Board. 
(5) The Board shall, through an independent agency or group of experts, within a period of three years 
from the date of incorporation of the Institute, and thereafter at least once every three years, evaluate and 
review the performance of the Institutes, including its faculty, on the parameters of long term strategy and 
rolling plans of the Institutes and such other parameters as the Board may decide and the report of such 
review shall be placed in public domain. 
(6) The qualifications, experience and the manner of selection of the independent agency or group of 
experts, referred to in sub-section ( 5), shall be such as may be specified by regulations. 
(7) The report of the evaluation and review under sub-section ( 5) shall be submitted by the Board to the 
Central Government along with an action taken report thereon. 
(8) Where in the opinion of the Chairperson or the Director the situation is so emergent that an 
immediate decision need to be taken in the interest of the Institute, the Chairperson, in consultation with 
the Director may issue such orders as may be necessary, recording the grounds for his opinion: 
Provided that such orders shall be submitted for ratification by the Board in the next meeting. 
(9) The Board shall in the exercise of its power and discharge of its functions under this Act, be 
accountable to the Central Government. 
12. Term of office of, vacancies among, and allowances payable to members of Board. —(1) Save 
as otherwise provided in this section, the term of office of the Chairperson or any other member of the 
Board, other than an ex officio member, shall be four years from the date of his appointment or 
nomination:
Provided that the term of office of a member nominated under clause ( e) of sub-section ( 2) of             
section 11 shall be two years from the date of his nomination: 
Provided further that the Chairperson, or any other member of the Board, other than an ex officio 
member, may be appointed or nominated for a second term: 
Provided also that the Chairperson or any other member of the Board, other than an ex officio member, 
shall not be appointed or nominated for more than two consecutive terms. 
(2) The term of office of an ex officio member shall continue so long as he holds the office by virtue of 
which he is a member of the Board. 9 (3) A member of the Board, other than a nominee of the Central Government or the State Government, 
who fails to attend three consecutive meetings of the Board without permission of the Chairperson, shall 
cease to be a member of the Board. 
(4) A casual vacancy of a member shall be filled up in accordance with the provisions of section 10. 
(5) The term of office of a member nominated to fill a casual vacancy shall continue for the remainder of 
the term of the member in whose place he has been so nominated. 
(6) Members of the Board shall be entitled to such allowances, as may be specified in the regulations, 
for attending meetings of the Board. 
(7) The Board shall meet at least once in every three months. 
13. Resignation of Chairperson. —The Chairperson may, by notice in writing under his hand 
addressed to the Board, resign from his office. 
14. Academic Council.— (1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of every 
Institute, consisting of the following persons, namely:—
(a) Director of the Institute, who shall be the Chairperson of the Academic Council; 
(b) Deans in charge of academics, research, student affairs and such other functions of the Institute; 
(c) Chairs of Areas or Programmes, Heads or Coordinators of Faculties or Schools or Centres or 
Departments, of the Institute; 
(d) all full time Faculty at the level of Professors and such number of other full time Faculty of the 
Institute as may be determined by the Board; 
(e) such members, by invitation of the Board on the recommendation of the Director, who are 
eminent in the fields of industry, finance, management, public administration and academics. 
(2) The term of office of an ex officio member shall continue so long as he holds the office by virtue of 
which he is a member. 
(3) The term of office of a member nominated under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) shall be two years 
from the date of his nomination. 
15. Power and functions of Academic Council. —(1) The Academic Council shall perform the 
following functions, namely:—
(a) to specify the criteria and process for admission to courses or programmes of study offered by 
the Institute; 
(b) to specify the academic content of programmes and courses of study and undertake 
modifications therein; 
(c) to specify the academic calendar, guidelines for conduct of examination and recommend grant of 
degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions or titles. 
(2) The Academic Council shall exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may 
be conferred upon it, by this Act or the regulations or by the Board. 
16. Director. —(1) The Director shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Institute and shall 
provide leadership to the Institute and be responsible for implementation of the decisions of the Board.
(2) The Director shall be appointed by the Board, on such terms and conditions of service as may be 
prescribed. 
(3) The Director shall be appointed out of the panel of names recommended by a search-cum-selection 
committee to be constituted by the Board, consisting of:— 
(a) the Chairperson of the Board, who shall be the Chairperson of the search-cum-selection 
committee; 10 (b) three members chosen from amongst eminent administrators, industrialists, educationists, 
scientists, technocrats and management specialists: 
Provided that where the Board is not satisfied with the recommendations of the search-cum-selection 
committee, it may ask the search-cum-selection committee to make fresh recommendations. 
(4) The Director shall exercise the powers and perform the duties as may be assigned to him under this 
Act or the regulations or as may be delegated to him by the Board: 
Provided that the Board may lay down the criteria to be followed by the Director while exercising 
powers and performing his duties, which shall be evaluated by the Board annually, and if the Board is of 
the opinion that such criteria has not been followed, then, the Board may, after giving an opportunity of 
being heard to the Director, initiate action for removal of such Director under sub-section ( 7). 
(5) The Director shall, except on account of resignation or removal, hold office for a term of five 
years, from the date on which he enters upon his office. 
(6) The Director may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the Board, through the 
Chairperson, resign his office at any time. 
(7) The Board may remove from office the Director, who— 
(a) has been adjudged as an insolvent; or 
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Board, involves moral turpitude; 
or 
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Director; or 
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as a 
Director; or 
(e) has so abused his position or so conducted himself as to render his continuance in office 
prejudicial to the public interest: 
Provided that the Director shall not be removed from office except by an order made by the Board, 
after an enquiry instituted by it in which the Director has been informed of the charges against him and 
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges. 
(8) Where the post of Director is likely to fall vacant on account of completion of tenure, the Board 
shall initiate the process of appointment nine months prior to the occurrence of such vacancy. 
(9) Where the post of Director falls vacant on account of any reason, the Board may appoint the 
senior-most faculty in the institution as the Director in charge till a regular Director is appointed: 
Provided that if the senior-most faculty is not willing to hold the post of Director in charge, then the 
next senior-most willing faculty may be appointed as Director in charge. 
17. Initiation of inquiry. —(1) The Board may initiate an inquiry as deemed proper against the 
Institute which has not been functioning in accordance with the provisions and the objectives of the Act:
Provided that such an inquiry shall be conducted by a retired High Court Judge. 
(2) The Board may, based on the findings of such an inquiry, remove the Director or take any other 
action deemed fit, and the Insitute shall be bound to comply with such directions within reasonable time. 
18. Custodian of records, etc. —The Board may designate any officer or officers of the Institute as 
the custodian of records, common seal, funds of the Institute and any other property of the Institute.
19. Role of members of Society. —The members of the societies referred to at serial numbers 2 and 3 
under column (3) of the Schedule, may be engaged by the respective Boards of corresponding Institutes, 
for advisory assistance to it, by passing a resolution in that behalf.
20. Committees and other authorities. —(1) The Board may, constitute such committees and other 
authorities of the Institute and specify the duties and functions of each such committees and authorities by 
regulations.11 (2) The Board may constitute such ad hoc committees as it may deem fit, for proper management of 
affairs of the Institute. 
CHAPTER IV 
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
21. Grants by Central Government. —For the purpose of enabling the Institutes to discharge their 
functions efficiently under this Act, the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to every Institute such sums of money in such manner as it may 
think fit.
22.  Fund of Institute. —(1) Every Institute shall maintain a Fund to which shall be credited—
(a) all moneys provided by the Central Government; 
(b) all fees and other charges received by the Institute; 
(c) all moneys received by the Institute by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests or 
transfers; 
(d) all moneys received by the Institute from utilisation of intellectual property arising from 
research conducted or rendering advisory or consultancy services by it; and 
(e) all moneys received by the Institute in any other manner or from any other source. 
(2) All moneys credited to the Fund of every Institute shall be deposited in such banks or invested in 
such manner as may be laid down by the Board by regulations. 
(3) Each Institute shall create a corpus fund for long term sustainability of the Institute, to which shall 
be credited such per cent. of the net income of the Institute and donations made specifically towards such 
corpus fund as the Central Government may in accordance with the provisions of the Income tax Act, 
1961 (43 of 1961), notify: 
Provided that the Board may also create endowment funds for specific purposes to which donations 
may be specifically made. 
(4) The fund of any Institute shall be applied in such manner and for such purposes as may be 
specified by the regulations. 
23. Accounts and audit. —(1) Every Institute shall maintain proper accounts including income and 
expenditure statements, internal audit report and statement audited by internal auditor specifying 
investments and other relevant records and prepare annual statement of accounts including the balance 
sheet in such form and as per such accounting standard as may be specified by notification by the Central 
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) Where the statement of income and expenditure and the balance sheet of the Institute do not 
comply with the accounting standards, the Institute shall disclose in its statement of income and 
expenditure and balance sheet, the following, namely:— 
(a) the deviation from the accounting standards; 
(b) the reasons for such deviation; and 
(c) the financial effect, if any, arising out of such deviation. 
 (3) The accounts of every Institute shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and 
any expenditure incurred by audit team in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Institute to the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(4) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Institute shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India has in connection with the 
audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the offices of the 
Institute. 12 (5) The accounts of every Institute as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually 
to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House of 
Parliament in accordance with such procedure as may be laid down by the Central Government. 
24. Books of account to be maintained by Institute. —Every Institute shall keep proper updated 
books of account with respect to—
(a) all sums of money received and expended by it and the matters in respect of which receipt and 
expenditure takes place; 
(b) the assets and liabilities of the Institute; 
(c) the properties, movable and immovable of the Institute. 
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, if books of account give a true and fair view of the 
state of affairs of the Institute and its transactions, it shall be deemed as proper books of account with 
respect to the matters specified therein. 
25. Appointment of auditors. —(1) The Board of every Institute shall, prior to the end of every 
financial year, and without prejudice to the provisions contained in the Comptroller and Auditor-General's 
(Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 (56 of 1971) or any other law for the time being in 
force containing provisions for audit of accounts by the Institutes, appoint such auditors including the 
internal auditor, on such remuneration as it thinks appropriate, to scrutinise the balance sheet and the 
statement of income and expenditure of such Institute:
Provided that the Board shall change the auditors after every four years. 
(2) The Board of every Institute shall constitute an Audit Committee to provide an expert advice on 
effectiveness of internal control system, risk management and audit report to the Board. 
(3) The auditor appointed under sub-section ( 1) or any person employed by him shall not have any 
direct or indirect interest, whether pecuniary or otherwise, in any matter concerning or related to the 
administration or functions of the Institute. 
26. Annual report of Director. —(1) There shall be attached to every statement of accounts laid 
before the Board of each Institute under section 27, a report, by its Director, with respect to—
(a) the state of affairs of such Institute; 
(b) the amounts, if any, which it proposes to carry to any surplus reserves in its balance sheet; 
(c) the extent to which understatement or overstatement of any surplus of income over expenditure or 
any shortfall of expenditure over income has been indicated in the auditor's report and the reasons for such 
understatement or overstatement; 
(d) the productivity of research projects undertaken by the Institute measured in accordance with 
such norms as may be specified by the Board; 
(e) appointments of the officers and faculty members of the Institute; 
(f) performance indicators and internal standards set by the Institute, including the nature of 
innovations in teaching, research and application of knowledge. 
(2) The report of the Director shall also include a statement showing the names of the five officers including 
faculty members and other employees of the Institute who received the highest remuneration (including 
allowances and other payments made to such employees) during the financial year and the contributions made by 
such employee during the financial year. 
(3) The statement referred to in sub-section ( 2) shall indicate whether any such employee is a relative of any 
member of the Board or Academic Council of the Institute and if so, the name of such member; and such other 
particulars as may be determined by the Board. 13 (4) The Director shall also be bound to give the complete information and explanations in the report 
referred to in sub-section ( 1) on every reservation, qualification or adverse remark contained in the 
auditors' report. 
27. Board to consider statement of accounts .—(1) The statement of accounts, including the balance sheet 
and the statement of income and expenditure, the auditor's report, the report of the Director and other documents 
required to be annexed or attached with such statement, shall be brought before the Board of concerned Institute in 
its meeting not later than three months, from the conclusion of the financial year.
(2) A copy of every statement of accounts referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be sent to every member of 
the Board not less than twenty-one days before the date of the meeting. 
(3) The statement of accounts referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall on its approval by the Board, be 
published on the website of the Institute. 
28. Annual report of Institute .—(1) The annual report of every Institute shall be prepared under the 
directions of the Board, which shall include, among other matters, steps taken by the Institute towards the 
fulfilment of its objects and an outcome based assessment of the research being undertaken in such 
Institute.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression “outcome based assessment of 
research” shall mean an elaboration and analysis of the research conducted and the qualitative and 
quantitative outcomes of such research along with its impact factor and social outcomes.
(2) The annual report prepared under sub-section ( 1) shall be submitted to the Board on or before such 
date as may be specified by the Board who shall consider the report in its meeting. 
(3) The annual report on its approval by the Board shall be published on the website of the Institute. 
(4) The annual report of each Institute shall be submitted to the Central Government who shall, as soon 
as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament. 
CHAPTER V 
COORDINATION  FORUM
29. Establishment of Coordination Forum .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf, there shall be established a Coordination Forum for 
all the Institutes.
(2) The Coordination Forum shall consist of the following members, namely:— 
(a) an eminent person to be selected by a Search-cum-Selection Committee as may be constituted 
by the Coordination Forum, as chairperson: 
Provided that the Coordination Forum may select one of its members to act as the chairperson till 
the chairperson is appointed; 
(b) the Secretary to the Government of India, in charge of the Ministry or Department of the 
Central Government having administrative control of management education, member— ex officio ; 
(c) two Secretaries in charge of management education of State Governments in which the Institutes 
are located, by rotation, each year, member— ex officio ; 
(d) four Chairpersons of Institutes, to be nominated by the Chairperson of the Coordination Forum, 
by rotation for two years; 
(e) the Director of each Institute, member— ex officio ; 
(f) five persons of eminence, of which at least one shall be a woman, in academia or public service, 
to be selected by a sub-committee constituted by the Coordination Forum. 
(3) The term of office of a member referred to in clause ( f) of sub-section ( 2) shall be three years from 
the date of his nomination. 
(4) The non-official members of the Coordination Forum shall be entitled to such travelling and other 
allowances, as may be prescribed. 14 (5) The Director of the host Institute where the meeting of the Coordination Forum takes place shall 
be the Member Secretary of the Coordination Forum and shall continue to be the Member-Secretary till a 
new host Institute is selected. 
30. Functions of Coordination Forum. —(1) The Coordination Forum shall facilitate the sharing of 
experiences, ideas and concerns with a view to enhancing the performance of all Institutes.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the Coordination Forum shall perform the 
following functions, namely:— 
(a) recommend to the Central Government, the institution of scholarships including for research 
and for the benefit of students belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and other 
socially and educationally backward classes of citizens; 
(b) deliberate on such matters of common interest to Institutes as may be referred to it by any 
Institute; 
(c) promote necessary coordination and co-operation in the working of the Institutes; 
(d) review the achievement of policy objectives; and 
(e) perform such other functions as may be referred to it by the Central Government. 
(3) The Coordination Forum may constitute such committees as it may consider necessary for carrying 
out its functions under this section. 
(4) The Chairperson of the Coordination Forum shall ordinarily preside at the meetings of the 
Coordination Forum and in his absence, any other member chosen by the members present amongst 
themselves at the meeting, shall preside at the meeting. 
(5) The Coordination Forum shall submit a report on its functions under sub-section ( 2) to the Central 
Government. 
(6) The Coordination Forum shall meet at least once in a calendar year. 
(7) At each meeting of the Coordination Forum, the host institute, which would host the next meeting, 
shall be selected: 
Provided that no Institute shall host the meeting for more than two consecutive years. 
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS
31. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc .—No act of any Institute or the 
Board or the Academic Council or any other body set-up under this Act or the regulations, shall be 
invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy or defect in the constitution thereof; or 
(b) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the case; or 
(c) any defect in the selection, nomination or appointment of a person acting as a member thereof. 
32. Return and information to be provided to Central Government. —Every Institute shall furnish 
to the Central Government such returns or other information with respect to its policies or activities as the 
Central Government may, for the purpose of reporting to the Parliament or for the making of policy, from 
time to time, require. 
33. Institute to be public authority under Right to Information Act. —(1) The provisions of the Right 
to Information Act, 2005 (22 of 2005) shall apply to each Institute, including Institutes established in public-
private partnership, as if it were a public authority established by notification issued or order made under 
clause ( h) of section 2 of the Right to Information Act, 2005. 
(2) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued or order to be made under the Act referred to in                 
sub-section ( 1), shall be laid in draft before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 15 expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 
in disapproving the issue of the notification or order or both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
notification or order, the notification or order shall not be issued or made, as the case may be, shall be issued or 
made only in such modified form as may be agreed upon by both the Houses. 
34. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make rules, for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) such other powers and duties of the Board under clause ( w) of sub-section ( 2) of section 11; 
(b) the term and conditions of service of the Director under sub-section ( 2) of section 16; 
(c) the travelling and such other allowances payable to the members of the Coordination Forum for attending its 
meetings or its Committees under sub-section ( 4) of section 29; 
(d) any other matter which is to be or may be, prescribed or in respect of which provision is to be 
made by the Central Government by rules. 
35. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Board may, by notification, make regulations not 
inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions of employees of existing Institute under clause 
(d) of section 5; 
(b) admission of candidates to the various courses of study under clause ( b) of section 7; 
(c) the manner of nominating the members from the faculty of respective Institutes under clause ( e) 
of sub-section ( 2) of section 10; 
(d) the conferment of honorary degrees under clause ( g) of sub-section ( 2) of section 11; 
(e) the number of posts, emoluments and the duties and conditions of service of the academic, 
administrative, technical and other staff under clause ( j) of sub-section ( 2) of section 11; 
(f) determine performance objectives on the basis of which variable pay may be paid to the 
Director under clause ( i) of sub-section ( 2) of section 11; 
(g) to specify by regulations, the fees to be charged for course of study and examinations in the 
Institute under clause ( m) of sub-section ( 2) of section 11; 
(h) the manner of formation of Departments of teaching under clause ( n) of sub-section ( 2) of 
section 11; 
(i) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes under clause ( o) of 
sub-section ( 2) of section 11; 
(j) the qualifications, classification, terms of office and method of appointment of the academic, 
administrative, technical and other staff of the Institute under clause ( p) of sub-section ( 2) of          
section 11; 
(k) the constitution of pension, insurance and provident funds for the benefit of the academic, 
administrative, technical and other staff under clause ( q ) of sub-section ( 2) of section 11;  
(I) the establishment and maintenance of buildings under clause ( r) of sub-section ( 2) of section 
11; 
(m) the conditions of residence of students of the Institute and levying of fees for residence in the 
halls and hostels and of other charges under clause ( s) of sub-section ( 2) of section 11; 16 (n) the manner of authentication of the orders and decisions of the Board under clause ( t) of               
sub-section ( 2) of section 11; 
(o) the meetings of the Board, the Academic Council or any Committee, the quorum at such 
meetings and the procedure to be followed in the conduct of their business under clause ( u) of            
sub-section ( 2) of section 11; 
(p) the financial accountability of the Institute under clause ( v) of sub-section ( 2) of section 11; 
(q) delegate such powers and functions of the Board to the Director under sub-section ( 3) of 
section 11; 
(r) the qualifications, experience and the manner of selection of the independent agency or group 
of experts under sub-section ( 5) of section 11; 
(s) allowances of the members of the Board for attending meetings under sub-section ( 6) of section 
12; 
(t) such other powers and functions of the Academic Council under sub-section ( 2) of section 15; 
(u) the powers and duties of the Director under sub-section ( 4) of section 16; 
(v) constitution of such committees and other authorities of the Institute and their duties and 
functions under sub-section ( 1) of section 20; 
(w) the manner of depositing or investing the moneys credited to the Fund of every Institute under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 21; 
(x) the manner of application of the Fund of the Institute under sub-section ( 4) of section 21; and 
(y) any other matter which is to be or may be, specified by regulations. 
36. Ordinances how made. —(1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, Ordinance shall be made 
by the Academic Council.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder, the Ordinances of 
every Institute may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the admission of students to the Institute; 
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees and diplomas of the Institute; 
(c) the conditions under which students shall be admitted to the degree or diploma courses and to 
the examinations of the Institute, and shall be eligible for degrees and diplomas; 
(d) the conditions of award of the fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes; 
(e) the conditions and model of appointment and duties of examining bodies, examiners and 
moderators; 
(f) the conduct of examinations; 
(g) the maintenance of discipline among the students of the Institute; and 
(h) any other matter which is to be or may be provided for by the Ordinances. 
(3) All Ordinances made by the Academic Council shall have effect from such date as it may direct, 
but every Ordinance so made shall be submitted, as soon as may be, to the Board and shall be considered 
by the Board at its next meeting. 
(4) The Board shall have power by resolution to modify or cancel any such Ordinance and such 
Ordinance shall from the date of such resolution stand modified accordingly or cancelled, as the case may 
be. 
37. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.— Every rule made by the Central Government 
and the first regulation made by the Board under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 17 comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation shall not be made, the 
rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule or regulation. 
38. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of the period of three 
years from the date of commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament. 
39. Transitional provisions .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act:— 
(a) the Board of every Institute functioning as such immediately before the commencement of this 
Act shall continue to so function until a new Board is constituted for that Institute under this Act, but 
on the constitution of a new Board under this Act, the members of the Board holding office before 
such constitution shall cease to hold office; 
(b) every Academic Council or Faculty Council, as the case may be, constituted in relation to every 
Institute before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be the Academic Council constituted 
under this Act until an Academic Council is constituted under this Act for that Institute, but on the 
constitution of the new Academic Council under this Act, the members of the Academic Council or Faculty 
Council, as the case may be, holding office before such constitution shall cease to hold office; 
(c) until the first regulations are made under this Act, the rules, and bye-laws of each Institute as in 
force, immediately before the commencement of this Act shall continue to apply to the Institute in so 
far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act. 
(2) The Central Government may, without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, if it considers so 
necessary and expedient, by notification, take such measures, which may be necessary for the smooth 
transfer of the existing Institute to the corresponding Institute. 18 THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 4( 1)] 
Sl. No. Name of  the State Name of the existing 
Institute Location Name of Institute 
incorporated under 
this Act 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1.  West Bengal Indian Institute of 
Management Calcutta, 
a Society registered 
under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 
(21 of 1860). Kolkata Indian Institute of 
Management, 
Calcutta. 
2.  Gujarat Indian Institute of 
Management  
Ahmedabad, a Society 
registered  
under the Societies 
Registration  
Act, 1860 (21 of 1860). Ahmedabad Indian Institute of 
Management, 
Ahmedabad. 
3.  Karnataka Indian Institute of 
Management  
Bangalore, a Society 
registered 
under the Mysore 
Societies' 
Registration Act, 1960 
(17 of 1960). Bengaluru Indian Institute of 
Management, 
Bangalore. 
4.  Uttar Pradesh Indian Institute of 
Management Lucknow, a 
Society registered under 
the Societies Registration 
Act, 1860 
(21 of 1860). Lucknow Indian Institute of 
Management, 
Lucknow. 
5.  Madhya Pradesh Indian Institute of 
Management  
Indore, a Society 
registered under 
the Madhya Pradesh 
Societies Registration 
Act, 1973 
(44 of 1973). Indore Indian Institute of 
Management, Indore. 
6.  Kerala Indian Institute of 
management Kozhikode, 
a Society registered 
under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 
(21 of 1860). Kozhikode Indian Institute of 
Management, 
Kozhikode. 
7.  Meghalaya Rajiv Gandhi Indian 
Institute of Management 
Shillong, a Society 
registered under the 
Societies Registration 
Act, 1860 (21 of 1860). Shillong Indian Institute of 
Management, 
Shillong. 19  (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
8.  Haryana Indian Institute of 
Management Rohtak, a 
Society registered under 
the Societies Registration 
Act, 1860 (21 of 1860). Rohtak Indian Institute of 
Management, Rohtak. 
9.  Jharkhand Indian Institute of 
Management Ranchi, a 
Society registered under 
the Societies Registration 
Act, 1860 (21 of 1860). Ranchi Indian Institute of 
Management, Ranchi. 
10.  Chhattisgarh Indian Institute of 
Management Raipur, a 
Society registered under 
the Societies Registration 
Act, 1860 (21 of 1860). Raipur Indian Institute of 
Management, Raipur. 
11.  Tamil Nadu Indian Institute of 
Management 
Tiruchirappalli, a Society 
registered under the 
Tamil Nadu Societies 
Registration Act, 1975. Tiruchirappalli Indian Institute of 
Management,  
Tiruchirappalli.
12. Uttarakhand Indian Institute of 
Management Kashipur, a 
Society registered under 
the Societies Registration 
Act, 1860 (21 of 1860). Kashipur Indian Institute of 
Management, 
Kashipur. 
13.  Rajasthan Indian Institute of 
Management Udaipur, a 
Society registered under 
the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 
(21 of 1860). Udaipur Indian Institute of 
Management, 
Udaipur. 
14.  Punjab Indian Institute of 
Mangement Amritsar, a 
Society resigtered under 
the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 
(21 of 1860). Amritsar Indian Institute of 
Management, 
Amritsar. 
15.  Himachal Pradesh 
H.P. Indian Institute of 
Management Sirmaur, a 
Society registered under 
the Societies Registration 
Act, 1860 (21 of 1860). Sirmaur Indian Institute of 
Management, Sirmaur. 
16. Odisha Indian Institute of 
Management Sambalpur, 
a Society registered 
under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 
(21 of 1860). Sambalpur Indian Institute of 
Management, 
Sambalpur. 20  (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
17.  Andhra Pradesh Indian Institute of 
Management 
Visakhapatnam, a 
Society registered under 
the Societies Registration 
Act, 1860 (21 of 1860). Visakhapatnam Indian Institute of 
Management, 
Visakhapatnam. 
18.  Maharashtra Indian Institute of 
Management Nagpur, a 
Society Registered under 
the Societies Registration 
Act, 1860 (21 of 1860). Nagpur Indian Institute of 
Management, Nagpur. 
19.  Bihar Indian Institute of 
Management                
Bodhgaya, a Society 
registered under the 
Societies Registration 
Act, 1860 (21 of 1860). Bodhgaya Indian Institute of 
Management, 
Bodhgaya. 
20. Jammu and Kashmir Indian Institute of 
Management Jammu, a 
Society registered under 
the Jammu and Kashmir 
Societies Registration 
Act, 1998 (VI of 1998.) Jammu Indian Institute of 
Management, Jammu. 
--------------------------The Integrated Goods and Services Tax (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 2017--------------------------
THE INTEGRATED GOODS AND SERVICES TAX (EXTENSION TO JAMMU AND KASHMIR)  
ACT, 2017 
_________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
___________ 
SECTIONS
1.Short title and commencement.
2.Extension and amendment of Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act.
3.Repeal and saving.THE INTEGRATED GOODS AND SERVICES TAX (EXTENSION TO JAMMU AND KASHMIR)  
ACT, 2017 
ACT NO. 27 OF2017 
[23rd August, 2017.] 
An Act to provide for the extension of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 to the State 
of Jammu and Kashmir. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Integrated Goods and Services Tax 
(Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 2017. 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 8th day of July, 2017. 
2. Extension and amendment of Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act. —The Integrated Goods and Services 
Tax Act, 2017 (13 of 2017) thereinafter referred to as the principal Act) and all rules, notifications, schemes and orders 
made hereunder by the Central Government are hereby extended to, and shall be in force in, the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir. 
(2) With effect from the date of commencement of this Act, in the principal Act, in section 1, in sub-section ( 2), the 
words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” shall be omitted. 
3. Repeal and saving. —(1) The Integrated Goods and Services Tax (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Ordinance 
(Ord. 4 of  2017)  is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to 
have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
--------------------------The Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017--------------------------
1 THE INTEGRATED GOODS AND SERVICES TAX ACT, 2017 
____________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
____________ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
SECTIONS 
1.Short title, extent and commencement. 
2.Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
ADMINISTRATION
3.Appointment of officers. 
4.Authorisation of officers of State tax or Union territory tax as proper officer in certain 
circumstances. 
CHAPTER III 
LEVY AND COLLECTION OF TAX
5.Levy and collection. 
6.Power to grant exemption from tax. 
CHAPTER IV 
DETERMINATION OF NATURE OF SUPPLY
7.Inter-State supply. 
8.Intra-State supply. 
9.Supplies in territorial waters. 
CHAPTER V 
PLACE OF SUPPLY OF GOODS OR SERVICES OR BOTH 
10.Place of supply of goods other than supply of goods imported into, or exported from India. 
11.Place of supply of goods imported into, or exported from India. 
12.Place of supply of services where location of supplier and recipient is in India. 
13.Place of supply of services where location of supplier or location of recipient is outside India. 
14.Special provision for payment of tax by a supplier of online information and database access or 
retrieval services. 
CHAPTER VI 
REFUND OF INTEGRATED TAX TO INTERNATIONAL TOURIST
15.Refund of integrated tax paid on supply of goods to tourist leaving India. 
CHAPTER VII 
ZERO RATED SUPPLY
16.Zero rated supply. 
CHAPTER VIII 
APPORTIONMENT OF TAX AND SETTLEMENT OF FUNDS 
17.Apportionment of tax and settlement of funds. 
18.Transfer of input tax credit. 
19.Tax wrongfully collected and paid to Central Government or State Government. 2 CHAPTER IX 
MISCELLANEOUS 
SECTIONS
20.Application of provisions of Central Goods and Services Tax Act. 
21.Import of services made on or after the appointed day. 
22.Power to make rules. 
23.Power to make regulations. 
24.Laying of rules, regulations and notifications. 
25.Removal of difficulties.3 THE INTEGRATED GOODS AND SERVICES TAX ACT, 2017  
ACT NO. 13 OF 2017 
[12th April , 2017.]  
An Act to make a provision for levy and collection of tax on inter-State supply of goods or 
services or both by the Central Government and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—  
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Integrated Goods and 
Services Tax Act, 2017. 
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint: 
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming 
into force of that provision. 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–– 
(1) “Central Goods and Services Tax Act” means the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017; 
(2) ‘‘central tax” means the tax levied and collected under the Central Goods and Services Tax 
Act; 
(3) “continuous journey” means a journey for which a single or more than one ticket or invoice is 
issued at the same time, either by a single supplier of service or through an agent acting on behalf of 
more than one supplier of service, and which involves no stopover between any of the legs of the 
journey for which one or more separate tickets or invoices are issued. 
Explanation .––For the purposes of this clause, the term “stopover” means a place where a 
passenger can disembark either to transfer to another conveyance or break his journey for a certain 
period in order to resume it at a later point of time; 
(4) “customs frontiers of India” means the limits of a customs area as defined in section 2 of the 
Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962); 
(5) “export of goods” with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means taking 
goods out of India to a place outside India; 
(6) “export of services” means the supply of any service when,–– 
(i) the supplier of service is located in India; 
(ii) the recipient of service is located outside India; 
(iii) the place of supply of service is outside India; 
(iv) the payment for such service has been received by the supplier of service in convertible 
foreign exchange 2[or in Indian rupees wherever permitted by the Reserve Bank of India]; and 
(v) the supplier of service and the recipient of service are not merely establishments of a 
distinct person in accordance with Explanation  1 in section 8; 
1. 22nd June, 2017 for sections 1, 2, 3, 14, 20 and 22 vide notification No. G.S.R. 603 (E) dated the 19th June, 2017, see Gazette 
of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( i). 
    1st July, 2017 for sections 4 to 13, 16 to 19, 21, 23 to 25 vide notification No. G.S.R. 662(E) dated 28th June 2017, see Gazette 
of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( i).  
2. Ins. by Act 32 of 2018, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-2-2019).   4 (7) “fixed establishment” means a place (other than the registered place of business) which is 
characterised by a sufficient degree of permanence and suitable structure in terms of human and 
technical resources to supply services or to receive and use services for its own needs; 
(8) “Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to States) Act” means the Goods and Services Tax 
(Compensation to States) Act, 2017 (15 of 2017); 
(9) “Government” means the Central Government; 
(10) ‘‘import of goods” with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means bringing 
goods into India from a place outside India; 
(11) ‘‘import of services” means the supply of any service, where–– 
(i) the supplier of service is located outside India; 
(ii) the recipient of service is located in India; and 
(iii) the place of supply of service is in India; 
(12) “integrated tax” means the integrated goods and services tax levied under this Act; 
(13) “intermediary” means a broker, an agent or any other person, by whatever name called, who 
arranges or facilitates the supply of goods or services or both, or securities, between two or more 
persons, but does not include a person who supplies such goods or services or both or securities on his 
own account; 
(14) “location of the recipient of services” means,–– 
(a) where a supply is received at a place of business for which the registration has been 
obtained, the location of such place of business; 
(b) where a supply is received at a place other than the place of business for which 
registration has been obtained (a fixed establishment elsewhere), the location of such fixed 
establishment; 
(c) where a supply is received at more than one establishment, whether the place of business 
or fixed establishment, the location of the establishment most directly concerned with the receipt 
of the supply; and 
(d) in absence of such places, the location of the usual place of residence of the recipient; 
(15) “location of the supplier of services” means,–– 
(a) where a supply is made from a place of business for which the registration has been 
obtained, the location of such place of business; 
(b) where a supply is made from a place other than the place of business for which 
registration has been obtained (a fixed establishment elsewhere), the location of such fixed 
establishment; 
(c) where a supply is made from more than one establishment, whether the place of business 
or fixed establishment, the location of the establishment most directly concerned with the 
provision of the supply; and 
(d) in absence of such places, the location of the usual place of residence of the supplier; 
(16) “non-taxable online recipient” means any Government, local authority, governmental 
authority, an individual or any other person not registered and receiving online information and 
database access or retrieval services in relation to any purpose other than commerce, industry or any 
other business or profession, located in taxable territory. 
Explanation .––For the purposes of this clause, the expression “governmental authority” means an 
authority or a board or any other body,–– 
(i) set up by an Act of Parliament or a State Legislature; or 
(ii) established by any Government, 5 with ninety per cent. or more participation by way of equity or control, to carry out any function 
entrusted 1[to a Panchayat under article 243G or] to a municipality under article 243W of the 
Constitution; 
(17) “online information and database access or retrieval services” means services whose delivery 
is mediated by information technology over the internet or an electronic network and the nature of 
which renders their supply essentially automated and involving minimal human intervention and 
impossible to ensure in the absence of information technology and includes electronic services such 
as,–– 
(i) advertising on the internet; 
(ii) providing cloud services; 
(iii) provision of e-books, movie, music, software and other intangibles through 
telecommunication networks or internet; 
(iv) providing data or information, retrievable or otherwise, to any person in electronic form 
through a computer network; 
(v) online supplies of digital content (movies, television shows, music and the like); 
(vi) digital data storage; and 
(vii) online gaming;  
(18) “output tax”, in relation to a taxable person, means the integrated tax chargeable under this 
Act on taxable supply of goods or services or both made by him or by his agent but excludes tax 
payable by him on reverse charge basis; 
(19) “Special Economic Zone” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( za) of 
section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005 (28 of 2005); 
(20) “Special Economic Zone developer” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in  
clause ( g) of section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005 (28 of 2005) and includes an 
Authority as defined in clause ( d) and a Co-Developer as defined in clause ( f) of section 2 of the said 
Act; 
(21) “supply” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 7 of the Central Goods and 
Services Tax Act; 
(22) “taxable territory” means the territory to which the provisions of this Act apply; 
(23) “zero-rated supply” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 16; 
(24) words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Central Goods and 
Services Tax Act, the Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act and the Goods and Services Tax 
(Compensation to States) Act shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in those Acts; 
(25) any reference in this Act to a law which is not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, 
shall, in relation to that State be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in 
that State. 
CHAPTER II 
ADMINISTRATION
3. Appointment of officers .––The Board may appoint such central tax officers as it thinks fit for 
exercising the powers under this Act. 
4. Authorisation of officers of State tax or Union territory tax as proper officer in certain 
circumstances .––Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the officers appointed under the State 
Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act are authorised to be the 
proper officers for the purposes of this Act, subject to such exceptions and conditions as the Government 
shall, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify. 
1.  Ins. by Act 32 of 2018, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-2-2019).   6 CHAPTER III 
LEVY AND COLLECTION OF TAX 
5. Levy and collection .––(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 2), there shall be levied a tax 
called the integrated goods and services tax on all inter-State supplies of goods or services or both, except 
on the supply of alcoholic liquor for human consumption, on the value determined under section 15 of the 
Central Goods and Services Tax Act and at such rates, not exceeding forty per cent., as may be notified by 
the Government on the recommendations of the Council and collected in such manner as may be 
prescribed and shall be paid by the taxable person: 
Provided that the integrated tax on goods imported into India shall be levied and collected in 
accordance with the provisions of section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 (51 of 1975) on the value as 
determined under the said Act at the point when duties of customs are levied on the said goods under 
section 12 of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962). 
(2) The integrated tax on the supply of petroleum crude, high speed diesel, motor spirit (commonly 
known as petrol), natural gas and aviation turbine fuel shall be levied with effect from such date as may be 
notified by the Government on the recommendations of the Council. 
(3) The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify categories 
of supply of goods or services or both, the tax on which shall be paid on reverse charge basis by the 
recipient of such goods or services or both and all the provisions of this Act shall apply to such recipient 
as if he is the person liable for paying the tax in relation to the supply of such goods or services or both. 
1[(4) The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify a class of 
registered persons who shall, in respect of supply of specified categories of goods or services or both 
received from an unregistered supplier, pay the tax on reverse charge basis as the recipient of such supply 
of goods or services or both, and all the provisions of this Act shall apply to such recipient as if he is the 
person liable for paying the tax in relation to such supply of goods or services or both.] 
(5) The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify categories 
of services, the tax on inter-State supplies of which shall be paid by the electronic commerce operator if 
such services are supplied through it, and all the provisions of this Act shall apply to such electronic 
commerce operator as if he is the supplier liable for paying the tax in relation to the supply of such 
services: 
Provided that where an electronic commerce operator does not have a physical presence in the taxable 
territory, any person representing such electronic commerce operator for any purpose in the taxable 
territory shall be liable to pay tax: 
Provided further that where an electronic commerce operator does not have a physical presence in the 
taxable territory and also does not have a representative in the said territory, such electronic commerce 
operator shall appoint a person in the taxable territory for the purpose of paying tax and such person shall 
be liable to pay tax.  
6. Power to grant exemption from tax.––  (1) Where the Government is satisfied that it is necessary 
in the public interest so to do, it may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, exempt 
generally, either absolutely or subject to such conditions as may be specified therein, goods or services or 
both of any specified description from the whole or any part of the tax leviable thereon with effect from 
such date as may be specified in such notification. 
(2) Where the Government is satisfied that it is necessary in the public interest so to do, it may, on the 
recommendations of the Council, by special order in each case, under circumstances of an exceptional 
nature to be stated in such order, exempt from payment of tax any goods or services or both on which tax 
is leviable. 
(3) The Government may, if it considers necessary or expedient so to do for the purpose of clarifying 
the scope or applicability of any notification issued under sub-section ( 1) or order issued under  
sub-section ( 2), insert an Explanation  in such notification or order, as the case may be, by notification at 
any time within one year of issue of the notification under sub-section ( 1) or order under sub-section ( 2), 
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 2018, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-2-2019).  7 and every such Explanation  shall have effect as if it had always been the part of the first such notification 
or order, as the case may be. 
Explanation .––For the purposes of this section, where an exemption in respect of any goods or 
services or both from the whole or part of the tax leviable thereon has been granted absolutely, the 
registered person supplying such goods or services or both shall not collect the tax, in excess of the 
effective rate, on such supply of goods or services or both. 
CHAPTER IV 
DETERMINATION OF NATURE OF SUPPLY 
7. Inter-State supply .––(1) Subject to the provisions of section 10, supply of goods, where the 
location of the supplier and the place of supply are in–– 
(a) two different States; 
(b) two different Union territories; or 
(c) a State and a Union territory,  
shall be treated as a supply of goods in the course of inter-State trade or commerce. 
(2) Supply of goods imported into the territory of India, till they cross the customs frontiers of India, 
shall be treated to be a supply of goods in the course of inter-State trade or commerce. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of section 12, supply of services, where the location of the supplier and 
the place of supply are in–– 
(a) two different States;  
(b) two different Union territories; or 
(c) a State and a Union territory, 
shall be treated as a supply of services in the course of inter-State trade or commerce. 
(4) Supply of services imported into the territory of India shall be treated to be a supply of services in 
the course of inter-State trade or commerce. 
(5) Supply of goods or services or both,–– 
(a) when the supplier is located in India and the place of supply is outside India;  
(b) to or by a Special Economic Zone developer or a Special Economic Zone unit; or 
(c) in the taxable territory, not being an intra-State supply and not covered elsewhere in this 
section,  
shall be treated to be a supply of goods or services or both in the course of inter-State trade or commerce. 
8. Intra-State supply .––(1) Subject to the provisions of section 10, supply of goods where the 
location of the supplier and the place of supply of goods are in the same State or same Union territory 
shall be treated as intra-State supply: 
Provided that the following supply of goods shall not be treated as intra-State supply, namely:–– 
(i) supply of goods to or by a Special Economic Zone developer or a Special Economic Zone unit; 
(ii) goods imported into the territory of India till they cross the customs frontiers of India; or 
(iii) supplies made to a tourist referred to in section 15. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 12, supply of services where the location of the supplier and 
the place of supply of services are in the same State or same Union territory shall be treated as intra-State 
supply: 
Provided that the intra-State supply of services shall not include supply of services to or by a Special 
Economic Zone developer or a Special Economic Zone unit. 
Explanation  1.––For the purposes of this Act, where a person has,–– 8 (i) an establishment in India and any other establishment outside India;  
(ii) an establishment in a State or Union territory and any other establishment outside that State or 
Union territory; or 
(iii) an establishment in a State or Union territory and any other establishment 1*** registered 
within that State or Union territory, 
then such establishments shall be treated as establishments of distinct persons. 
Explanation  2.––A person carrying on a business through a branch or an agency or a representational 
office in any territory shall be treated as having an establishment in that territory.  
9. Supplies in territorial waters .––Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,–– 
(a) where the location of the supplier is in the territorial waters, the location of such supplier; or 
(b) where the place of supply is in the territorial waters, the place of supply, 
shall, for the purposes of this Act, be deemed to be in the coastal State or Union territory where the 
nearest point of the appropriate baseline is located. 
CHAPTER V 
PLACE OF SUPPLY OF GOODS OR SERVICES OR BOTH 
10. Place of supply of goods other than supply of goods imported into, or exported from India .––
(1) The place of supply of goods, other than supply of goods imported into, or exported from India, shall 
be as under,–– 
(a) where the supply involves movement of goods, whether by the supplier or the recipient or by 
any other person, the place of supply of such goods shall be the location of the goods at the time at 
which the movement of goods terminates for delivery to the recipient; 
(b) where the goods are delivered by the supplier to a recipient or any other person on the 
direction of a third person, whether acting as an agent or otherwise, before or during movement of 
goods, either by way of transfer of documents of title to the goods or otherwise, it shall be deemed 
that the said third person has received the goods and the place of supply of such goods shall be the 
principal place of business of such person; 
(c) where the supply does not involve movement of goods, whether by the supplier or the 
recipient, the place of supply shall be the location of such goods at the time of the delivery to the 
recipient; 
(d) where the goods are assembled or installed at site, the place of supply shall be the place of 
such installation or assembly; 
(e) where the goods are supplied on board a conveyance, including a vessel, an aircraft, a train or 
a motor vehicle, the place of supply shall be the location at which such goods are taken on board. 
(2) Where the place of supply of goods cannot be determined, the place of supply shall be determined 
in such manner as may be prescribed. 
11. Place of supply of goods imported into, or exported from India .––The place of supply of 
goods,–– 
(a) imported into India shall be the location of the importer; 
(b) exported from India shall be the location outside India. 
1. The words “being a business vertical” omitted by Act 32 of 2018, s. 4 (w.e.f 1-2-2019).  9 12. Place of supply of services where location of supplier and recipient is in India .––(1) The 
provisions of this section shall apply to determine the place of supply of services where the location of 
supplier of services and the location of the recipient of services is in India. 
(2) The place of supply of services, except the services specified in sub-sections ( 3) to ( 14),–– 
(a) made to a registered person shall be the location of such person; 
(b) made to any person other than a registered person shall be,–– 
(i) the location of the recipient where the address on record exists; and 
(ii) the location of the supplier of services in other cases. 
(3) The place of supply of services,–– 
(a) directly in relation to an immovable property, including services provided by architects, 
interior decorators, surveyors, engineers and other related experts or estate agents, any service 
provided by way of grant of rights to use immovable property or for carrying out or co-ordination of 
construction work; or 
(b) by way of lodging accommodation by a hotel, inn, guest house, home stay, club or campsite, 
by whatever name called, and including a house boat or any other vessel; or 
(c) by way of accommodation in any immovable property for organising any marriage or 
reception or matters related thereto, official, social, cultural, religious or business function including 
services provided in relation to such function at such property; or 
(d) any services ancillary to the services referred to in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c), 
shall be the location at which the immovable property or boat or vessel, as the case may be, is located or 
intended to be located: 
Provided that if the location of the immovable property or boat or vessel is located or intended to be 
located outside India, the place of supply shall be the location of the recipient. 
Explanation .––Where the immovable property or boat or vessel is located in more than one State or 
Union territory, the supply of services shall be treated as made in each of the respective States or Union 
territories, in proportion to the value for services separately collected or determined in terms of the 
contract or agreement entered into in this regard or, in the absence of such contract or agreement, on such 
other basis as may be prescribed. 
(4) The place of supply of restaurant and catering services, personal grooming, fitness, beauty 
treatment, health service including cosmetic and plastic surgery shall be the location where the services 
are actually performed. 
(5) The place of supply of services in relation to training and performance appraisal to,–– 
(a) a registered person, shall be the location of such person; 
(b) a person other than a registered person, shall be the location where the services are actually 
performed. 
(6) The place of supply of services provided by way of admission to a cultural, artistic, sporting, 
scientific, educational, entertainment event or amusement park or any other place and services ancillary 
thereto, shall be the place where the event is actually held or where the park or such other place is located. 
(7) The place of supply of services provided by way of,— 
(a) organisation of a cultural, artistic, sporting, scientific, educational or entertainment event 
including supply of services in relation to a conference, fair, exhibition, celebration or similar events; 
or 
(b) services ancillary to organisation of any of the events or services referred to in clause ( a), or 
assigning of sponsorship to such events,–– 
(i) to a registered person, shall be the location of such person; 10 (ii) to a person other than a registered person, shall be the place where the event is actually 
held and if the event is held outside India, the place of supply shall be the location of the 
recipient. 
Explanation .––Where the event is held in more than one State or Union territory and a 
consolidated amount is charged for supply of services relating to such event, the place of supply of 
such services shall be taken as being in each of the respective States or Union territories in proportion 
to the value for services separately collected or determined in terms of the contract or agreement 
entered into in this regard or, in the absence of such contract or agreement, on such other basis as may 
be prescribed.  
(8) The place of supply of services by way of transportation of goods, including by mail or courier 
to,–– 
(a) a registered person, shall be the location of such person; 
(b) a person other than a registered person, shall be the location at which such goods are handed 
over for their transportation: 
1[Provided that where the transportation of goods is to a place outside India, the place of supply 
shall be the place of destination of such goods.] 
(9) The place of supply of passenger transportation service to,— 
(a) a registered person, shall be the location of such person; 
(b) a person other than a registered person, shall be the place where the passenger embarks on the 
conveyance for a continuous journey: 
Provided that where the right to passage is given for future use and the point of embarkation is not 
known at the time of issue of right to passage, the place of supply of such service shall be determined 
in accordance with the provisions of sub-section ( 2). 
Explanation .––For the purposes of this sub-section, the return journey shall be treated as a 
separate journey, even if the right to passage for onward and return journey is issued at the same time. 
(10) The place of supply of services on board a conveyance, including a vessel, an aircraft, a train or a 
motor vehicle, shall be the location of the first scheduled point of departure of that conveyance for the 
journey. 
(11) The place of supply of telecommunication services including data transfer, broadcasting, cable 
and direct to home television services to any person shall,— 
(a) in case of services by way of fixed telecommunication line, leased circuits, internet leased 
circuit, cable or dish antenna, be the location where the telecommunication line, leased circuit or cable 
connection or dish antenna is installed for receipt of services; 
(b) in case of mobile connection for telecommunication and internet services provided on  
post-paid basis, be the location of billing address of the recipient of services on the record of the 
supplier of services; 
(c) in cases where mobile connection for telecommunication, internet service and direct to home 
television services are provided on pre-payment basis through a voucher or any other means,–– 
(i) through a selling agent or a re-seller or a distributor of subscriber identity module card or 
re-charge voucher, be the address of the selling agent or re-seller or distributor as per the record of 
the supplier at the time of supply; or 
(ii) by any person to the final subscriber, be the location where such prepayment is received 
or such vouchers are sold; 
(d) in other cases, be the address of the recipient as per the records of the supplier of services and 
where such address is not available, the place of supply shall be location of the supplier of services: 
Provided that where the address of the recipient as per the records of the supplier of services is not 
available, the place of supply shall be location of the supplier of services: 
1. The proviso ins. by Act 32 of 2018, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1-2-2019).  11 Provided further that if such pre-paid service is availed or the recharge is made through internet 
banking or other electronic mode of payment, the location of the recipient of services on the record of 
the supplier of services shall be the place of supply of such services.  
Explanation .––Where the leased circuit is installed in more than one State or Union territory and a 
consolidated amount is charged for supply of services relating to such circuit, the place of supply of such 
services shall be taken as being in each of the respective States or Union territories in proportion to the 
value for services separately collected or determined in terms of the contract or agreement entered into in 
this regard or, in the absence of such contract or agreement, on such other basis as may be prescribed. 
(12) The place of supply of banking and other financial services, including stock broking services to 
any person shall be the location of the recipient of services on the records of the supplier of services: 
Provided that if the location of recipient of services is not on the records of the supplier, the place of 
supply shall be the location of the supplier of services. 
(13) The place of supply of insurance services shall,–– 
(a) to a registered person, be the location of such person; 
(b) to a person other than a registered person, be the location of the recipient of services on the 
records of the supplier of services. 
(14) The place of supply of advertisement services to the Central Government, a State Government, a 
statutory body or a local authority meant for the States or Union territories identified in the contract or 
agreement shall be taken as being in each of such States or Union territories and the value of such supplies 
specific to each State or Union territory shall be in proportion to the amount attributable to services 
provided by way of dissemination in the respective States or Union territories as may be determined in 
terms of the contract or agreement entered into in this regard or, in the absence of such contract or 
agreement, on such other basis as may be prescribed. 
13. Place of supply of services where location of supplier or location of recipient is outside 
India .––(1) The provisions of this section shall apply to determine the place of supply of services where 
the location of the supplier of services or the location of the recipient of services is outside India. 
(2) The place of supply of services except the services specified in sub-sections ( 3) to ( 13) shall be the 
location of the recipient of services: 
Provided that where the location of the recipient of services is not available in the ordinary course of 
business, the place of supply shall be the location of the supplier of services. 
(3) The place of supply of the following services shall be the location where the services are actually 
performed, namely:— 
(a) services supplied in respect of goods which are required to be made physically available by 
the recipient of services to the supplier of services, or to a person acting on behalf of the supplier of 
services in order to provide the services: 
Provided that when such services are provided from a remote location by way of electronic 
means, the place of supply shall be the location where goods are situated at the time of supply of 
services: 
1[Provided further that nothing contained in this clause shall apply in the case of services supplied 
in respect of goods which are temporarily imported into India for repairs or for any other treatment or 
process and are exported after such repairs or treatment or process without being put to any use in 
India, other than that which is required for such repairs or treatment or process;]  
(b) services supplied to an individual, represented either as the recipient of services or a person 
acting on behalf of the recipient, which require the physical presence of the recipient or the person 
acting on his behalf, with the supplier for the supply of services. 
(4) The place of supply of services supplied directly in relation to an immovable property, including 
services supplied in this regard by experts and estate agents, supply of accommodation by a hotel, inn, 
guest house, club or campsite, by whatever name called, grant of rights to use immovable property, 
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 2018, s. 6 for the second proviso (w.e.f. 1-2-2019)  12 services for carrying out or co-ordination of construction work, including that of architects or interior 
decorators, shall be the place where the immovable property is located or intended to be located. 
(5) The place of supply of services supplied by way of admission to, or organisation of a cultural, 
artistic, sporting, scientific, educational or entertainment event, or a celebration, conference, fair, 
exhibition or similar events, and of services ancillary to such admission or organisation, shall be the place 
where the event is actually held. 
(6) Where any services referred to in sub-section ( 3) or sub-section ( 4) or sub-section ( 5) is supplied 
at more than one location, including a location in the taxable territory, its place of supply shall be the 
location in the taxable territory. 
(7) Where the services referred to in sub-section ( 3) or sub-section ( 4) or sub-section ( 5) are supplied 
in more than one State or Union territory, the place of supply of such services shall be taken as being in 
each of the respective States or Union territories and the value of such supplies specific to each State or 
Union territory shall be in proportion to the value for services separately collected or determined in terms 
of the contract or agreement entered into in this regard or, in the absence of such contract or agreement, 
on such other basis as may be prescribed. 
(8) The place of supply of the following services shall be the location of the supplier of services, 
namely:–– 
(a) services supplied by a banking company, or a financial institution, or a non-banking financial 
company, to account holders; 
(b) intermediary services; 
(c) services consisting of hiring of means of transport, including yachts but excluding aircrafts 
and vessels, up to a period of one month. 
Explanation .––For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression,–– 
(a) “account” means an account bearing interest to the depositor, and includes a non-resident 
external account and a non-resident ordinary account; 
(b) “banking company” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it under clause ( a) of 
section 45A of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934); 
(c) ‘‘financial institution” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( c) of 
section 45-I of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934); 
(d) “non-banking financial company” means,–– 
(i) a financial institution which is a company; 
(ii) a non-banking institution which is a company and which has as its principal business 
the receiving of deposits, under any scheme or arrangement or in any other manner, or 
lending in any manner; or 
(iii) such other non-banking institution or class of such institutions, as the Reserve Bank 
of India may, with the previous approval of the Central Government and by notification in the 
Official Gazette, specify. 
(9) The place of supply of services of transportation of goods, other than by way of mail or courier, 
shall be the place of destination of such goods. 
(10) The place of supply in respect of passenger transportation services shall be the place where the 
passenger embarks on the conveyance for a continuous journey. 
(11) The place of supply of services provided on board a conveyance during the course of a passenger 
transport operation, including services intended to be wholly or substantially consumed while on board, 
shall be the first scheduled point of departure of that conveyance for the journey. 
(12) The place of supply of online information and database access or retrieval services shall be the 
location of the recipient of services. 13 Explanation .––For the purposes of this sub-section, person receiving such services shall be deemed to 
be located in the taxable territory, if any two of the following noncontradictory conditions are satisfied, 
namely:–– 
(a) the location of address presented by the recipient of services through internet is in the taxable 
territory; 
(b) the credit card or debit card or store value card or charge card or smart card or any other card 
by which the recipient of services settles payment has been issued in the taxable territory; 
(c) the billing address of the recipient of services is in the taxable territory; 
(d) the internet protocol address of the device used by the recipient of services is in the taxable 
territory; 
(e) the bank of the recipient of services in which the account used for payment is maintained is in 
the taxable territory; 
(f) the country code of the subscriber identity module card used by the recipient of services is of 
taxable territory; 
(g) the location of the fixed land line through which the service is received by the recipient is in 
the taxable territory. 
(13) In order to prevent double taxation or non-taxation of the supply of a service, or for the uniform 
application of rules, the Government shall have the power to notify any description of services or 
circumstances in which the place of supply shall be the place of effective use and enjoyment of a service. 
14. Special provision for payment of tax by a supplier of online information and database access 
or retrieval services .––(1) On supply of online information and database access or retrieval services by 
any person located in a non-taxable territory and received by a non-taxable online recipient, the supplier 
of services located in a non-taxable territory shall be the person liable for paying integrated tax on such 
supply of services: 
Provided that in the case of supply of online information and database access or retrieval services by 
any person located in a non-taxable territory and received by a non-taxable online recipient, an 
intermediary located in the non-taxable territory, who arranges or facilitates the supply of such services, 
shall be deemed to be the recipient of such services from the supplier of services in non-taxable territory 
and supplying such services to the non-taxable online recipient except when such intermediary satisfies 
the following conditions, namely:–– 
(a) the invoice or customer’s bill or receipt issued or made available by such intermediary taking 
part in the supply clearly identifies the service in question and its supplier in non-taxable territory; 
(b) the intermediary involved in the supply does not authorise the charge to the customer or take 
part in its charge which is that the intermediary neither collects or processes payment in any manner 
nor is responsible for the payment between the non-taxable online recipient and the supplier of such 
services; 
(c) the intermediary involved in the supply does not authorise delivery; and 
(d) the general terms and conditions of the supply are not set by the intermediary involved in the 
supply but by the supplier of services. 
(2) The supplier of online information and database access or retrieval services referred to in  
sub-section ( 1) shall, for payment of integrated tax, take a single registration under the Simplified 
Registration Scheme to be notified by the Government: 
Provided that any person located in the taxable territory representing such supplier for any purpose in 
the taxable territory shall get registered and pay integrated tax on behalf of the supplier: 
Provided further that if such supplier does not have a physical presence or does not have a 
representative for any purpose in the taxable territory, he may appoint a person in the taxable territory for 
the purpose of paying integrated tax and such person shall be liable for payment of such tax.  14 CHAPTER VI 
REFUND OF INTEGRATED TAX TO INTERNATIONAL TOURIST 
15. Refund of integrated tax paid on supply of goods to tourist leaving India .––The integrated tax 
paid by tourist leaving India on any supply of goods taken out of India by him shall be refunded in such 
manner and subject to such conditions and safeguards as may be prescribed. 
Explanation .––For the purposes of this section, the term “tourist” means a person not normally 
resident in India, who enters India for a stay of not more than six months for legitimate non-immigrant 
purposes.  
CHAPTER VII 
ZERO RATED SUPPLY 
16. Zero rated supply .––(1) “zero rated supply” means any of the following supplies of goods or 
services or both, namely:–– 
(a) export of goods or services or both; or 
(b) supply of goods or services or both to a Special Economic Zone developer or a Special 
Economic Zone unit. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 5) of section 17 of the Central Goods and Services Tax 
Act, credit of input tax may be availed for making zero-rated supplies, notwithstanding that such supply 
may be an exempt supply. 
(3) A registered person making zero rated supply shall be eligible to claim refund under either of the 
following options, namely:–– 
(a) he may supply goods or services or both under bond or Letter of Undertaking, subject to such 
conditions, safeguards and procedure as may be prescribed, without payment of integrated tax and 
claim refund of unutilised input tax credit; or 
(b) he may supply goods or services or both, subject to such conditions, safeguards and procedure 
as may be prescribed, on payment of integrated tax and claim refund of such tax paid on goods or 
services or both supplied,  
in accordance with the provisions of section 54 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act or the rules 
made thereunder.  
CHAPTER VIII 
APPORTIONMENT OF TAX AND SETTLEMENT OF FUNDS 
17. Apportionment of tax and settlement of funds .––(1) Out of the integrated tax paid to the 
Central Government,–– 
(a) in respect of inter-State supply of goods or services or both to an unregistered person or to a 
registered person paying tax under section 10 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act; 
(b) in respect of inter-State supply of goods or services or both where the registered person is not 
eligible for input tax credit; 
(c) in respect of inter-State supply of goods or services or both made in a financial year to a 
registered person, where he does not avail of the input tax credit within the specified period and thus 
remains in the integrated tax account after expiry of the due date for furnishing of annual return for 
such year in which the supply was made; 
(d) in respect of import of goods or services or both by an unregistered person or by a registered 
person paying tax under section 10 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act; 
(e) in respect of import of goods or services or both where the registered person is not eligible for 
input tax credit; 15 (f) in respect of import of goods or services or both made in a financial year by a registered 
person, where he does not avail of the said credit within the specified period and thus remains in the 
integrated tax account after expiry of the due date for furnishing of annual return for such year in 
which the supply was received,  
the amount of tax calculated at the rate equivalent to the central tax on similar intra-State supply shall be 
apportioned to the Central Government. 
(2) The balance amount of integrated tax remaining in the integrated tax account in respect of the 
supply for which an apportionment to the Central Government has been done under sub-section ( 1) shall 
be apportioned to the,–– 
(a) State where such supply takes place; and 
(b) Central Government where such supply takes place in a Union territory:  
Provided that where the place of such supply made by any taxable person cannot be determined 
separately, the said balance amount shall be apportioned to,–– 
(a) each of the States; and 
(b) Central Government in relation to Union territories,  
in proportion to the total supplies made by such taxable person to each of such States or Union territories, 
as the case may be, in a financial year: 
Provided further that where the taxable person making such supplies is not identifiable, the said 
balance amount shall be apportioned to all States and the Central Government in proportion to the amount 
collected as State tax or, as the case may be, Union territory tax, by the respective State or, as the case 
may be, by the Central Government during the immediately preceding financial year. 
1[(2A) The amount not apportioned under sub-section ( 1) and sub-section ( 2) may, for the time being, 
on the recommendations of the Council, be apportioned at the rate of fifty per cent. to the Central 
Government and fifty per cent. to the State Governments or the Union territories, as the case may be, on 
ad hoc  basis and shall be adjusted against the amount apportioned under the said sub-sections.] 
(3) The provisions of sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) relating to apportionment of integrated tax shall, mutatis 
mutandis , apply to the apportionment of interest, penalty and compounding amount realised in connection 
with the tax so apportioned. 
(4) Where an amount has been apportioned to the Central Government or a State Government under 
sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) or sub-section ( 3), the amount collected as integrated tax shall stand 
reduced by an amount equal to the amount so apportioned and the Central Government shall transfer to 
the central tax account or Union territory tax account, an amount equal to the respective amounts 
apportioned to the Central Government and shall transfer to the State tax account of the respective States 
an amount equal to the amount apportioned to that State, in such manner and within such time as may be 
prescribed. 
(5) Any integrated tax apportioned to a State or, as the case may be, to the Central Government on 
account of a Union territory, if subsequently found to be refundable to any person and refunded to such 
person, shall be reduced from the amount to be apportioned under this section, to such State, or Central 
Government on account of such Union territory, in such manner and within such time as may be 
prescribed. 
18. Transfer of input tax credit .––On utilisation of credit of integrated tax availed under this Act for 
payment of,–– 
(a) central tax in accordance with the provisions of sub-section ( 5) of section 49 of the Central 
Goods and Services Tax Act, the amount collected as integrated tax shall stand reduced by an amount 
equal to the credit so utilised and the Central Government shall transfer an amount equal to the 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2018, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-2-2019).  16 amount so reduced from the integrated tax account to the central tax account in such manner and 
within such time as may be prescribed; 
(b) Union territory tax in accordance with the provisions of section 9 of the Union Territory 
Goods and Services Tax Act, the amount collected as integrated tax shall stand reduced by an amount 
equal to the credit so utilised and the Central Government shall transfer an amount equal to the 
amount so reduced from the integrated tax account to the Union territory tax account in such manner 
and within such time as may be prescribed; 
(c) State tax in accordance with the provisions of the respective State Goods and Services Tax 
Act, the amount collected as integrated tax shall stand reduced by an amount equal to the credit so 
utilised and shall be apportioned to the appropriate State Government and the Central Government 
shall transfer the amount so apportioned to the account of the appropriate State Government in such 
manner and within such time as may be prescribed. 
Explanation .––For the purposes of this Chapter, “appropriate State” in relation to a taxable 
person, means the State or Union territory where he is registered or is liable to be registered under the 
provisions of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act.  
19. Tax wrongfully collected and paid to Central Government or State Government .––(1) A 
registered person who has paid integrated tax on a supply considered by him to be an inter-State supply, 
but which is subsequently held to be an intra-State supply, shall be granted refund of the amount of 
integrated tax so paid in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed. 
(2) A registered person who has paid central tax and State tax or Union territory tax, as the case may 
be, on a transaction considered by him to be an intra-State supply, but which is subsequently held to be an 
inter-State supply, shall not be required to pay any interest on the amount of integrated tax payable. 
CHAPTER IX 
MISCELLANEOUS
20. Application of provisions of Central Goods and Services Tax Act .––Subject to the provisions 
of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the provisions of Central Goods and Services Tax Act relating 
to,–– 
(i) scope of supply; 
(ii) composite supply and mixed supply; 
(iii) time and value of supply; 
(iv) input tax credit; 
(v) registration; 
(vi) tax invoice, credit and debit notes; 
(vii) accounts and records; 
(viii) returns, other than late fee; 
(ix) payment of tax; 
(x) tax deduction at source; 
(xi) collection of tax at source; 
(xii) assessment; 
(xiii) refunds; 
(xiv) audit; 
(xv) inspection, search, seizure and arrest; 
(xvi) demands and recovery; 
(xvii) liability to pay in certain cases; 17 (xviii) advance ruling; 
(xix) appeals and revision; 
(xx) presumption as to documents; 
(xxi) offences and penalties; 
(xxii) job work; 
(xxiii) electronic commerce; 
(xxiv) transitional provisions; and 
(xxv) miscellaneous provisions including the provisions relating to the imposition of interest and 
penalty,  
shall, mutatis mutandis , apply, so far as may be, in relation to integrated tax as they apply in relation to 
central tax as if they are enacted under this Act: 
Provided that in the case of tax deducted at source, the deductor shall deduct tax at the rate of two per 
cent. from the payment made or credited to the supplier: 
Provided further that in the case of tax collected at source, the operator shall collect tax at such rate 
not exceeding two per cent, as may be notified on the recommendations of the Council, of the net value of 
taxable supplies: 
Provided also that for the purposes of this Act, the value of a supply shall include any taxes, duties, 
cesses, fees and charges levied under any law for the time being in force other than this Act, and the 
Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to States) Act, if charged separately by the supplier: 
Provided also that in cases where the penalty is leviable under the Central Goods and Services Tax 
Act and the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act, the 
penalty leviable under this Act shall be the sum total of the said penalties.  
1[Provided also that where the appeal is to be filed before the Appellate Authority or the Appellate 
Tribunal, the maximum amount payable shall be fifty crore rupees and one hundred crore rupees 
respectively.] 
21. Import of services made on or after the appointed day.  –– Import of services made on or after 
the appointed day shall be liable to tax under the provisions of this Act regardless of whether the 
transactions for such import of services had been initiated before the appointed day: 
Provided that if the tax on such import of services had been paid in full under the existing law, no tax 
shall be payable on such import under this Act: 
Provided further that if the tax on such import of services had been paid in part under the existing law, 
the balance amount of tax shall be payable on such import under this Act. 
Explanation .––For the purposes of this section, a transaction shall be deemed to have been initiated 
before the appointed day if either the invoice relating to such supply or payment, either in full or in part, 
has been received or made before the appointed day. 
22. Power to make rules .––(1) The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by 
notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the Government may 
make rules for all or any of the matters which by this Act are required to be, or may be, prescribed or in 
respect of which provisions are to be or may be made by rules. 
(3) The power to make rules conferred by this section shall include the power to give retrospective 
effect to the rules or any of them from a date not earlier than the date on which the provisions of this Act 
come into force. 
1. The proviso ins. by Act 32 of 2018, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1-2-2019).   18 (4) Any rules made under sub-section ( 1) may provide that a contravention thereof shall be liable to a 
penalty not exceeding ten thousand rupees.  
23. Power to make regulations .––The Board may, by notification, make regulations consistent with 
this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
24. Laying of rules, regulations and notifications .––Every rule made by the Government, every 
regulation made by the Board and every notification issued by the Government under this Act, shall be 
laid, as soon as may be, after it is made or issued, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or in the 
notification, as the case may be, or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation or the notification should 
not be made, the rule or regulation or notification, as the case may be, shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or 
regulation or notification, as the case may be. 
25. Removal of difficulties .––(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any provision of this Act, 
the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by a general or a special order published in 
the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or the rules or 
regulations made thereunder, as may be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the said 
difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years from the date of 
commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament. 
--------------------------The Mental Healthcare Act, 2017--------------------------
1 
 THE MENTAL HEALTHCARE ACT, 2017  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commence ment . 
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
MENTAL ILLNESS AND CAPACITY TO MAKE MENTAL HEALTHCARE AND TREATMENT DECISIONS  
3. Determination of mental illness.  
4. Capacity to make mental healthcare and treatment decisions.  
CHAPTER III  
ADVANCE DIRECTIVE  
5. Advance directive.  
6. Manner of making advance directive.  
7. Maintenance of online register . 
8. Revocation, amendment or cancellation of advance directive . 
9. Advance directive not to apply to emergency treatment . 
10. Duty to follow advance directive . 
11. Power to review, alter, modify or cancel advance directive . 
12. Review of advance directives.  
13. Liability of medical health professional in relation to advance directive . 
CHAPTER IV  
NOMINATED REPRESENTATIVE  
14. Appointment and revocation of nominated representative.  
15. Nominated representative of minor.  
16. Revocation, alteration, etc., of nominated representative by Board.  
17. Duties of nominated representative.  
CHAPTE R V 
RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH MENTAL ILLNESS  
18. Right to access mental  health care.  
19. Right to community living.  
20. Right to protection from cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment.  
21. Right to equality and non -discrimination.  
22. Right to information.  
23. Right to confidentiality.  
24. Restriction on release of information in respect of mental illness . 
25. Right to access medical records.  
26. Right to personal contacts and communication.  
27. Right to legal aid.  
28. Right to make complaints about deficiencies in provision of services.  
CHAPTER VI  
DUTIES OF APPROPRIATE GOVERNMENT  
29. Promotion of mental health and preventive programmes.  2 
  
SECTIONS  
30. Creating awareness about mental health and illness and reducing stigma associated with mental 
illness.  
31. Appropriate Government to take measures as regard to human resource development and 
training, etc . 
32. Co-ordination within appropriate Government . 
CHAPTER VII  
CENTRAL  MENTAL  HEALTH  AUTHORITY  
33. Establishment of Central Authority.  
34. Composition of Central Authority.  
35. Term of office, salaries and allowances of chairperson and members.  
36. Resignation.  
37. Filling of vacancies.  
38. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Central Authority.  
39. Member not to participate in meetings in certain cases.  
40. Officers and other employees of Central Authority.  
41. Functions of chie f executive officer of Central Authority.  
42. Transfer of assets, liabilities of Central Authority.  
43. Functions of Central Authority.  
44. Meetings of Central Authority.  
CHAPTER VII I 
STATE  MENTAL HEALTH  AUTHORITY  
45. Establishment of State Authority.  
46. Composition of State  Authority.  
47. Term of office, salaries and allowances of chairperson and other members.  
48. Resignation.  
49. Filling of vacancies.  
50. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of State Authority.  
51. Member not to participate in meetings in certain cases.  
52. Officers and  other employees of State Authority.  
53. Functions of chief executive officer of State Authority.  
54. Transfer of assets, liabilities of State Authority.  
55. Functions of State Authority.  
56. Meetings of State Authority.  
CHAPTER IX  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
57. Grants by Ce ntral Government to Central Authority.  
58. Central Mental Health Authority Fund.  
59. Accounts and audit of Central Authority.  
60. Annual report of Central Authority.  
61. Grants by State Government.  
62. State Mental Health Authority Fund.  
63. Accounts and audit of State Authority.  
64. Annual report of State Authority.  
CHAPTER X  
MENTAL HEALTH ESTABLISHMENTS  
65. Registration of mental health establishment.  
66. Procedure for registration, inspection and inquiry of mental health establishments.  
67. Audit of mental health establishment.  
68. Inspection and inquiry.  3 
 SECTIONS  
69. Appeal to High Court against order of Authority.  
70. Certificates, fees and register of mental health establishments.  
71. Maintenance of register of mental health establishment in digital format.  
72. Duty of mental health establishment to display inf ormation.  
CHAPTER XI  
MENTAL HEALTH  REVIEW  BOARDS  
73. Constitution of Mental Health Review Boards.  
74. Composition of Board.  
75. Terms and conditions of service of chairperson and members of Board.  
76. Decisions of Authority and Board.  
77. Applications to Board.  
78. Proceedings before Board to be judicial proceedings.   
79. Meetings . 
80. Proceedings before Board.  
81. Central Authority to appoint Expert Committee to prepare guidance document.  
82. Powers and functions of Board.  
83. Appeal to High Court against order of Authority or Board.  
84. Grants by Central Government.  
CHAPTER XII  
ADMISSION, TREATMENT AND DISCHARGE  
85. Admission of person with mental illness as independent patient in mental health establishment . 
86. Independent admission and treatment.  
87. Admission of minor.  
88. Discharge of independent patients.  
89. Admission and treatment of persons with mental illness, with high support needs, in mental 
health establishment, up to  thirty days (supported admission ).  
90. Admission and treatment of persons with mental illness, with high support needs, in mental 
health est ablishment, beyond thirty days (supported admission beyond thirty days).  
91. Leave of absence.  
92. Absence without leave or discharge.  
93. Transfer of persons with mental illness from one mental health establishment to another mental 
health establishment.  
94. Emergency tr eatment.  
95. Prohibited procedures.  
96. Restriction on psychosurgery for persons with mental illness.  
97. Restraints and seclusion.  
98. Discharge planning.  
99. Research.  
CHAPTER XIII  
RESPONSIBI LITIES OF OTHER AGENCIES  
100.  Duties of police officers in respect of persons with mental illness.  
101.  Report to Magistrate of person with mental illness in private residence who is ill -treated or 
neglected.  
102.  Conveying or admitting person with mental illness to mental health establishment by 
Magistrate.  
103.  Prisoners with mental illness.  
104.  Persons in custodial institutions.  
105.  Question of mental illness in judicial process.  
CHAPTER XIV  
RESTRICTION TO DISCHARGE FUNCTIONS BY PROFESSIONALS NOT COVERED PROFESSION  
106.  Restriction to discharge functions by professionals not covered by profession.  4 
 CHAPT ER XV  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
SECTIONS  
107. Penalties for establishing or maintaining mental health establishment in contravention of   
provisions of this Act.  
108.  Punishment for contravention of provisions of the Act or rules or regulations made thereunder.  
109.  Offences by companies.  
CHAPTER XVI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
110.  Power to call for information.  
111.  Power of Central Government to issue directions  
112.  Power of Central Government to supersede Central Authority.  
113.  Power of State Government to supersede State Authority.  
114.  Special  provisions for States in north -east and hill States.  
115.  Presumption of severe stress in case of attempt to commit suicide.  
116.  Bar of jurisdiction.  
117.  Transitory provisions.  
118.  Chairperson, members and staff of Authority and Board to be public servants.  
119.  Protection of action taken in good faith.  
120.  Act to have overriding effect.  
121.  Power of Central Government and State Governments to make rules.  
122.  Power of Central Authority to make regulations.  
123.  Power of State Authority to make regulations.  
124.  Laying of rules and  regulations.  
125.  Power to remove difficulties.  
126.  Repeal and saving.  
 
 
  5 
 THE MENTAL HEALTHCARE ACT, 2017  
ACT NO. 10 OF 2017  
[7th April, 2017.]  
An Act to provide for mental healthcare and services for persons with mental illness and to 
protect, promote and fulfil the rights of such persons during delivery of mental healthcare 
and services and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  the Convention on Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its Optional Protocol was adopted 
on the 13th D ecember, 2006 at United Nations Headquarters in New York and came into force on the           
3rd May, 2008;  
AND WHEREAS India has signed and ratified the said Convention on the 1st day of October, 2007;  
AND WHEREAS  it is necessary to align and harmonise the existing laws with the said Convention.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1.  Short title, extent and commence ment. —(1) This Act may be called the Mental Healthcare Act, 
2017.  
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint; or on the date of completion of the period of nine months from the date on 
which th e Mental Healthcare Act, 2017 receives the assent of the President.  
2. Definitions. —(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —  
(a) “advance  directive ” means an advance directive made by a person under section 5;  
(b) “appropriate Government ” means, —  
(i) in relation to a mental health establishment established, owned or controlled by the Central 
Government or the Administrator of a Union territory having no legislature, the Central 
Government;  
(ii) in relation to a mental health establishment , other than an establishment referred to in         
sub-clause ( i), established, owned or controlled within the territory of — 
(A) a State, the State Government;  
(B) a Union territory having legislature, the Government of that Union territory;  
(c) “Authority ” means the Central Mental Health Authority or the State Mental Health Authority, 
as the case may be;  
(d) “Board ” means the Mental Health Review Board constituted by the State Authority under                
sub-section ( 1) of section 73  in such ma nner as may be prescribed;  
(e) “care-giver ” means a person who resides with a person with mental illness and is responsible for 
providing care to that person and includes a relative or any other person who performs this function, 
either free or with remune ration;  
(f) “Central Authority ” means the Central Mental Health Authority constituted under                         
section 33;  
                                                   
1. 29th May, 2018, vide Notification No. S.O. 2173(E), dated 29 th May 2018, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 6 
  
(g) “clinical psychologist ” means a person — 
(i) having a recognised qualification in Clinical Psychology from an institution approved and 
recognised, by the Rehabilitation Council of India, constituted under section 3 of the Rehabilitation 
Council of India Act, 1992  (34 of 1992) ; or 
(ii) having a Post-Graduate  degree in Psychology or Clinical Psychology or Applied Psychology 
and a Master of Philosophy in Clinical Psychology or Medical and Social Psychology obtained after 
completion of a full time course of two years which includes supervised clinical training from any 
University recognised by the University Grants Commission esta blished under the University Grants 
Commission Act, 1956  (3 of 1956)  and approved and recognised by the Rehabilitation Council of 
India Act, 1992  (34 of 1992)  or such recognised qualifications as may be prescribed;  
(h) “family ” means a group of persons related by blood, adoption or marriage;  
(i) “informed consent ” means consent given for a specific intervention, without any force, undue 
influence, fraud, threat, mistake or misrepresentation, and obtained after disclosing to a person adequate 
information including risks and benefits of, and alternatives to, the spec ific intervention in a language 
and manner understood by the person;  
(j) “least restrictive alternative ” or “least restrictive environment ” or “less restrictive option ” 
means offering an option for treatment or a setting for treatment which — 
(i) meets the person's treatment needs; and  
(ii) imposes the least restriction on the person's rights;  
(k) “local authority ” means a Municipal Corporation or Municipal Council, or Zilla Parishad, or 
Nagar Panchayat, or Panchayat, by whatever name called, and includes such other authority or body 
having administrative control over the mental health establishment or empowered und er any law for the 
time being in force, to function as a local authority in any city or town or village;  
(l) “Magistrate ” means — 
(i) in relation to a metropolitan area within the meaning of clause ( k) of section 2 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2  of 1974), a Metropolitan Magistrate;  
(ii) in relation to any other area, the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Sub -divisional Judicial Magistrate 
or such other Judicial Magistrate of the first class as the State Government may, by notification, 
empower to perfor m the functions of a Magistrate under this Act;  
(m) “medical officer in charge ” in relation to any mental health establishment means the psychiatrist 
or medical practitioner who, for the time being, is in charge of that mental health establishment;  
(n) “medical practitioner ” means a person who possesses a re cognised medical qualification — 
(i) as defined in clause ( h) of section 2 of the I ndian Medical Council Act, 1956  (102 of 1956), 
and whose name has been entered in the State Medical Register, as defined in clause ( k) of that 
section; or  
(ii) as defined in clause ( h) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Indian Medicine Central Council 
Act, 1970 (48 of 1970), and whose name has been entered in a State Register of Indian Medicine, as 
defined in clause ( j) of sub -section ( 1) of that section; or  
(iii) as defined in clause ( g) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Homoeopathy Central Council 
Act, 1973 (59 of 1973), and whose name has been entered in a State Register of Homoeopathy, as 
defined in clause ( i) of sub-section ( 1) of that section;  
(o) “Mental healthcare ” includes analysis and diagnosis of a person's mental condition and treatment 
as well as care and rehabilitation of such person for his mental illness or suspected mental illness;  
(p) “mental health establishment ” means any health establishment, including Ayurveda, Yoga and 
Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy establishment, by whatever name called, either wholly or 
partly, meant for the care of persons with mental illness, established, owned, c ontrolled or maintained by 7 
 the appropriate Government, local authority, trust, whether private or public, corporation, co -operative 
society, organisation or any other entity or person, where persons with mental illness are admitted and 
reside at, or kept i n, for care, treatment, convalescence and rehabilitation, either temporarily or 
otherwise; and includes any general hospital or general nursing home established or maintained by the 
appropriate Government, local authority, trust, whether private or public,  corporation, co -operative 
society, organisation or any other entity or person; but does not include a family residential place where 
a person with mental illness resides with his relatives or friends;  
(q) “mental health nurse ” means a person with a diplom a or degree in general nursing or diploma or 
degree in psychiatric nursing recognised by the Nursing Council of India established under the Nursing 
Council of India Act, 1947 (38 of 1947) and registered as such with the relevant nursing council in the 
State; 
(r) “mental health professional ” means — 
(i) a psychiatrist as defined in clause ( y); or 
(ii) a professional registered with the concerned State Authority under section 55; or  
(iii) a professional having a post -graduate degree (Ayurveda) in Mano Vigyan Avum Manas 
Roga or a post -graduate degree (Homoeopathy) in Psychiatry or a post -graduate degree (Unani) in 
Moalijat (Nafasiyatt) or a post -graduate degree (Siddha) in Sirappu Maruthuvam;  
(s) “mental illness ” means a substantial disorder of thinking, mood, perception, orientation or 
memory that grossly impairs judgment, behaviour, capacity to recognise reality or ability to meet the 
ordinary demands of life, mental conditions associated with the abuse of alcohol and drugs, but does not 
include mental retarda tion which is a condition of arrested or incomplete development of mind of a 
person, specially characterised by sub normality of intelligence;  
(t) “minor ” means a person who has not completed the age of eighteen years;  
(u) “notification ” means a notificati on published in the Official Gazette and the expression notify 
shall be construed accordingly;  
(v) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(w) “prisoner with mental illness ” means a person with mental illness who is an under -trial or 
convicted of an offence and detained in a jail or prison;  
(x) “psychiatric social worker ” means a person having a post -graduate degree in Social Work and a 
Master of Philosophy in Psychiatric Social Work obtained after completion of a full time course of two  
years which includes supervised clinical training from any University recognised by the University 
Grants Commission established under the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 (3 of 1956) or such 
recognised qualifications, as may be prescribed;  
(y) “psychiatrist ” means a medical practitioner possessing a post -graduate degree or diploma in 
psychiatry awarded by an university recognised by the University Grants Commission established under 
the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 (3 of 1956), or award ed or recognised by the National 
Board of Examinations and included in the First Schedule to the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956         
(102 of 1956),  or recognised by the Medical Council of India, constituted under the Indian Medical 
Council Act, 1956 an d includes, in relation to any State, any medical officer who having regard to his 
knowledge and experience in psychiatry, has been declared by the Government of that State to be a 
psychiatrist for the purposes of this Act;  
(z) “regulations ” means regulati ons made under this Act;  
(za) “relative ” means any person related to the person with mental illness by blood, marriage or 
adoption;  
(zb) “State Authority ” means the State Mental Health Authority established under section 45.  8 
 (2) The words and expressions u sed and not defined in this Act but defined in the Indian Medical 
Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956) or the Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970 (48 of 1970) and not 
inconsistent with this Act shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in thos e Acts.  
CHAPTER II  
MENTAL ILLNESS AND CAPACITY TO MAKE MENTAL HEALTHCARE AND TREATMENT DECISIONS  
3. Determination of mental illness .—(1) Mental illness shall be determined in accordance with such 
nationally or internationally accepted medical standards (including the latest edition of the International 
Classification of Disease of the World Health Organisation) as may be notified by the Central Government.  
(2) No person or authority shall classify a person as a person with mental illness, except for purp oses 
directly relating to the treatment of the mental illness or in other matters as covered under this Act or any 
other law for the time being in force.  
(3) Mental illness of a person shall not be determined on the basis of, — 
(a) political, economic or so cial status or membership of a cultural, racial or religious group, or for 
any other reason not directly relevant to mental health status of the person;  
(b) non -conformity with moral, social, cultural, work or political values or religious beliefs prevaili ng 
in a person's community.  
(4) Past treatment or hospitalisation in a mental health establishment though relevant, shall not by itself 
justify any present or future determination of the person's mental illness.  
(5) The determination of a person's mental illness shall alone not imply or be taken to mean that the 
person is of unsound mind unless he has been declared as such by a competent court.  
4. Capacity to make mental healthcare and treatment decisions .—(1) Every person, including a 
person with mental i llness shall be deemed to have capacity to make decisions regarding his mental 
healthcare or treatment if such person has ability to — 
(a) understand the information that is relevant to take a decision on the treatment or admission or 
personal assistance; o r 
(b) appreciate any reasonably foreseeable consequence of a decision or lack of decision on the 
treatment or admission or personal assistance; or  
(c) communicate the decision under sub -clause ( a) by means of speech, expression, gesture or any 
other means.  
(2) The information referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be given to a person using simple language, 
which such person understands or in sign language or visual aids or any other means to enable him to 
understand the information.  
(3) Where a person makes a decision regarding his mental healthcare or treatment which is perceived by 
others as inappropriate or wrong, that by itself, shall not mean that the person does not have the capacity to 
make mental healthcare or treatment decision, so long as the person  has the capacity to make mental 
healthcare or treatment decision under sub -section ( 1). 
CHAPTER III  
ADVANCE DIRECTIVE  
5. Advance directive .—(1) Every person, who is not a minor, shall have a right to make an advance 
directive in writing, specifying any or  all of the following, namely: — 
(a) the way the person wishes to be cared for and treated for a mental illness;  
(b) the way the person wishes not to be cared for and treated for a mental illness;  9 
 (c) the individual or individuals, in order of precedence, h e wants to appoint as his nominated 
representative as provided under section 14.  
(2) An advance directive under sub -section ( 1) may be made by a person irrespective of his past mental 
illness or treatment for the same.  
(3) An advance directive made under s ub-section ( 1), shall be invoked only when such person ceases to 
have capacity to make mental healthcare or treatment decisions and shall remain effective until such person 
regains capacity to make mental healthcare or treatment decisions.  
(4) Any decision  made by a person while he has the capacity to make mental healthcare and treatment 
decisions shall over -ride any previously written advance directive by such person.  
(5) Any advance directive made contrary to any law for the time being in force shall be ab initio  void.  
6. Manner of making advance directive .—An advance directive shall be made in the manner as may 
be specified by the regulations made by the Central Authority.  
7. Maintenance of online registe r.—Subject to the provisions contained in clause ( a) of                     
sub-section ( 1) of section 82 , every Board shall maintain an online register of all advance directives 
registered with it and make them available to the concerned mental health professionals as and when 
required.  
8. Revocation, amendment or cancellation of advance directive .—(1) An advance directive made 
under section 6 may be revoked, amended or cancelled by the person who made it at any time.  
(2) The procedure for revoking, amending or cancelling an advance directive shall be t he same as for 
making an advance directive under section 6.  
9. Advance directive not to apply to emergency treatment .—The advance directive shall not 
apply to the emergency treatment given under section 94 to a person who made the advance directive.  
10. Duty to follow advance directive .—It shall be the duty of every medical officer in charge of a 
mental health establishment and the psychiatrist in charge of a person's treatment to propose or give 
treatment to a person with mental illness, in accordance wi th his valid advance directive, subject to 
section 11.  
11. Power to review, alter, modify or cancel advance directive .—(1) Where a mental health 
professional or a relative or a care -giver of a person desires not to follow an advance directive while 
treating a person with mental illness, such mental health professional or the relative or the care -giver of 
the person shall make an application to the concerned Board to review, alter, modify or cancel the 
advance directive.  
(2) Upon receipt of the applic ation under sub -section ( 1), the Board shall, after giving an opportunity 
of hearing to all concerned parties (including the person whose advance directive is in question), either 
uphold, modify, alter or cancel the advance directive after taking into cons ideration the following, 
namely: — 
(a) whether the advance directive was made by the person out of his own free will and free from 
force, undue influence or coercion; or  
(b) whether the person intended the advance directive to apply to the present circumsta nces, 
which may be different from those anticipated; or  
(c) whether the person was sufficiently well informed to make the decision; or  
(d) whether the person had capacity to make decisions relating to his mental healthcare or 
treatment when such advanced d irective was made; or  
(e) whether the content of the advance directive is contrary to other laws or constitutional 
provisions.  10 
 (3) The person writing the advance directive and his nominated representative shall have a duty to 
ensure that the medical officer in charge of a mental health establishment or a medical practitioner or a 
mental health professional, as the case may be, has access to the advance directive when required.  
(4) The legal guardian shall have right to make an advance directive in wri ting in respect of a minor 
and all the provisions relating to advance directive, mutatis mutandis , shall apply to such minor till such 
time he attains majority.  
12. Review of advance directives. —(1) The Central Authority shall regularly and periodically 
review the use of advance directives and make recommendations in respect thereof.  
(2) The Central Authority in its review under sub -section ( 1) shall give specific consideration to the 
procedure for making an advance directive and also examine whether the ex isting procedure protects the 
rights of persons with mental illness.  
(3) The Central Authority may modify the procedure for making an advance directive or make 
additional regulations regarding the procedure for advance directive to protect the rights of pe rsons with 
mental illness.  
13. Liability of medical health professional in relation to advance directive. —(1) A medical 
practitioner or a mental health professional shall not be held liable for any unforeseen consequences on 
following a valid advance direc tive. 
(2) The medical practitioner or mental health professional shall not be held liable for not following a 
valid advance directive, if he has not been given a copy of the valid advance directive.  
CHAPTER IV  
NOMINATED REPRESENTATIVE  
14. Appointment and revocation of nominated representative. —(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 5, every person who is not a minor, shall have a 
right to appoint a nominated representative.  
(2) The nomination under sub -section ( 1) shall be made in writing on plain paper with the person's 
signature or thumb impression of the person referred to in that sub -section.  
(3) The person appointed as the nominated representative shall not be a minor, be competent to 
discharge the duties or perform the functions assigned to him under this Act, and give his consent in 
writing to the mental health professional to discharge his duties and perform the functions assigned to 
him under this Act.  
(4) Where no nominated representative is appointed by a person under sub -section ( 1), the following 
persons for the purposes of this Act in the order of precedence shall be deemed to be the nominated 
representative of a person with mental illness, namely: — 
(a) the individual appointed as the nominated represe ntative in the advance directive under  
clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 5; or  
(b) a relative, or if not available or not willing to be the nominated representative of such person; 
or 
(c) a care -giver, or if not available or not willing to be the nominated representative of such 
person; or  
(d) a suitable person appointed as such by the concerned Board; or  
(e) if no such person is available to be appointed as a nominated representative, the Board shall 
appoint the Director, Department of Social Welf are, or his designated representative, as the 
nominated representative of the person with mental illness:  
Provided that a person representing an organisation registered under the Societies Registration Act, 
1860 (21 of 1860) or any other law for the time being in force, working for persons with mental illness, 11 
 may temporarily be engaged by the mental health professional to discharge the duties of a nominated 
representative pending appointment of a nominated representative by the concerned Board.  
(5) The re presentative of the organisation, referred to in the proviso to sub -section ( 4), may make a 
written application to the medical officer in -charge of the mental health establishment or the psychiatrist 
in-charge of the person's treatment, and such medical of ficer or psychiatrist, as the case may be, shall 
accept him as the temporary nominated representative, pending appointment of a nominated 
representative by the concerned Board.  
(6) A person who has appointed any person as his nominated representative under  this section may 
revoke or alter such appointment at any time in accordance with the procedure laid down for making an 
appointment of nominated representative under sub -section ( 1). 
(7) The Board may, if it is of the opinion that it is in the interest of the person with mental illness to 
do so, revoke an appointment made by it under this section, and appoint a different representative under 
this section.  
(8) The appointment of a nominated representative, or the inability of a person with mental illness to 
appoint a nominated representative, shall not be construed as the lack of capacity of the person to take 
decisions about his mental healthcare or treatment.  
(9) All persons with mental illness shall have capacity to make mental healthcare or treatment 
decisions but may require varying levels of support from their nominated representative to make 
decisions.   
15. Nominated representative of minor .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 14, in 
case of minors, the legal guardian shall be their nominated representative, unless the concerned Board 
orders otherwise under sub -section ( 2). 
(2) Where on an application made to the concerned Board, by a mental health professional or any 
other person acting in the best interest of the minor, and on evide nce presented before it, the concerned  
Board is of the opinion that, — 
(a) the legal guardian is not acting in the best interests of the minor; or  
(b) the legal guardian is otherwise not fit to act as the nominated representative of the minor,          
it may appoint, any suitable individual who is willing to act as such, the nominated representative of the 
minor with mental illness:  
Provided that in case no individual is available for appointment as a nominated representative, the 
Board shall appoint the Di rector in the Department of Social Welfare of the State in which such Board is 
located, or his nominee, as the nominated representative of the minor with mental illness.  
16. Revocation, alteration, etc., of nominated representative by Board .—The Board, on an 
application made to it by the person with mental illness, or by a relative of such person, or by the 
psychiatrist responsible for the care of such person, or by the medical officer in -charge of the mental 
health establishment where the individual is adm itted or proposed to be admitted, may revoke, alter or 
modify the order made under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 4) of section 14 or under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 15.  
17. Duties of nominated representative .—While fulfilling his duties under this Act, the nominated 
representative shall — 
(a) consider the current and past wishes, the life history, values, cultural background and the best 
interests of the person with mental illness;  
(b) give particular credence to the views of the person with mental illness to the extent that the 
person understands the nature of the decisions under consideration;  
(c) provide support to the person with mental illness in making treatment decisions under            
section 89 or section 90;  12 
 (d) have right to seek information on dia gnosis and treatment to provide adequate support to the 
person with mental illness;  
(e) have access to the family or home based rehabilitation services as provided under clause ( c) of 
sub-section ( 4) of section 18 on behalf of and for the benefit of the pe rson with mental illness;  
(f) be involved in discharge planning under section 98;  
(g) apply to the mental health establishment for admission under section 87 or section 89 or 
section 90;  
(h) apply to the concerned Board on behalf of the person with mental illness for discharge under 
section 87 or section 89 or section 90;  
(i) apply to the concerned Board against violation of rights of the person with mental illness in a 
mental health establishment;  
(j) appoint a suitable attendant under sub -section ( 5) or s ub-section ( 6) of section 87;  
(k) have the right to give or withhold consent for research under circumstances mentioned under 
sub-section ( 3) of section 99.  
CHAPTER V  
RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH MENTAL ILLNESS  
18. Right to access mental health care.—(1) Every person shall have a right to access mental 
healthcare and treatment from mental health services run or funded by the appropriate Government.  
(2) The right to access mental healthcare and treatment shall mean mental health services of 
affordable cost, of go od quality, available in sufficient quantity, accessible geographically, without 
discrimination on the basis of gender, sex, sexual orientation, religion, culture, caste, social or political 
beliefs, class, disability or any other basis and provided in a m anner that is acceptable to persons with 
mental illness and their families and care -givers.  
(3) The appropriate Government shall make sufficient provision as may be necessary, for a range of 
services required by persons with mental illness.  
(4) Without pre judice to the generality of range of services under sub -section ( 3), such services shall 
include — 
(a) provision of acute mental healthcare services such as outpatient and inpatient services;  
(b) provision of half -way homes, sheltered accommodation, support ed accommodation as may be 
prescribed;  
(c) provision for mental health services to support family of person with mental illness or home 
based rehabilitation;  
(d) hospital and community based rehabilitation establishments and services as may be 
prescribed;  
(e) provision for child mental health services and old age mental health services.  
(5) The  appropriate Government shall, — 
(a) integrate mental health services into general healthcare services at all levels  of healthcare 
including primary, secondary and ter tiary healthcare and in all health programmes run by the 
appropriate Government;  
(b) provide treatment in a manner, which supports persons with mental illness to live in the 
community and with their families;  13 
 (c) ensure that the long term care in a mental health establishment for treatment of mental illness 
shall be used only in exceptional circumstances, for as short a duration as possible, and only as a last 
resort when appropriate community based treatment has been tried and shown to have failed;  
(d) ens ure that no person with mental illness (including children and older persons) shall be 
required to travel long distances to access mental health services and such services shall be available 
close to a place where a person with mental illness resides;  
(e) ensure that as a minimum, mental health services run or funded by Government shall be 
available in each district;  
(f) ensure, if minimum mental health services specified under sub -clause ( e) of this sub-section 
are not available in the district where a per son with mental illness resides, that the person with 
mental illness is entitled to access any other mental health service in the district and the costs of 
treatment at such establishments in that district will be borne by the appropriate Government:  
Provi ded that till such time the services under this sub -section are made available in a health 
establishment run or funded by the appropriate Government, the appropriate Government shall make 
rules regarding reimbursement of costs of treatment at such mental h ealth establishment.  
(6) The appropriate Government shall make available a range of appropriate mental health services 
specified under sub -section ( 4) of section 18 at all general hospitals run or funded by such Government 
and basic and emergency mental healthcare services shall be available at all community health centres 
and upwards in the public health system run or funded by such Government.  
(7) Persons with mental illness living below the poverty line whether or not in possession of a below 
poverty l ine card, or who are destitute or homeless shall be entitled to mental health treatment and 
services free of any charge and at no financial cost at all mental health establishments run or funded by 
the appropriate Government and at other mental health esta blishments designated by it.  
(8) The appropriate Government shall ensure that the mental health services shall be of equal quality 
to other general health services and no discrimination be made in quality of services provided to persons 
with mental illness . 
(9) The minimum quality standards of mental health services shall be as specified by regulations 
made by the State Authority.  
(10) Without prejudice to the generality of range of services under sub -section ( 3) of section 18, the 
appropriate Government shall notify Essential Drug List and all medicines on the Essential Drug List 
shall be made available free of cost to all persons with mental illness at all times at health 
establishments run or funded by the appropriate Government starting from Community Health Centres 
and upwards in the public health system:  
Provided that where the health professional of ayurveda, yoga, unani, siddha, homoeopathy or 
naturopathy systems recognised by the Central Government are available in any health establishment, 
the ess ential medicines from any similar list relating to the appropriate ayurv eda, yoga, unani, siddha, 
homoeopathy or naturopathy systems shall also be made available free of cost to all persons with mental 
illness.  
(11) The appropriate Government shall take me asures to ensure that necessary budgetary provisions 
in terms of adequacy, priority, progress and equity are made for effective implementation of the 
provisions of this section.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of sub -section ( 11), the expressions — 
(i) “adequ acy” means in terms of how much is enough to offset inflation;  
(ii) “priority ” means in terms of compared to other budget heads;  
(iii) “equity ” means in terms of fair allocation of resources taking into account the health, social 
and economic burden of mental illness on individuals, their families and care -givers;  14 
 (iv) “progress ” means in terms of indicating an improvement in the State's response . 
19. Right to community living .—(1) Every person with ment al illness shall, — 
(a) have a right to live in, be part of and not be segregated from society; and  
(b) not continue to remain in a mental health establishment merely because he does not have a 
family or is not accepted by his family or is homeless or due to absence of community based 
facilities.  
(2) Where it is not possible for a mentally ill person to live with his family or relatives, or where a 
mentally ill person has been abandoned by his family or relatives, the appropriate Government shall 
provide support as appropriate including legal aid and to facilitate exercising his right to family home 
and living in the family home.  
(3) The appropriate Government shall, within a reasonable period, provide for or support the 
establishment of less restrictive community based establishments including half -way homes, group 
homes and the like for persons who no longer require treatment in more restrictive mental health 
establishments such as long stay me ntal hospitals.  
20. Right to protection from cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment .—(1) Every person with 
mental illness shall have a right to live with dignity.  
(2) Every person with mental illness shall be protected from cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment 
in any mental health establishment and shall have the following rights, namely: — 
(a) to live in safe and hygienic environment;  
(b) to have adequate sanitary conditions;  
(c) to have reasonable facilities for leisure, recreation, education and reli gious practices;  
(d) to privacy;  
(e) for proper clothing so as to protect such person from exposure of his body to maintain his 
dignity;  
(f) to not be forced to undertake work in a mental health establishment and to receive appropriate 
remuneration for wor k when undertaken;  
(g) to have adequate provision for preparing for living in the community;  
(h) to have adequate provision for wholesome food, sanitation, space and access to articles of 
personal hygiene, in particular, women's personal hygiene be adequat ely addressed by providing 
access to items that may be required during menstruation;  
(i) to not be subject to compulsory tonsuring (shaving of head hair);  
(j) to wear own personal clothes if so wished and to not be forced to wear uniforms provided by  
the e stablishment; and  
(k) to be protected from all forms of physical, verbal, emotional and sexual abuse.  
21. Right to equality and non -discrimination .—(1) Every person with mental illness shall be treated 
as equal to persons with physical illness in the provision of all healthcare which shall  include the following, 
namely: — 
(a) there shall be no discrimination on any basis including gender, sex, sexual orientation, religion, 
culture, caste, social or political beliefs, class or disability;  
(b) emergency f acilities and emergency services for mental illness shall be of the same quality and 
availability as those provided to persons with physical illness;  
(c) persons with mental illness shall be entitled to the use of ambulance services in the same manner, 
extent and quality as provided to persons with physical illness;  15 
 (d) living conditions in health establishments shall be of the same manner, extent and quality as 
provided to persons with physical illness; and  
(e) any other health services provided to persons  with physical illness shall be provided in same 
manner, extent and quality to persons with mental illness.  
(2) A child under the age of three years of a woman receiving care, treatment or rehabilitation at a 
mental health establishment shall ordinarily no t be separated from her during her stay in such establishment:  
Provided that where the treating Psychiatrist, based on his examination of the woman, and if appropriate, 
on information provided by others, is of the opinion that there is risk of harm to the child from the woman 
due to her mental illness or it is in the interest and safety of the child, the child shall be temporarily 
separated from the woman during her stay at the mental health establishment:  
Provided further that the woman shall continue to h ave access to the child under such supervision of the 
staff of the establishment or her family, as may be appropriate, during the period of separation.  
(3) The decision to separate the woman from her child shall be reviewed every fifteen days during the 
woman's stay in the mental health establishment and separation shall be terminated as soon as conditions 
which required the separation no longer exist:  
Provided that any separation permitted as per the assessment of a mental health professional, if it 
exceed s thirty days at a stretch, shall be required to be approved by the respective Authority.  
(4) Every insurer shall make provision for medical insurance for treatment of mental illness on the same 
basis as is available for treatment of physical illness.  
22. Right to information .—(1) A person with mental illness and his nominated representative shall 
have the rights to the following information, namely: — 
(a) the provision of this Act or any other law for the time being in force under which he has been 
admitted , if he is being admitted, and the criteria for admission under that provision;  
(b) of his right to make an application to the concerned Board for a review of the admission;  
(c) the nature of the person's mental illness and the proposed treatment plan whic h includes 
information about treatment proposed and the known side effects of the proposed treatment;  
(d) receive the information in a language and form that such person receiving the information can 
understand.  
(2) In case complete information cannot be given to the person with mental illness at the time of the 
admission or the start of treatment, it shall be the duty of the medical officer or psychiatrist in -charge of the 
person's care to ensure that full information is provided promptly when the individ ual is in a position to 
receive it:  
Provided that where the information has not been given to the person with mental illness at the time of 
the admission or the start of treatment, the medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the person's care shall 
give the information to the nominated representative immediately.  
23. Right to confidentiality .—(1) A person with mental illness shall have the right to confidentiality 
in respect of his mental health, mental healthcare, treatment and physical healthcare.  
(2) All health professionals providing care or treatment to a person with mental illness shall have a 
duty to keep all such information confidential which has been obtained during care or treatment with the  
following exceptions, namely: — 
(a) release of infor mation to the nominated representative to enable him to fulfil his duties under 
this Act;  
(b) release of information to other mental health professionals and other health professionals to 
enable them to provide care and treatment to the person with mental illness;  16 
 (c) release of information if it is necessary to protect any other person from harm or violence;  
(d) only such information that is necessary to protect against the harm identified shall be released;  
(e) release only such information as is necessary to prevent threat to life;  
(f) release of information upon an order by concerned Board or the Central Authority or High 
Court or Supreme Court or any other statutory authority competent to do so; and  
(g) release of information in the interests of  public safety and security . 
 24. Restriction on release of information in respect of mental illness .—(1) No photograph or any 
other information relating to a person with mental illness undergoing treatment at a mental health 
establishment shall be release d to the media without the consent of the person with mental illness.  
(2) The right to confidentiality of person with mental illness shall also apply to all information stored 
in electronic or digital format in real or virtual space.  
25. Right to access me dical records .—(1) All persons with mental illness shall have the right to 
access their basic medical records as may be prescribed.  
(2) The mental health professional in charge of such records may withhold specific information in 
the medical records if dis closure would result in, — 
(a) serious mental harm to the person with mental illness; or  
(b) likelihood of harm to other persons.  
(3) When any information in the medical records is withheld from the person, the mental health 
professional shall inform the pe rson with mental illness of his right to apply to the concerned Board for 
an order to release such information.  
26. Right to personal contacts and communication .—(1) A person with mental illness admitted to 
a mental health establishment shall have the right to refuse or receive visitors and to refuse or receive 
and make telephone or mobile phone calls at reasonable times subject to the norms of such mental 
health establishment.  
(2) A person with mental illness admitted in a mental health establishment m ay send and receive 
mail through electronic mode including through e -mail.  
(3) Where a person with mental illness informs the medical officer or mental health professional in 
charge of the mental health establishment that he does not want to receive mail o r e-mail from any 
named person in the community, the medical officer or mental health professional in charge may restrict 
such communication by the named person with the person with mental illness.  
(4) Nothing contained in sub -sections ( 1) to ( 3) shall app ly to visits from, telephone calls to, and 
from mail or e -mail to, and from individuals, specified under clauses ( a) to ( f) under any circumstances, 
namely: — 
(a) any Judge or officer authorised by a competent court;  
(b) members of the concerned Board or th e Central Authority or the State Authority;  
(c) any member of the Parliament or a Member of State Legislature;  
(d) nominated representative, lawyer or legal representative of the person;  
(e) medical practitioner in charge of the person's treatment;  
(f) any  other person authorised by the appropriate Government.  
27. Right to legal aid .—(1) A person with mental illness shall be entitled to receive free legal 
services to exercise any of his rights given under this Act.  
(2) It shall be the duty of magistrate, police officer, person in charge of such custodial institution as 
may be prescribed or medical officer or mental health professional in charge of a mental health 17 
 establishment to inform the person with mental illness t hat he is entitled to free legal services under the 
Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 (39 of 1987) or other relevant laws or under any order of the court 
if so ordered and provide the contact details of the availability of services.  
28. Right to make co mplaints about deficiencies in provision of services .—(1) Any person with 
mental illness or his nominated representative, shall have the right to complain regarding deficiencies in 
provision of care, treatment and services in a m ental health establishment to,— 
(a) the medical officer or mental health professional in charge of the establishment and if not 
satisfied with the response;  
(b) the concerned Board and if not satisfied with the response;  
(c) the State Authority.  
(2) The provisions for making complaint in sub -section ( 1), is without prejudice to the rights of the 
person to seek any judicial remedy for violation of his rights in a mental health establishment or by any 
mental health professional either under this Act or any other law for the time  being in force.  
CHAPTER VI  
DUTIES OF APPROPRIATE GOVERNMENT  
29. Promotion of mental health and preventive programmes .—(1) The appropriate Government 
shall have a duty to plan, design and implement programmes for the promotion of mental health and 
prevention of mental illness in the country.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the appropriate 
Government shall, in particular, plan, design and implement public health programmes to reduce 
suicides and  attempted suicides in the country.  
30. Creating awareness about mental health and illness and reducing stigma associated with 
mental illness .—The appropriate Government shall take all measures to en sure that, — 
(a) the provisions of this Act are given wide  publicity through public media, including television, 
radio, print and online media at regular intervals;  
(b) the programmes to reduce stigma associated with mental illness are planned, designed, funded 
and implemented in an effective manner;  
(c) the appr opriate Government officials including police officers and other officers of the 
appropriate Government are given periodic sensitisation and awareness training on the issues under 
this Act . 
31. Appropriate Government to take measures as regard to human res ource development and 
training, etc .—(1) The appropriate Government shall take measures to address the human resource 
requirements of mental health services in the country by planning, developing and implementing 
educational and training programmes in coll aboration with institutions of higher education and training, 
to increase the human resources available to deliver mental health interventions and to improve the 
skills of the available human resources to better address the needs of persons with mental ill ness.  
(2) The appropriate Government shall, at the minimum, train all medical officers in public healthcare 
establishments and all medical officers in the prisons or jails to provide basic and emergency mental 
healthcare.  
(3) The appropriate Government shall make efforts to meet internationally accepted guidelines for 
number of mental health professionals on the basis of population, within ten years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
32. Co-ordination within appropriate Government .—The appropriate Govern ment shall take all 
measures to ensure effective co -ordination between services provided by concerned Ministries and 
Departments such as those dealing with health, law, home affairs, human resources, social justice, 18 
 employment, education, women and child d evelopment, medical education to address issues of mental 
health care. 
CHAPTER VII  
CENTRAL  MENTAL  HEALTH  AUTHORITY  
33. Establishment of Central Authority .—The Central Government shall, within a period of nine 
months from the date on which this Act receives the assent of the President, by notification, establish, 
for the purposes of this Act, an Authority to be known as the Central Mental Health Authority.  
34. Composition of Central Authority .—(1) The Central Authority shall con sist of the following, 
namely: — 
(a) Secretary or Additional Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Health and 
Family Welfare --chairperson ex officio ; 
(b) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Health and Family Welfa re, 
in charge of mental health —member ex officio ; 
(c) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Ayurveda, Yoga and 
Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopa thy—member ex officio ; 
(d) Director General of Health Services —member ex officio ; 
(e) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Disability Affairs of the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment —member ex officio ; 
(f) Joint Secretar y to the Government of India in the Ministry of Women and Child       
Development —member ex officio ; 
(g) Directors of the Central Institutions for Mental Health —members ex officio ; 
(h) such other ex officio representatives from the relevant Central Governm ent Ministries or 
Departments;  
(i) one mental health professional as defined in item ( iii) of clause ( r) of sub -section ( 1) of            
section 2 having at least fifteen years experience in the field, to be nominated by the Central           
Government —member;  
(j) one psychiatric social worker having at least fifteen years experience in the field, to be 
nomi nated by the Central Government —member;  
(k) one clinical psychologist having at least fifteen years experience in the field, to be nominated 
by the C entra l Government —member;  
(l) one mental health nurse having at least fifteen years experience in the field of mental health, to 
be nomin ated by the Central Government —member;  
(m) two persons representing persons who have or have had mental illness, to be nomi nated by 
the Central Government —members;  
(n) two persons representing care -givers of persons with mental illness or organisations 
representing care -givers, to be nomin ated by the Central Government —members;  
(o) two persons representing non -governmental  organisations which provide services to persons 
with mental illness, to be nomin ated by the Central Government —members;  
(p) two persons representing areas relevant to mental health, if considered necessary.  
(2) The members referred to in clauses ( h) to ( p) of sub -section ( 1), shall be nominated by the 
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.  19 
 35. Term of office, salaries and allowances of chairperson and members .—(1) The members of 
the Central Authority referred to in clauses ( h) to ( p) of su b-section ( 1) of section 34 shall hold office as 
such for a term of three years from the date of nomination and shall be eligible for reappointment:  
Provided that a member shall not hold office as such after he has attained the age of seventy years.  
(2) Th e chairperson and other ex officio  members of the Authority shall hold office as such 
chairperson or member, as the case may be, so long as he holds the office by virtue of which he is 
nominated.  
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other te rms and conditions of service of, the 
chairperson and other members shall be such as may be prescribed.  
36. Resignation .—A member of the Central Authority may, by notice in writing under his hand 
addressed to the Central Government, resign his office:  
Provided that a member shall, unless he is permitted by the Central Government to relinquish his 
office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such 
notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor e nters upon the office or until the expiry of his 
term of office, whichever is the earliest.  
37. Filling of vacancies .—The Central Government shall, within two months from the date of 
occurrence of any vacancy by reason of death, resignation or removal of a  member of the Authority and 
three months before the superannuation or completion of the term of office of any member of that 
Authority, make nomination for filling up of the vacancy.  
38. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Central Authority .—No act or proceeding of 
the Central Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Authority; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a member of the Authority; or  
(c) any irregula rity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of the case.  
39. Member not to participate in meetings in certain cases .—Any member having any direct or 
indirect interest, whether pecuniary or otherwise, in any matter coming up for consider ation at a meeting 
of the Central Authority, shall, as soon as possible after the relevant circumstances have come to his 
knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting and such disclosure shall be recorded in 
the proceedings of the Central  Authority, and the member shall not take any part in any deliberation or 
decision of the Authority with respect to that matter.  
40. Officers and other employees of Central Authority .—(1) There shall be a chief executive 
officer of the Authority, not below  the rank of the Director to the Government of India, to be appointed 
by the Central Government.  
(2) The Authority may, with the approval of the Central Government, determine the number, nature 
and categories of other officers and employees required by the  Central Authority in the discharge of its 
functions.  
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service (including 
the qualifications, experience and manner of appointment) of, the chief executive officer and other 
officers and employees of the Central Authority shall be such as may be specified by regulations with 
the approval of the Central Government.  
41. Functions of chief executive officer of Central Authority .—(1) The chief executive officer 
shall be the legal r epresentative of the Central Authority and shall be responsible for — 
(a) the day -to-day administration of the Central Authority;  
(b) implementing the work programmes and decisions adopted by the Central Authority;  
(c) drawing up of proposal for the Central  Authority's work programmes;  20 
 (d) the preparation of the statement of revenue and expenditure and the execution of the budget of 
the Central Authority.  
(2) Every year, the chief executive officer shall submit to the Central Authority for approval — 
(a) a ge neral report covering all the activities of the Central Authority in the previous year;  
(b) programmes of work;  
(c) the annual accounts for the previous year; and  
(d) the budget for the coming year.  
(3) The chief executive officer shall have administrative  control over the officers and other 
employees of the Central Authority.  
42. Transfer of assets, liabilities of Central Authority .—On the establishment of the Central 
Authority — 
(a) all the assets and liabilities of the Central Authority for Mental Health Services constituted 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 3  of the Mental Health Act, 1987 (14 of 1987) shall stand transferred 
to, and vested in, the Central Authority.  
Explanation .—The assets of such Central Authority for Mental Health Services shall be deem ed 
to include all rights and powers, and all properties, whether movable or immovable, including, in 
particular, cash balances, deposits and all other interests and rights in, or arising out of, such 
properties as may be in the possession of such Unique Id entification Authority of India and all books 
of account and other documents relating to the same; and liabilities shall be deemed to include all 
debts, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind;  
(b) without prejudice to the provisions of clause ( a), all data and information collected during 
enrolment, all details of authentication performed, debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all 
contracts entered into and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for such Central 
Authority for Men tal Health Services immediately before that day, for or in connection with the 
purpose of the said Central Authority for Mental Health Services, shall be deemed to have been 
incurred, entered into or engaged to be done by, with or for, the Central Authorit y; 
(c) all sums of money due to the Central Authority for Mental Health Services immediately 
before that day shall be deemed to be due to the Central Authority; and  
(d) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by  or 
against such Central Authority for Mental Health Services immediately before that day may be 
continued or may be instituted by or against the Central Authority.  
43. Functions of Central Authority .—(1) The Central Authority shall — 
(a) register all mental health establishments under the control of the Central Government and 
maintain a register of all mental health establishments in the country based on information provided 
by all State Mental Health Authorities of registered establishments and compil e update and publish 
(including online on the internet) a register of such establishments;  
(b) develop quality and service provision norms for different types of mental health 
establishments under the Central Government;  
(c) supervise all mental health est ablishments under the Central Government and receive 
complaints about deficiencies in provision of services;  
(d) maintain a national register of clinical psychologists, mental health nurses and psychiatric 
social workers based on information provided by al l State Authorities of persons registered to work 
as mental health professionals for the purpose of this Act and publish the list (including online on the 
internet) of such registered mental health professionals;  21 
 (e) train all persons including law enforce ment officials, mental health professionals and other 
health professionals about the provisions and implementation of this Act;  
(f) advise the Central Government on all matters relating to mental healthcare and services;  
(g) discharge such other functions with respect to matters relating to mental health as the Central 
Government may decide:  
Provided that the mental health establishments under the control of the Central Government, before 
the commencement of this Act, registered under the Mental Health Act,  1987 (14 of 1987) or any other 
law for the time being in force, shall be deemed to have been registered under the provisions of this Act 
and copy of such registration shall be furnished to the Central Authority.  
(2) The procedure for registration (includi ng the fees to be levied for such registration) of the mental 
health establishments under this section shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
44. Meetings of Central Authority .—(1) The Central Authority shall meet at such times (not less 
than twice in a year) and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of 
business at its meetings (including quorum at such meetings) as may be specified by regulations made 
by the Central Authority.  
(2) If the chairp erson, for any reason, is unable to attend a meeting of the Central Authority, the 
senior -most member shall preside over the meeting of the Authority.  
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided by a majority 
of votes by the members present and voting and in the event of an equality of votes, the chairperson or 
in his absence the member presiding over shall have a second or casting vote.  
(4) All decisions of the Central Authority shall be authenticated by the sign ature of the chairperson 
or any other member authorised by the Central Authority in this behalf.  
(5) If any member, who is a director of a company and who as such director, has any direct or 
indirect pecuniary interest in any manner coming up for considera tion at a meeting of the Central 
Authority, he shall, as soon as possible after relevant circumstances have come to his knowledge, 
disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting and such disclosure shall be recorded in the 
proceedings of the Authority , and the member shall not take part in any deliberation or decision of the 
Authority with respect to that matter.  
CHAPTER VII I 
STATE  MENTAL HEALTH  AUTHORITY  
45. Establishment of State Authority .—Every State Government shall, within a period of nine 
months  from the date on which this Act receives the assent of the President, by notification, establish, 
for the purposes of this Act, an Authority to be known as the State Mental Health Authority.  
46. Composition of State Authority .—(1) The State Authority shal l consist of the following 
chairperson and members: — 
(a) Secretary or Principal Secretary in the Department of Health of State Government —
chairperson ex officio ; 
(b) Joint Secretary in the Department of Health of the State Government, in charge of mental 
health —member ex officio ; 
(c) Director of Health Services or Medical Education —member ex officio ; 
(d) Joint Secretary in the Department of Social Welfare of the State Government —member         
ex officio ;  
(e) such other ex officio representatives from the  relevant State Government Ministries or 
Departments;  22 
 (f) Head of any of the Mental Hospitals in the State or Head of Department of Psychiatry at any 
Government Medical College, to be nom inated by the State Government —member;  
(g) one eminent psychiatrist f rom the State not in Government service to be nom inated by the 
State Government —member;  
(h) one mental health professional as defined in item ( iii) of clause ( r) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 having at least fifteen years experience in the field, to be n ominated by th e State 
Government —member;  
(i) one psychiatric social worker having at least fifteen years experience in the field, to be 
nominated by the State Government —member;  
(j) one clinical psychologist having at least fifteen years experience in the field, to be nom inated 
by the State Government —member;  
(k) one mental health nurse having at least fifteen years experience in the field of mental health, 
to be nom inated by the State Government —member;  
(l) two persons representing persons who have or have  had mental illness, to be nom inated by the 
State Government —member;  
(m) two persons representing care -givers of persons with mental illness or organisations 
representing care -givers, to be nom inated by the State Government —members;  
(n) two persons represe nting non -governmental organisations which provide services to persons 
with mental illness, to be nom inated by the State Government —members.  
(2) The members referred to in clauses ( e) to ( n) of sub -section ( 1), shall be nominated by the State 
Government in  such manner as may be prescribed.  
47. Term of office, salaries and allowances of chairperson and other members .—(1) The 
members of the State Authority referred to in clauses ( e) to ( n) of sub -section ( 1) of section 46 shall 
hold office as such for a term of three years from the date of nomination and shall be eligible for 
reappointment:  
Provided that a member shall not hold office as such after he has attained the age of seventy years.  
(2) The chairperson and other ex officio  members of the State Authority shall hold office as such 
chairperson or member, as the case may be, so long as he holds the office by virtue of which he is 
nominated.  
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of servic e of, the 
chairperson and other members shall be such as may be prescribed.  
48. Resignation .—A member of the State Authority may, by notice in writing under his hand 
addressed to the State Government, resign his office:  
Provided that a member shall, unless  he is permitted by the State Government to relinquish his office 
sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such notice or 
until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon office or until the exp iry of his term of office, 
whichever is the earliest.  
49. Filling of vacancies .—The State Government shall, within two months from the date of 
occurrence of any vacancy by reason of death, resignation or removal of a member of the Authority and 
three month s before the superannuation or completion of the term of office of any member of that 
Authority, make nomination for filling up of the vacancy.  
50. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of State Authority .—No act or proceeding of 
the State Authori ty shall be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the State Authority; or  23 
 (b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a member of the State Authority; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of the case . 
51. Member not to participate in meetings in certain cases .—Any member having any direct or 
indirect interest, whether pecuniary or otherwise, in any matter coming up for consideration at a meeting 
of the Sta te Authority, shall, as soon as possible after the relevant circumstances have come to his 
knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting and such disclosure shall be recorded in 
the proceedings of the State Authority, and the member shall not take any part in any deliberation or 
decision of the State Authority with respect to that matter.  
52. Officers and other employees of State Authority .—(1) There shall be a chief executive officer 
of the State Authority, not below the rank of the Deputy  Secretary to the State Government, to be 
appointed by the State Government.  
(2) The State Authority may, with the approval of the State Government, determine the number, 
nature and categories of other officers and employees required by the State Authority  in the discharge of 
its functions.  
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service (including 
the qualifications, experience and manner of appointment) of, the chief executive officer and other 
officers and employ ees of the State Authority shall be such as may be specified by regulations with the 
approval of the State Government.  
53. Functions of chief executive officer of State Authority .—(1) The chief executive officer shall 
be the legal representative of the Sta te Authorit y and shall be responsible for — 
(a) the day -to-day administration of the State Authority;  
(b) implementing the work programmes and decisions adopted by the State Authority;  
(c) drawing up of proposal for the State Authority's work programmes;  
(d) the preparation of the statement of revenue and expenditure and the execution of the budget of 
the State Authority.  
(2) Every year, the chief executive officer shall submit to th e State Authority for approval — 
(a) a general report covering all the activities of the Authority in the previous year;  
(b) programmes of work;  
(c) the annual accounts for the previous year; and  
(d) the budget for the coming year.  
(3) The chief executive officer shall have administrative control over the officers and other 
employees of the State Authority.  
54. Transfer of assets, liabilities of State Authority .—On and from the establ ishment of the State 
Authority — 
(a) all the assets and liabilities of the State Authority for Mental Health Services constituted under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 4  of the Mental Health Act, 1987 (14 of 1987) shall stand transferred to, 
and vested in, the State Authority.  
Explanation. —The assets of such State Authority for Mental Health Services shall be deemed to 
include all rights and po wers, and all properties, whether movable or immovable, including, in 
particular, cash balances, deposits and all other interests and rights in, or arising out of, such 
properties as may be in the possession of such State Authority for Mental Health Servic es and all 
books of account and other documents relating to the same; and liabilities shall be deemed to include 
all debts, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind;  24 
 (b) without prejudice to the provisions of clause ( a), all data and information collec ted during 
enrolment, all details of authentication performed, debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all 
contracts entered into and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for such State 
Authority for Mental Health Services immediately  before that day, for or in connection with the 
purpose of the said State Authority for Mental Health Services, shall be deemed to have been 
incurred, entered into or engaged to be done by, with or for, the State Authority;  
(c) all sums of money due to the  State Authority for Mental Health Services immediately before 
that day shall be deemed to be due to the State Authority; and  
(d) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or 
against such State Authority for Me ntal Health Services immediately before that day may be 
continued or may be instituted by or against the State Authority.  
55. Functions of State Authority .—(1) The State Authority shall — 
(a) register all mental health establishments in the State except those referred to in section 43 and 
maintain and publish (including online on the internet) a register of such establishments;  
(b) develop quality and service provision norms for different types of mental health 
establishments in the State;  
(c) supervise a ll mental health establishments in the State and receive complaints about 
deficiencies in provision of services;  
(d) register clinical psychologists, mental health nurses and psychiatric social workers in the State 
to work as mental health professionals, a nd publish the list of such registered mental health 
professionals in such manner as may be specified by regulations by the State Authority;  
(e) train all relevant persons including law enforcement officials, mental health professionals and 
other health pr ofessionals about the provisions and implementation of this Act;  
(f) discharge such other functions with respect to matters relating to mental health as the State 
Government may decide:  
Provided that the mental health establishments in the State (except th ose referred to in section 43), 
registered, before the commencement of this Act, under the Mental Health Act, 1987 (14 of 1987)  or 
any other law for the time being in force, shall be deemed to have been registered under the provisions 
of this Act and copy of such registration shall be furnished to the State Authority.  
(2) The procedure for registration (including the fees to be levied for such registration) of the mental 
health establishments under this section shall be such as may be prescribed by the Stat e Government.  
56. Meetings of State Authority .—(1) The State Authority shall meet at such times (not less than 
four times in a year) and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of 
business at its meetings (including qu orum at such meetings) as may be specified by regulations made 
by the State Authority.  
(2) If the chairperson, for any reason, is unable to attend a meeting of the State Authority, the senior -
most member shall preside over the meetings of the Authority.  
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the State Authority shall be decided by a 
majority of votes by the members present and voting and in the event of an equality of votes, the 
chairperson or in his absence the member presiding over shall ha ve a second or casting vote.  
(4) All decisions of the State Authority shall be authenticated by the signature of the chairperson or 
any other member authorised by the State Authority in this behalf.  
(5) If any member, who is a director of a company and who as such director, has any direct or 
indirect pecuniary interest in any manner coming up for consideration at a meeting of the State 
Authority, he shall, as soon as possible after relevant circumstance s have come to his knowledge, 
disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting and such disclosure shall be recorded in the 25 
 proceedings of the Authority, and the member shall not take part in any deliberation or decision of the 
State Authority with resp ect to that matter.  
CHAPTER IX  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
57. Grants by Central Government to Central Authority .—The Central Government may, after 
due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Central Authority grants of 
such sums of money as the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this 
Act. 
58. Central Mental Health Authority Fund .—(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the 
Central Mental Health Authority Fund and there shall be credited thereto — 
(i) any grants and loans made to the Authority by the Central Government;  
(ii) all fees and charges received by the Authority under this Act; and  
(iii) all sums received by the Authority from such other sources as may be decided upon by t he 
Central Government.  
(2) The Fund referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be applied for meeting the salary, allowances and 
other remuneration of the chairperson, other members, chief executive officer, other officers and 
employees of the Authority and the expenses of the Authority incurred in the discharge of its functions 
and for purposes of this Act.  
59. Accounts and audit of Central Authority .—(1) The Central Authority shall maintain proper 
accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statem ent of accounts in such form as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of 
India.  
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any other person appoint ed by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority shall have the same rights and privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General generally has in 
connection with the audit of the Governmen t accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand 
the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect 
any of the office of the Authority.  
(4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comp troller and Auditor -General of India or 
any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon, shall be 
forwarded annually to the Central Government by the Authority and the Central Government shall cause 
the same to be la id before each House of Parliament.  
60. Annual report of Central Authority .—The Central Authority shall prepare in every year, in 
such form and at such time as may be prescribed by the Central Government, an annual report giving a 
full account of its activ ities during the previous year, and copies thereof along with copies of its annual 
accounts and auditor's report shall be forwarded to the Central Government and the Central Government 
shall cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.  
61. Grants by State Government .—The State Government may, after due appropriation made by 
State Legislature by law in this behalf, make to the State Authority grants of such sums of money as the 
State Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes  of this Act.  
62. State Mental Health Authority Fund .—(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the 
State Mental Health Authority Fund and t here shall be credited thereto — 
(i) any grants and loans made to the State Authority by the State Governmen t; 26 
 (ii) all fees and charges received by the Authority under this Act; and  
(iii) all sums received by the State Authority from such other sources as may be decided upon by 
the State Government.  
(2) The Fund referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be applied for meeting the salary, allowances and 
other remuneration of the chairperson, other members, chief executive officer, other officers and 
employees of the State Authority and the expenses of the State Authority incurred in the discharge of its 
functions and  for purposes of this Act.  
63. Accounts and audit of State Authority .—(1) The State Authority shall maintain proper 
accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be 
prescribed by the State Government, i n consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the State Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of 
India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connecti on with such 
audit shall be payable by the State Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any other person appointed by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of the State Aut hority shall have the same rights and privileges 
and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General generally has in 
connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand 
the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect 
any of the office of the State Authority.  
64. Annual report of State Authority .—The State Authority shall prepare in every year, in such 
form and at such time as may be prescribed by the State Government, an annual report giving a full 
account of its activities during the previous year, and copies thereof along with copies of its annual 
accounts and auditor's report shall be forwarded to the State Government and  the Government shall 
cause the same to be laid before the State Legislature.  
CHAPTER X  
MENTAL HEALTH ESTABLISHMENTS  
65. Registration of mental health establishment .—(1) No person or organisation shall establish or 
run a mental health establishment unless it has been registered with the Authority under the provisions 
of this Act.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this Chapter, th e expression Authority means — 
(a) in respect of the mental health establishments under the control of the Central Government, 
the C entral Authority;  
(b) in respect of the mental health establishments in the State [not being the health establishments 
referred to in clause ( a)], the State Authority.  
(2) Every person or organisation who proposes to establish or run a mental health establ ishment shall 
register the said establishment with the Authority under the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that the Central Government, may, by notification, exempt any category or class of existing 
mental health establishments from the requirement of reg istration under this Act.  
Explanation .—In case a mental health establishment has been registered under the Clinical 
Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010 (23 of 2010) or any other law for the time being 
in force in a State, such mental health establishment shall submit a copy of the said registration along 
with an application in such form as may be prescribed to the Authority with an undertaking that the 
mental health establishment fulfils the minimum standards, if any, specified by the Authority for the 
specific category of mental health establishment.  27 
 (3) The Authority shall, on receipt of application under sub -section ( 2), on being satisfied that such 
mental health establishment fulfils the standards specified by the Authority, issue a  certificate of 
registration in such form as may be prescribed:  
Provided that till the period the Authority specifies the minimum standards for different categories of 
mental health establishments, it shall issue a provisional certificate of registration t o the mental health 
establishment:  
Provided further that on specifying the minimum standards for different categories of mental health 
establishments, the mental health establishment referred to in the first proviso shall, within a period of 
six months fro m the date such standards are specified, submit to the Authority an undertaking stating 
therein that such establishment fulfils the specified minimum standards and on being satisfied that such 
establishment fulfils the minimum standards, the Authority shal l issue a certificate of registration to 
such mental health establishment.  
(4) Every mental health establishment shall, for the purpose of registration and continuation of 
regist ration, fulfil — 
(a) the minimum standards of facilities and services as may be  specified by regulations made by 
the Authority;  
(b) the minimum qualifications for the personnel engaged in such establishment as may be 
specified by regulations made by the Authority;  
(c) provisions for maintenance of records and reporting as may be spec ified by regulations made 
by the Authority; and  
(d) any other conditions as may be specified by regulations made by the Authority.  
(5) The Authority may — 
(a) classify mental health establishments into such different categories, as may be specified by 
regulations made by the Central Authority;  
(b) specify different standards for different categories of mental health establishments;  
(c) while specifying the minimum standards for mental health establishments, have regard to local 
conditions.  
(6) Notwithst anding anything in this section, the Authority shall, within a period of eighteen months 
from the commencement of this Act, by notification, specify the minimum standards for different 
categories of mental health establishments.  
66. Procedure for registration, inspection and inquiry of mental health               
establishments .—(1) The mental health establishment shall, for the purpose of registration, submit an 
application, in such form, accompanied with such details and fees, as ma y be prescribed, to the 
Authority.  
(2) The mental health establishment may submit the application in person or by post or online.  
(3) Every mental health establishment, existing on the date of commencement of this Act, shall, 
within a period of six months from the date of constitution of the Authority, submit an application for its 
provisional registration to the Authority.  
(4) The Authority shall, within a period of ten days from the date of receipt of such application, issue 
to the mental health establish ment a certificate of provisional registration in such form and containing 
such particulars and information as may be prescribed.  
(5) The Authority shall not be required to conduct any inquiry prior to issue of provisional 
registration.  
(6) The Authority s hall, within a period of forty -five days from the date of provisional registration, 
publish in print and in digital form online, all particulars of the mental health establishment.  28 
 (7) A provisional registration shall be valid for a period of twelve months  from the date of its issue 
and be renewable.  
(8) Where standards for particular categories of mental health establishments have been specified 
under this Act, the mental health establishments in that category shall, within a period of six months 
from date  of notifying such standards, apply for that category and obtain permanent registration.  
(9) The Authority shall publish the standards in print and online in digital format.  
(10) Until standards for particular categories of mental health establishments are  specified under this 
Act, every mental health establishment shall, within thirty days before the expiry of the validity of 
certificate of provisional registration, apply for a renewal of provisional registration.  
(11) If the application is made after the expiry of provisional registration, the Authority shall allow 
renewal of registration on payment of such fees, as may be prescribed.  
(12) A mental health establishment shall make an application for permanent registration to the 
Authority in such form and accompanied with such fees as may be specified by regulations.  
(13) The mental health establishment shall submit evidence that the establishment has complied with 
the specified minimum standards in such manner as may be specified by regulations by the Auth ority.  
(14) As soon as the mental health establishment submits the required evidence of the mental health 
establishment having complied with the specified minimum standards, the Authority shall give public 
notice and display the same on its website for a p eriod of thirty days, for filing objections, if any, in 
such manner as may be specified by regulations.  
(15) The Authority shall, communicate the objections, if any, received within the period referred to 
in sub -section ( 14), to the mental health establish ment for response within such period as the Authority 
may determine.  
(16) The mental health establishment shall submit evidence of compliance with the standards with 
reference to the objections communicated to such establishment under sub -section ( 15), to the Authority 
within the specified period.  
(17) The Authority shall on being satisfied that the mental health establishment fulfils the specified 
minimum standards for registration, grant permanent certificate of registration to such establishment.  
(18) The Authority shall, within a period of forty -five days after the expiry of the period specified 
under this section, pass an order, either — 
(a) grant permanent certificate of registration; or  
(b) reject the application after recording the reasons thereof:  
Provided that in case the Authority rejects the application under clause ( b), it shall grant such period 
not exceeding six months, to the mental health establishment for rectification of the deficiencies which 
have led to rejection of the application and s uch establishment may apply afresh for registration.  
(19) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, if the Authority has neither communicated 
any objections received by it to the mental health establishment under sub -section ( 15), nor has passed 
an order under sub -section ( 18), the registration shall be deemed to have been granted by the Authority 
and the Authority shall provide a permanent certificate of registration.  
67. Audit of mental health establishment .—(1) The Authority shall cause to be conducted an audit 
of all registered mental health establishments by such person or persons (including representatives of the 
local community) as may be prescribed, every three years, so as to ensure that such mental health 
establishments comply with the r equirements of minimum standards for registration as a mental health 
establishment.  
(2) The Authority may charge the mental health establishment such fee as may be prescribed, for 
conducting the audit under this section.  29 
 (3) The Authority may issue a show  cause notice to a mental health establishment as to why its 
registration under this Act not be cancelled, if the Authority is satisfied that — 
(a) the mental health establishment has failed to maintain the minimum standards specified by the 
Authority; or  
(b) the person or persons or entities entrusted with the management of the mental health 
establishment have been convicted of an offence under this Act; or  
(c) the mental health establishment violates the rights of any person with mental illness.  
(4) The Au thority may, after giving a reasonable opportunity to the mental health establishment, if 
satisfied that the mental health establishment falls under clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) of         
sub-section ( 3), without prejudice to any other action wh ich it may take against the mental health 
establishment, cancel its registration.  
(5) Every order made under sub -section ( 4) shall take effect — 
(a) where no appeal has been preferred against such order, immediately on the expiry of the 
period specified for  preferring of appeal; and  
(b) where the appeal has been preferred against such an order and the appeal has been dismissed, 
from the date of the order of dismissal.  
(6) The Authority shall, on cancellation of the registration for reasons to be recorded in writing, 
restrain immediately the mental health establishment from carrying on its operations, if there is 
imminent danger to the health and safety of the persons admitted in the mental health establishment.  
(7) The Authority may cancel the registration of  a mental health establishment if recommended by 
the Board to do so.  
68. Inspection and inquiry .—(1) The Authority may, suo motu  or on a complaint received from any 
person with respect to non -adherence of minimum standards specified by or under this Act or  
contravention of any provision thereof, order an inspection or inquiry of any mental health 
establishment, to be made by such person as may be prescribed.  
(2) The mental health establishment shall be entitled to be represented at such inspection or inquir y. 
(3) The Authority shall communicate to the mental health establishment the results of such 
inspection or inquiry and may after ascertaining the opinion of the mental health establishment, order 
the establishment to make necessary changes within such period as may be specified by it.  
(4) The mental health establishment shall comply with the order of the Authority made under                
sub-section ( 3). 
(5) If the mental health establishment fails to comply with the order of the Authority made under 
sub-section ( 3), the Authority may cancel the registration of the mental health establishment.  
(6) The Authority or any person authorised by it may, if there is any reason to suspect that any 
person is operating a mental health establishment without regist ration, enter and search in such manner 
as may be prescribed, and the mental health establishment shall co -operate with such inspection or 
inquiry and be entitled to be represented at such inspection or inquiry.  
69. Appeal to High Court against order of Au thority .—Any mental health establishment 
aggrieved by an order of the Authority refusing to grant registration or renewal of registration or 
cancellation of registration, may, within a period of thirty days from such order, prefer an appeal to the 
High Cou rt in the State:  
Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty 
days, if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the 
period of thirty days.  30 
 70. Certifi cates, fees and register of mental health establishments .—(1) Every mental health 
establishment shall display the certificate of registration in a conspicuous place in the mental health 
establishment in such manner so as to be visible to everyone visiting the mental health establishment.  
(2) In case the certificate is destroyed or lost or mutilated or damaged, the Authority may issue a 
duplicate certificate on the request of the mental health establishment and on the payment of such fees 
as may be prescribe d. 
(3) The certificate of registration shall be non -transferable and valid in case of change of ownership 
of the establishment.  
(4) Any change of ownership of the mental health establishment shall be intimated to the Authority 
by the new owner within one month from the date of change of ownership.  
(5) In the event of change of category of the mental health establishment, such establishment shall 
surrender the certificate of registration to the Authority and the mental health establishment shall apply 
afres h for grant of certificate of registration in that category.  
71. Maintenance of register of mental health establishment in digital format .—The Authority 
shall maintain in digital format a register of mental health establishments, registered by the Authorit y, to 
be called the Register of Mental Health Establishments and shall enter the particulars of the certificate 
of registration so granted in a separate register to be maintained in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed.  
72. Duty of mental health estab lishment to display information .—(1) Every mental health 
establishment shall display within the establishment at conspicuous place (including on its website), the 
contact details including address and telephone numbers of the concerned Board.  
(2) Every men tal health establishment shall provide the person with necessary forms to apply to the 
concerned Board and also give free access to make telephone calls to the Board to apply for a review of 
the admission.  
CHAPTER XI  
MENTAL HEALTH  REVIEW  BOARDS  
73. Constitution of Mental Health Review Boards .—(1) The State Authority shall, by notification, 
constitute Boards to be called the Mental Health Review Boards, for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The requisite number, location and the jurisdiction of the Board s shall be specified by the State 
Authority in consultation with the State Governments concerned.  
(3) The constitution of the Boards by the State Authority for a district or group of districts in a State 
under this section shall be such as may be prescribe d by the Central Government.  
(4) While making rules under sub -section ( 3), the Central Government shall have re gard to the 
following, namely: — 
(a) the expected or actual workload of the Board in the State in which such Board is to be 
constituted;  
(b) number of mental health establishments existing in the State;  
(c) the number of persons with mental illness;  
(d) population in the district in which the Board is to be constituted;  
(e) geographical and climatic conditions of the district in which the Board  is to be constituted.  
74. Composition of Board .—(1) Each Board shall consist of — 
(a) a District Judge, or an officer of the State judicial services who is qualified to be appointed as 
District Judge or a retired District Judge who shall be chairperson of the Board;  31 
 (b) representative of the District Collector or District Magistrate or Deputy Commissioner of the 
districts in which the Board is to be constituted;  
(c) two members of whom one shall be a psychiatrist and the other shall be a medical practitione r. 
(d) two members who shall be persons with mental illness or care -givers or persons representing 
organisations of persons with mental illness or care -givers or non -governmental organisations 
working in the field of mental health.  
(2) A person shall be disqualified to be appointed as the chairperson or a member of a Board or be 
removed  by the State Authority, if he — 
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which involves moral 
turpitude; or  
(b) is adjudged as an insolvent; or  
(c) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the Government or a body corporate 
owned or controlled by the Government; or  
(d) has such financial or other interest as is likely to prejudice the discharge of his functions as a 
member; or  
(e) has such  other disqualifications as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(3) A chairperson or member of a Board may resign his office by notice in writing under his hand 
addressed to the Chairperson of the State Authority and on such resignation being acce pted, the vacancy 
shall be filled by appointment of a person, belonging to the category under sub -section ( 1) of section 74.  
75. Terms and conditions of service of chairperson and members of Board .—(1) The 
chairperson and members of the Board shall hold of fice for a term of five years or up to the age of 
seventy years, whichever is earlier and shall be eligible for reappointment for another term of five years 
or up to the age of seventy years whichever is earlier.  
(2) The appointment of chairperson and members of every Board shall be made by the Chairperson 
of the State Authority.  
(3) The honorarium and other allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service 
of, the chairperson and members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribe d by the Central 
Government.  
76. Decisions of Authority and Board .—(1) The decisions of the Authority or the Board, as the 
case may be, shall be by consensus, failing which by a majority of votes of members present and voting 
and in the event of equality o f votes, the president or the chairperson, as the case may be, shall have a 
second or casting vote.  
(2) The quorum of a meeting of the Authority or the Board, as the case may be, shall be three 
members.  
77. Applications to Board .—(1) Any person with mental  illness or his nominated representative or 
a representative of a registered non -governmental organisation, with the consent of such a person, being 
aggrieved by the decision of any of the mental health establishment or whose rights under this Act have 
been violated, may make an application to the Board seeking redressal or appropriate relief.  
(2) There shall be no fee or charge levied for making such an application.  
(3) Every application referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall contain the name of applicant, his contact 
details, the details of the violation of his rights, the mental health establishment or any other place where 
such violation took place and the redressal sought from the Board.  
(4) In exceptional circumstances, the Board may accept an applicati on made orally or over telephone 
from a person admitted to a mental health establishment.  32 
 78. Proceedings before Board to be judicial proceedings .—All proceedings before the Board shall 
be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of  sections 19 3, 219 and 228 of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
79. Meetings —The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be specified by regulations 
made by the Central Authority.  
80. Proceedings before Board .—(1) The Board, on receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 77 , shall, subject to the provisions of this section, endeavour to hear and dispose of the same 
within a period of ninety days . 
(2) The Board shall dispose of an application — 
(a) for appointment of nominated representative under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 4) of section 14;  
(b) challenging admission of a minor under section 87;  
(c) challenging supported admission under sub -section  (10) or sub -section ( 11) of section 89,  
within  period of seven days from the date of receipt of such applications.  
(3) The Board shall dispose of an application challenging supported admission under section 90  
within a period of twenty -one days from the  date of receipt of the application.  
(4) The Board shall dispose of an application, other than an application referred to in sub -section ( 3),  
within a period of ninety days from the date of filing of the application.  
(5) The proceeding of the Board shall be held in camera . 
(6) The Board shall not ordinarily grant an adjournment for the hearing.  
(7) The parties to an application may appear in person or be represented by a counsel or a 
representative of their choice.  
(8) In respect of any application concerning a person with mental illness, the Board shall hold the 
hearings and conduct the proceedings at the mental health establishment where such person is admitted.  
(9) The Board may allow any persons other than those directly interested with the appli cation, with 
the permission of the person with mental illness and the chairperson of the Board, to attend the hearing.  
(10) The person with mental illness whose matter is being heard shall have the right to give oral 
evidence to the Board, if such person d esires to do so.  
(11) The Board shall have the power to require the attendance and testimony of such other witnesses 
as it deems appropriate.  
(12) The parties to a matter shall have the right to inspect any document relied upon by any other 
party in its su bmissions to the Board and may obtain copies of the same.  
(13) The Board shall, within five days of the completion of the hearing, communicate its decision to 
the parties in writing.  
(14) Any member who is directly or indirectly involved in a particular ca se, shall not sit on the Board 
during the hearings with respect to that case.  
81. Central Authority to appoint Expert Committee to prepare guidance document .—(1) The 
Central Authority shall appoint an Expert Committee to prepare a guidance document for medical 
practitioners and mental health professionals, containing procedures for assessing, when necessary or 
the capacity of persons to make mental health care or treatment decisions.  
(2) Every medical practitioner and mental health professional shall, wh ile assessing capacity of a 
person to make mental healthcare or treatment decisions, comply with the guidance document referred 
to in sub -section ( 1) and follow the procedure specified therein.  33 
 82. Powers and functions of Board .—(1) Subject to the provisio ns of this Act, the powers and 
functions of the Board shall, include all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) to register, review, alter, modify or cancel an advance directive;  
(b) to appoint a nominated representative;  
(c) to receive and decide application from a person with mental illness or his nominated 
representative or any other interested person against the decision of medical officer or mental health 
professional in charge of mental health establishment or mental health establishment under  section 
87 or section 89 or section 90;  
(d) to receive and decide applications in respect non -disclosure of information specified under 
sub-section ( 3) of section 25;  
(e) to adjudicate complaints regarding deficiencies in care and services specified under               
section 28;  
(f) to visit and inspect prison or jails and seek clarifications from the medical officer in -charge of 
health services in such prison or jail.  
(2) Where it is brought to the notice of a Board or the Central Authority or State Auth ority, that a 
mental health establishment violates the rights of persons with mental illness, the Board or the Authority 
may conduct an inspection and inquiry and take action to protect their rights.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Board, in consultation with the Authority, 
may take measures to protect the rights of persons with mental illness as it considers appropriate.  
(4) If the mental health establishment does not comply with the orders or directions of the Authority 
or the Board or wilfully neglects such order or direction, the Authority or the Board, as the case may be, 
may impose penalty which may extend up to five lakh rupees on such mental health establishment and 
the Authority on its own or on the recommendations of the  Board may also cancel the registration of 
such mental health establishment after giving an opportunity of being heard.  
83. Appeal to High Court against order of Authority or Board .—Any person or establishment 
aggrieved by the decision of the Authority or a Board may, within a period of thirty days from such 
decision, prefer an appeal to the High Court of the State in which the Board is situated:  
Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty 
days, if it i s satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the 
period of thirty days.  
84. Grants by Central Government .—(1) The Central Government may, make to the Central 
Authority grants of such sums of money as the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for 
the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The grants referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be applied for, — 
(a) meeting the salary, allowances and other remuneration of the chairperson, members, officers 
and other employe es of the Central Authority;  
(b) meeting the salary, allowances and other remuneration of the chairperson, members, officers 
and other employees of the Boards; and  
(c) the expenses of the Central Authority and the Boards incurred in the discharge of their 
functions and for the purposes of this Act.  
CHAPTER XII  
ADMISSION, TREATMENT AND DISCHARGE  
85. Admission of person with mental illness as independent patient in mental health 
establishment .—(1) For the purposes of this Act, “independent patient or an independent admission ” 
refers to the admission of person with mental illness, to a mental health establishment, who has the 34 
 capacity to make mental healthcare and treatment decisions or requires minimal support in making 
decisions.  
(2) All admissions in th e mental health establishment shall, as far as possible, be independent 
admissions except when such conditions exist as make supported admission unavoidable.  
86. Independent admission and treatment .—(1) Any person, who is not a minor and who 
considers hims elf to have a mental illness and desires to be admitted to any mental health establishment 
for treatment may request the medical officer or mental health professional in charge of the 
establishment to be admitted as an independent patient.  
(2) On receipt o f such request under sub -section ( 1), the medical officer or mental health 
professional in charge of the establishment shall admit the person to the establishment if the medical 
officer or mental health professional is satisfied that — 
(a) the person has a mental illness of a severity requiring admission to a mental health 
establishment;  
(b) the person with mental illness is likely to benefit from admission and treatment to the mental 
health establishment;  
(c) the person has understood the nature and purpose  of admission to the mental health 
establishment, and has made the request for admission of his own free will, without any duress or 
undue influence and has the capacity to make mental healthcare and treatment decisions without 
support or requires minimal support from others in making such decisions.  
(3) If a person is unable to understand the purpose, nature, likely effects of proposed treatment and of 
the probable result of not accepting the treatment or requires a very high level of support approaching 
hundred per cent. support in making decisions, he or she shall be deemed unable to understand the 
purpose of the admission and therefore shall not be admitted as independent patient under this section.  
(4) A person admitted as an independent patient to a me ntal health establishment shall be bound to 
abide by order and instructions or bye -laws of the mental health establishment.  
(5) An independent patient shall not be given treatment without his informed consent.  
(6) The mental health establishment shall admit an independent patient on his own request, and shall 
not require the consent or presence of a nominated representative or a relative or care -giver for 
admitting the person to the mental health establishment.  
(7) Subject to the provisions contained in  section 88 an independent patient may get himself 
discharged from the mental health establishment without the consent of the medical officer or mental 
health professional in charge of such establishment.  
87. Admission of minor .—(1) A minor may be admitted  to a mental health establishment only after 
following the procedure laid down in this section.  
(2) The nominated representative of the minor shall apply to the medical officer in charge of a 
mental health establishment for admission of the minor to the es tablishment.  
(3) Upon receipt of such an application, the medical officer or mental health professional in charge 
of the mental health establishment may admit such a minor to the establishment, if two psychiatrists, or 
one psychiatrist and one mental healt h professional or one psychiatrist and one medical practitioner, 
have independently examined the minor on the day of admission or in the preceding seven days and 
both independently conclude based on the examination and, if appropriate, on informa tion provi ded by 
others, that, — 
(a) the minor has a mental illness of a severity requiring admission to a mental health 
establishment;  35 
 (b) admission shall be in the best interests of the minor, with regard to his health, well -being or 
safety, taking into account the  wishes of the minor if ascertainable and the reasons for reaching this 
decision;  
(c) the mental healthcare needs of the minor cannot be fulfilled unless he is admitted; and  
(d) all community based alternatives to admission have been shown to have failed o r are 
demonstrably unsuitable for the needs of the minor.  
(4) A minor so admitted shall be accommodated separately from adults, in an environment that takes 
into account his age and developmental needs and is at least of the same quality as is provided to other 
minors admitted to hospitals for other medical treatments.  
(5) The nominated representative or an attendant appointed by the nominated representative shall 
under all circumstances stay with the minor in the mental health establishment for the entire duration of 
the admission of the minor to the mental health establishment.  
(6) In the case of minor girls, where the nominated representative is male, a female attendant shall be 
appointed by the nominated representative and under all circumstances shall s tay with the minor girl in 
the mental health establishment for the entire duration of her admission.  
(7) A minor shall be given treatment with the informed consent of his nominated representative.  
(8) If the nominated representative no longer supports admi ssion of the minor under this section or 
requests discharge of the minor from the mental health establishment, the minor shall be discharged by 
the mental health establishment.  
(9) Any admission of a minor to a mental health establishment shall be informed  by the medical 
officer or mental health professional in charge of the mental health establishment to the concerned 
Board within a period of seventy -two hours.  
(10) The concerned Board shall have the right to visit and interview the minor or review the med ical 
records if the Board desires to do so.  
(11) Any admission of a minor which continues for a period of thirty days shall be immediately 
informed to the concerned Board.  
(12) The concerned Board shall carry out a mandatory review within a period of seven  days of being 
informed, of all admissions of minors continuing beyond thirty days and every subsequent thirty days.  
(13) The concerned Board shall at minimum, review the clinical records of the minor and may 
interview the minor if necessary.  
88. Discharge  of independent patients .—(1) The medical officer or mental health professional in 
charge of a mental health establishment shall discharge from the mental health establishment any person 
admitted under section 86 as an independent patient immediately on re quest made by such person or if 
the person disagrees with his admission under section 86 subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3). 
(2) Where a minor has been admitted to a mental health establishment under section 87 and attains 
the age of eighteen years during his stay in the mental health establishment, the medical officer in 
charge of the mental health establishment shall classify him as an independent patient under section 86 
and all provisions of this Act as applicable to independent patient who  is not minor, shall apply to such 
person.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, a mental health professional may prevent 
discharge of a person admitted as an independent person under section 86 for a period of twenty -four 
hours so as to allo w his assessment necessary for admission under section 89 if the mental health 
profession al is of the opinion that — 
(a) such person is unable to understand the nature and purpose of his decisions and requires 
substantial or very high support from his nominated representative; or  36 
 (b) has recently threatened or attempted or is threatening or attempting to cause bodily harm to 
himself; or  
(c) has recently behaved or is behaving violently towards another person or has caused or is 
causing another person to  fear bodily harm from him; or  
(d) has recently shown or is showing an inability to care for himself to a degree that places the 
individual at risk of harm to himself.  
(4) The person referred to in sub -section ( 3) shall be either admitted as a supported pa tient under 
section 89, or discharged from the establishment within a period of twenty -four hours or on completion 
of assessments for admission for a supported patient under section 89, whichever is earlier.  
 89. Admission and treatment of persons with men tal illness, with high support needs, in 
mental health establishment, up to thirty days (supported admission) .—(1) The medical officer or 
mental health professional in charge of a mental health establishment shall admit every such person to 
the establishme nt, upon application by the nominated representative of the person, under this section, 
if— 
(a) the person has been independently examined on the day of admission or in the preceding 
seven days, by one psychiatrist and the other being a mental health professional or a medical 
practitioner, and both independently conclude based on the examination and, if appropriate, on 
information provided by others, that the person has a mental illness of such severity that the person, -- 
(i) has recently threatened or  attempted or is threatening or attempting to cause bodily harm to 
himself; or  
(ii) has recently behaved or is behaving violently towards another person or has caused or is 
causing another person to fear bodily harm from him; or  
(iii) has recently shown or  is showing an inability to care for himself to a degree that places 
the individual at risk of harm to himself;  
(b) the psychiatrist or the mental health professionals or the medical practitioner, as the case may 
be, certify, after taking into account an a dvance directive, if any, that admission to the mental health 
establishment is the least restrictive care option possible in the circumstances; and  
(c) the person is ineligible to receive care and treatment as an independent patient because the 
person is unable to make mental healthcare and treatment decisions independently and needs very 
high support from his nominated representative in making decisions.  
(2) The admission of a person with mental illness to a mental health establishment under this section 
shall be limited to a period of thirty days.  
(3) At the end of the period mentioned under sub -section ( 2), or earlier, if the person no longer meets 
the criteria for admission as stated in sub -section ( 1), the patient shall no longer remain in the 
establis hment under this section.  
(4) On the expiry of the period of thirty days referred to in sub -section ( 2), the person may continue 
to remain admitted in the mental health establishment in accordance with the provisions of section 90.  
(5) If the conditions un der section 90 are not met, the person may continue to remain in the mental 
health establishment as an independent patient under section 86 and the medical officer or mental health 
professional in charge of the mental health establishment shall inform the person of his admission status 
under this Act, including his right to leave the mental health establishment.  
(6) Every person with mental illness admitted under this section shall be provided treatm ent after 
taking into account, — 
(a) an advance directive i f any; or  37 
 (b) informed consent of the patient with the support of his nominated representative subject to the 
provisions of sub -section ( 7). 
(7) If a person with the mental illness admitted under this section requires nearly hundred per cent. 
support from his nominated representative in making a decision in respect of his treatment, the 
nominated representative may temporarily consent to the treatment plan of such person on his behalf.  
(8) In case where consent has been given under sub -section ( 7), the medi cal officer or mental health 
professional in charge of the mental health establishment shall record such consent in the medical 
records and review the capacity of the patient to give consent every seven days.  
(9) The medical officer or mental health professional in charge of the mental health establishment 
shall report the concerned Board, — 
(a) within three days the admissions of a woman or a minor;  
(b) within seven days the admission of any person not being a woman or minor.  
(10) A person admitted un der this section or his nominated representative or a representative of a 
registered non -governmental organisation with the consent of the person, may apply to the concerned 
Board for review of the decision of the medical officer or mental health professio nal in charge of the 
mental health establishment to admit the person to the mental health establishment under this section.  
(11) The concerned Board shall review the decision of the medical officer or mental health 
professional in charge of the mental heal th establishment and give its findings thereon within seven days 
of receipt of request for such review which shall be binding on all the concerned parties.  
(12) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, it shall be the duty of the medical officer or 
mental health professional in charge of the mental health establishment to keep the condition of the 
person with mental illness admitted under this section on going review.  
(13) If the medical officer or mental health professional in charge of the mental h ealth establishment 
is of the opinion that the conditions specified under sub -section ( 1) are no longer applicable, he shall 
terminate the admission under this section, and inform the person and his nominated representative 
accordingly.  
(14) Non applicabil ity of conditions referred to in sub -section ( 13) shall not preclude the person with 
mental illness remaining as an independent patient.  
(15) In a case, a person with the mental illness admitted under this section has been discharged, such 
person shall not  be readmitted under this section within a period of seven days from the date of his 
discharge.  
(16) In case a person referred to in sub -section ( 15) requires readmission within a period of seven 
days referred to in that sub -section, such person shall be c onsidered for readmission in accordance with 
the provisions of section 90.  
(17) If the medical officer or mental health professional in charge of the mental health establishment 
is of the opinion that the person with mental illness admitted under this section in the mental health 
establishment requires or is likely to require further treatment beyond the period of thirty days, then 
such medical officer or mental health professional shall be duty bound to refer the matter to be 
examined by two psychiatri sts for his admission beyond thirty days.  
90. Admission and treatment of persons with mental illness, with high support needs, in mental 
health establishment, beyond thirty days (supported admission beyond thirty days) .—(1) If a 
person with mental illness admitted under section 89 requires continuous admission and treatment 
beyond thirty days or a person with mental illness discharged under sub -section (15) of that section 
requires readmission within seven days of such discharge, he shall be admitted in acc ordance with the 
provisions of this section.  38 
 (2) The medical officer or mental health professional in charge of a mental health establishment, 
upon application by the nominated representative of a person with mental illness, shall continue 
admission of suc h person with mental illness, if — 
(a) two psychiatrists have independently examined the person with mental illness in the preceding 
seven days and both independently conclude based on the examination and, on information provided 
by others that the person h as a mental illness  of a severity that the person — 
(i) has consistently over time threatened or attempted to cause bodily harm to himself; or  
(ii) has consistently over time behaved violently towards another person or has consistently 
over time caused anot her person to fear bodily harm from him; or  
(iii) has consistently over time shown an inability to care for himself to a degree that places 
the individual at risk of harm to himself;  
(b) both psychiatrists, after taking into account an advance directive, i f any, certify that admission 
to a mental health establishment is the least restrictive care option possible under the circumstances; 
and 
(c) the person continues to remain ineligible to receive care and treatment as a independent 
patient as the person can not make mental healthcare and treatment decisions independently and 
needs very high support from his nominated representative, in making decisions.  
(3) The medical officer or mental health professional in charge of the mental health establishment 
shall re port all admissions or readmission under this section, within a period of seven days of such 
admission or readmission, to the concerned Board.  
(4) The Board shall, within a period of twenty -one days from the date of last admission or 
readmission of person with mental illness under this section, permit such admission or readmission or 
order discharge of such person.  
(5) While permitting admission or readmission or ordering discharge of such person under                 
sub-section ( 4), the Board shall examin e— 
(a) the need for institutional care to such person;  
(b) whether such care cannot be provided in less restrictive settings based in the community.  
(6) In all cases of application for readmission or continuance of admission of a person with mental 
illness  in the mental health establishment under this section, the Board may require the medical officer 
or psychiatrist in charge of treatment of such person with mental illness to submit a plan for community 
based treatment and the progress made, or likely to b e made, towards realising this plan.  
(7) The person referred to in sub -section ( 4) shall not be permitted to continue in the mental health 
establishment in which he had been admitted or his readmission in such establishment merely on the 
ground of non -existence of community based services at the place where such person ordinarily resides.  
(8) The admission of a person with mental illness to a mental health establishment under this section 
shall be limited to a period up to ninety days in the first instance.  
(9) The admission of a person with mental illness to a mental health establishment under this section 
beyond the period of ninety days may be extended for a period of one hundred and twenty days at the 
first instance and thereafter for a period of one hun dred and eighty days each time after complying with 
the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) to ( 7). 
(10) If the Board refuses to permit admission or continuation thereof or readmission under               
sub-section ( 9), or on the expiry of the periods referre d to in sub -section ( 9) or earlier if such person no 
longer falls within the criteria for admission under sub -section ( 1), such person shall be discharged from 
such mental health establishment.  39 
 (11) Every person with mental illness admitted under this sect ion shall be provided treatment, after 
taking into account — 
(a) an advance directive; or  
(b) informed consent of the person with the support from his nominated representative subject to 
the provision of sub -section (12). 
(12) If a person with mental illnes s admitted under this section, requires nearly hundred per cent. 
support from his nominated representative, in making decision in respect of his treatment, the nominated 
representative may temporarily consent to the treatment plan of such person on his beh alf. 
(13) In a case where consent has been given under sub -section ( 12), the medical officer or mental 
health professional in charge of the mental health establishment shall record such consent in the medical 
records of such person with mental illness and review on the expiry of every fortnight, the capacity of 
such person to give consent.  
(14) A person with mental illness admitted under this section, or his nominated representative or a 
representative of a registered non -governmental organisation with the consent of the person, may apply 
to the concerned Board for review of the decision of the medical officer or mental health professional in 
charge of medical health establishment to admit such person in such establishment and the decision of 
the Board there on shall be binding on all parties.  
(15) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if the medical officer or mental health 
professional in charge of the mental health establishment is of the opinion that the conditions under  
sub-section ( 1) are no longer applicable, such medical officer or mental health professional shall 
discharge such person from such establishment and inform such person and his nominated 
representative accordingly.  
(16) The person with mental illness referred to in sub -section ( 15) may continue to remain in the 
mental health establishment as an independent patient.  
91. Leave of absence .—The medical officer or mental health professional in charge of the mental 
health establishment may grant leave to any person with mental illness a dmitted under section 87 or 
section 89 or section 90, to be absent from the establishment subject to such conditions, if any, and for 
such duration as such medical officer or psychiatrist may consider necessary.  
92.  Absence without leave or discharge .—If any person to whom section 103 applies absents 
himself without leave or without discharge from the mental health establishment, he shall be taken into 
protection by any Police Officer at the request of the medical officer or mental health professional in -
charge of the mental health establishment and shall be sent back to the mental health establishment 
immediately.  
93. Transfer of persons with mental illness from one mental health establishment to another 
mental health establishment .—(1) A person with menta l illness admitted to a mental health 
establishment under section 87 or section 89 or section 90 or section 103, as the case may be, may 
subject to any general or special order of the Board be removed from such mental health establishment 
and admitted to a nother mental health establishment within the State or with the consent of the Central 
Authority to any mental health establishment in any other State:  
Provided that no person with mental illness admitted to a mental health establishment under an order 
made in pursuance of an application made under this Act shall be so removed unless intimation and 
reasons for the transfer have been given to the person with mental illness and his nominated 
representative.  
(2) The State Government may make such general or sp ecial order as it thinks fit directing the 
removal of any prisoner with mental illness from the place where he is for the time being detained, to 
any mental health establishment or other place of safe custody in the State or to any mental health 
establishm ent or other place of safe custody in any other State with the consent of the Government of 
that other State.  40 
 94. Emergency treatment .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any medical 
treatment, including treatment for mental illness, may be  provided by any registered medical 
practitioner to a person with mental illness either at a health establishment or in the community, subject 
to the informed consent of the nominated representative, where the nominated representative is 
available, and whe re it is im mediately necessary to prevent — 
(a) death or irreversible harm to the health of the person; or  
(b) the person inflicting serious harm to himself or to others; or  
(c) the person causing serious damage to property belonging to himself or to others  where such 
behaviour is believed to flow directly from the person's mental illness.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “emergency treatment ” includes transportation of the 
person with mental illness to a nearest mental health establishment for  assessment.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall allow any medical officer or psychiatrist to give to the person with 
mental illness medical treatment which is not directly related to the emergency treatment specified 
under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Nothing in th is section shall allow any medical officer or psychiatrist to use electro -convulsive 
therapy as a form of treatment.  
(4) The emergency treatment referred to in this section shall be limited to seventy -two hours or till 
the person with mental illness has be en assessed at a mental health establishment, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that during a disaster or emergency declared by the appropriate Government, the period of 
emergency treatment referred to in this sub -section may extend up to seven days.  
95. Proh ibited procedures .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the following 
treatments shall not be performed on any person with mental illness — 
(a) electro -convulsive therapy without the use of muscle relaxants and anaesthesia;  
(b) electro -convulsive therapy for minors;  
(c) sterilisation of men or women, when such sterilisation is intended as a treatment for mental 
illness;  
(d) chained in any manner or form whatsoever.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), if, in  the opinion of psychiatrist in charge 
of a minor's treatment, electro -convulsive therapy is required, then, such treatment shall be done with 
the informed consent of the guardian and prior permission of the concerned Board.  
96. Restriction on psychosurger y for persons with mental illness .—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act, psychosurgery shall not be performed as a treat ment for mental illness unless — 
(a) the informed consent of the person on whom the surgery is being performed; and  
(b) approval from the concerned Board to perform the surgery,  
has been obtained.  
(2) The Central Authority may make regulations for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this 
section.  
97. Restraints and seclusion .—(1) A person with mental illness shall  not be subjected to seclusion 
or solitary confinement, and, where necessary, physical re straint may only be used when, — 
(a) it is the only means available to prevent imminent and immediate harm to person concerned or 
to others;  
(b) it is authorised by the  psychiatrist in charge of the person's treatment at the mental health 
establishment.  41 
 (2) Physical restraint shall not be used for a period longer than it is absolutely necessary to prevent 
the immediate risk of significant harm.  
(3) The medical officer or  mental health professional in charge of the mental health establishment 
shall be responsible for ensuring that the method, nature of restraint justification for its imposition and 
the duration of the restraint are immediately recorded in the person's medi cal notes.  
(4) The restraint shall not be used as a form of punishment or deterrent in any circumstance and the 
mental health establishment shall not use restraint merely on the ground of shortage of staff in such 
establishment.  
(5) The nominated represent ative of the person with mental illness shall be informed about every 
instance of restraint within a period of twenty -four hours.  
(6) A person who is placed under restraint shall be kept in a place where he can cause no harm to 
himself or others and under regular ongoing supervision of the medical personnel at the mental health 
establishment.  
(7) The mental health establishment shall include all instances of restraint in the report to be sent to 
the concerned Board on a monthly basis.  
(8) The Central Author ity may make regulations for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this 
section.  
(9) The Board may order a mental health establishment to desist from applying restraint if the Board 
is of the opinion that the mental health establishment is persiste ntly and wilfully ignoring the provisions 
of this section.  
98. Discharge planning .—(1) Whenever a person undergoing treatment for mental illness in a 
mental health establishment is to be discharged into the community or to a different mental health 
establi shment or where a new psychiatrist is to take responsibility of the person's care and treatment, the 
psychiatrist who has been responsible for the person's care and treatment shall consult with the person 
with mental illness, the nominated representative, the family member or care -giver with whom the 
person with mental illness shall reside on discharge from the hospital, the psychiatrist expected to be 
responsible for the person's care and treatment in the future, and such other persons as may be 
appropriat e, as to what treatment or services would be appropriate for the person.  
(2) The psychiatrist responsible for the person's care shall in consultation with the persons referred to 
in sub -section ( 1) ensure that a plan is developed as to how treatment or ser vices shall be provided to the 
person with mental illness.  
(3) The discharge planning under this section shall apply to all discharges from a mental health 
establishment.  
99. Research. —(1) The professionals conducting research shall obtain free and informed consent 
from all persons with mental illness for participation in any research involving interviewing the person 
or psychological, physical, chemical or medicinal interventions.  
(2) In case of research involving any psychological, physical, chemic al or medicinal interventions to 
be conducted on person who is unable to give free and informed consent but does not resist participation 
in such research, permission to conduct such research shall be obtained from concerned State Authority.  
(3) The State  Authority may allow the research to proceed based on informed consent being obtained 
from the nominated representative of persons with mental illness, if the State Authority is satisfied      
that–– 
(a) the proposed research cannot be performed on persons  who are capable of giving free and 
informed consent;  
(b) the proposed research is necessary to promote the mental health of the population represented 
by the person;  42 
 (c) the purpose of the proposed research is to obtain knowledge relevant to the particular mental 
health needs of persons with mental illness;  
(d) a full disclosure of the interests of persons and organisations conducting the proposed research 
is made and there is no conflict of interest involved; and  
(e) the proposed research follows  all the national and international guidelines and regulations 
concerning the conduct of such research and ethical approval has been obtained from the institutional 
ethics committee where such research is to be conducted.  
(4) The provisions of this section  shall not restrict research based study of the case notes of a person 
who is unable to give informed consent, so long as the anonymity of the persons is secured.  
(5) The person with mental illness or the nominated representative who gives informed consent  for 
participation in any research under this Act may withdraw the consent at any time during the period of 
research.  
CHAPTER XIII  
RESPONSIBILITIES OF OTHER AGENCIES  
100. Duties of police officers in respect of persons with mental illness .—(1) Every officer          
in-charge of a po lice station shall have a duty — 
(a) to take under protection any person found wandering at large within the limits of the police 
station whom the officer has reason to believe has mental illness and is incapable of  taking care of 
himself; or  
(b) to take under protection any person within the limits of the police station whom the officer has 
reason to believe to be a risk to himself or others by reason of mental illness.  
(2) The officer in -charge of a police station shall inform the person who has been taken into 
protection under sub -section ( 1), the grounds for taking him into such protection or his nominated 
representative, if in the opinion of the officer such person has difficulty in understanding those grounds.  
(3) Every person taken into protection under sub -section ( 1) shall be taken to the nearest public 
health establishment as soon as possible but not later than twenty -four hours from the time of being 
taken into protection, for assessment of the person's heal thcare needs.  
(4) No person taken into protection under sub -section ( 1) shall be detained in the police lock up or 
prison in any circumstances.  
(5) The medical officer in -charge of the public health establishment shall be responsible for 
arranging the asse ssment of the person and the needs of the person with mental illness will be addressed 
as per other provisions of this Act as applicable in the particular circumstances.  
(6) The medical officer or mental health professional in -charge of the public mental h ealth 
establishment if on assessment of the person finds that such person does not have a mental illness of a 
nature or degree requiring admission to the mental health establishment, he shall inform his assessment 
to the police officer who had taken the pe rson into protection and the police officer shall take the person 
to the person's residence or in case of homeless persons, to a Government establishment for homeless 
persons.  
(7) In case of a person with mental illness who is homeless or found wandering i n the community, a 
First Information Report of a missing person shall be lodged at the concerned police station and the 
station house officer shall have a duty to trace the family of such person and inform the family about the 
whereabouts of the person.  
101. Report to Magistrate of person with mental illness in private residence who is ill -treated 
or neglected .—(1) Every officer in -charge of a police station, who has reason to believe that any person 
residing within the limits of the police station has a mental illness and is being ill -treated or neglected, 43 
 shall forthwith report the fact to the Magistrate within t he local limits of whose jurisdiction the person 
with mental illness resides.  
(2) Any person who has reason to believe that a person has mental illness and is being ill -treated or 
neglected by any person having responsibility for care of such person, shall  report the fact to the police 
officer in -charge of the police station within whose jurisdiction the person with mental illness resides.  
(3) If the Magistrate has reason to believe based on the report of a police officer or otherwise, that 
any person with mental illness within the local limits of his jurisdiction is being ill -treated or neglected, 
the Magistrate may cause the person with mental illness to be produced before him and pass an order in 
accordance with the provisions of section 102.  
102. Conveyi ng or admitting person with mental illness to mental health establishment by 
Magistrate .—(1) When any person with mental illness or who may have a mental illness appears or is 
brought before a Magistrate, the Ma gistrate may, order in writing — 
(a) that the person is conveyed to a public mental health establishment for assessment and 
treatment, if necessary and the mental health establishment shall deal with such person in accordance 
with the provisions of the Act; or  
(b) to authorise the admission of the per son with mental illness in a mental health establishment 
for such period not exceeding ten days to enable the medical officer or mental health professional in 
charge of the mental health establishment to carry out an assessment of the person and to plan fo r 
necessary treatment, if any.  
(2) On completion of the period of assessment referred to in sub -section ( 1), the medical officer or 
mental health professional in charge of the mental health establishment shall submit a report to the 
Magistrate and the pers on shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
103. Prisoners with mental illness .—(1) An order under  section 30  of the Prisoners Act, 1900             
(3 of 1900) or under  section 144  of the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950), or under  section 145  of the 
Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950), or under  section 143  or section 144  of the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957), 
or under  section 330  or section 335  of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), directing the 
admission of a prisoner wit h mental illness into any suitable mental health establishment, shall be 
sufficient authority for the admission of such person in such establishment to which such person may be 
lawfully transferred for care and treatment therein:  
Provided that transfer of a prisoner with mental illness to the psychiatric ward in the medical wing of 
the prison shall be sufficient to meet the requirements under this section:  
Provided further that where there is no provision for a psychiatric ward in the medical wing, the 
prisoner may be transferred to a mental health establishment with prior permission of the Board.  
(2) The method, modalities and procedure by which the transfer of a prisoner under this section is to 
be effected shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) The medical officer of a prison or jail shall send a quarterly report to the concerned Board 
certifying therein that there are no prisoners with mental illness in the prison or jail.  
(4) The Board may visit the prison or jail and ask the medical officer as to why the prisoner with 
mental illness, if any, has been kept in the prison or jail and not transferred for treatment to a mental 
health establishment.  
(5) The medical officer in -charge of a mental health establishment wherein any person referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) is detained, shall once in every six months, make a special report regarding the mental 
and physical condition of such person to the authority under whose order such person is detained.  
(6) The appropriate Government shall setup mental health es tablishment in the medical wing of at 
least one prison in each State and Union territory and prisoners with mental illness may ordinarily be 
referred to and cared for in the said mental health establishment.  44 
 (7) The mental health establis hment setup under sub-section (6 ) shall be registered under this Act 
with the Central or State Mental Health Authority, as the case may be, and shall conform to such 
standards and procedures as may be prescribed.  
104. Persons in custodial institutions .—(1) If it appears to the person in -charge of a State run 
custodial institution (including beggars homes, orphanages, women's protection homes and children 
homes) that any resident of the institution has, or is likely to have, a mental illness, then, he shall take 
such resident  of the institution to the nearest mental health establishment run or funded by the 
appropriate Government for assessment and treatment, as necessary.  
(2) The medical officer in -charge of a mental health establishment shall be responsible for 
assessment of  the person with mental illness, and the treatment required by such persons shall be 
decided in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
105. Question of mental illness in judicial process .—If during any judicial process before any 
competent court, proo f of mental illness is produced and is challenged by the other party, the court shall 
refer the same for further scrutiny to the concerned Board and the Board shall, after examination of the 
person alleged to have a mental illness either by itself or throu gh a committee of experts, submit its 
opinion to the court.  
CHAPTER XIV  
RESTRICTION TO DISCHARGE FUNCTIONS BY PROFESSIONAL N OT COVERED BY PROFESSION  
106. Restriction to discharge functions by professionals not covered  by profession .—No mental 
health professional or medical practitioner shall discharge any duty or perform any function not 
authorised by this Act or specify or recommend any medicine or treatment not authorised by the field of 
his profession.  
CHAPTER XV  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
107. Penalties for establishing or maintaining mental health establishment in contravention of 
provisions of this Act .—(1) Whoever carries on a mental health establishment without registration shall 
be liable to a penalty which shall not be less than five thou sand rupees but which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees for first contravention or a penalty which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees 
but which may extend to two lakh rupees for a second contravention or a penalty which shall not be less 
than t wo lakh rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees for every subsequent contravention.  
(2) Whoever knowingly serves in the capacity as a mental health professional in a mental health 
establishment which is not registered under this Act, shall be liabl e to a penalty which may extend to 
twenty -five thousand rupees.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the penalty under this section shall be adjudicated by the 
State Authority.  
(4) Whoever fails to pay the amount of penalty, the State Authority may forward the order to the 
Collector of the district in which such person owns any property or resides or carries on his business or 
profession or where the mental health establishment is situated, and the Collector shall recover from 
such persons or mental health establishment the amount specified thereunder, as if it were an arrear of 
land revenue.  
(5) All sums realised by way of penalties under this Chapter shall be credited to the Consolidated 
Fund of India.  
108. Punishment for contravention of provisions  of the Act or rules or regulations made 
thereunder .—Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, or of any rule or 
regulation made thereunder shall for first contravention be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six  months, or with a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both, 
and for any subsequent contravention with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or 45 
 with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may exte nd to five lakh rupees or 
with both.  
109.  Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in -charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the cond uct of the business of the company, as well as the company, 
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he has exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of  the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
CHAPTER XVI  
MISCELLA NEOUS  
110. Power to call for information .—(1) The Central Government may, by a general or special 
order, call upon the Authority or the Board to furnish, periodically or as and when required any 
information concerning the activities carried on by the Authority or the Board, as the case may be, in 
such form as may be prescribed, to enable that G overnment, to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The State Government may, by a general or special order, call upon the State Authority or the 
Board to furnish, periodically or as and when required any information concerning the activities carried 
on by the State Authority or the Board in such form as may be prescribed, to enable that Government, to 
carry out the purposes of this Act.  
111. Power of Central Government to issue directions .—(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing 
provisions of this Act, th e Authority shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions 
under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy, other than those relating to technical 
and administrative matters, as the Central Government may give in wr iting to it from time to time:  
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views 
before any direction is given under this sub -section.  
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one  of policy or not shall be final.  
112. Power of Central Government to supersede Central Authority .—(1) If at any time the 
Centra l Government is of the opinion — 
(a) that on account of circumstances beyond the control of the Central Authority, it is unable t o 
discharge the functions or perform the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or  
(b) that the Central Authority has persistently defaulted in complying with any direction given by 
the Central Government under this Act or in the disc harge of the functions or performance of the 
duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or  
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary i n the public interest so to do,  46 
 the Central Government may, by notification and for reasons  to be specified therein, supersede the 
Central Authority for such period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification:  
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central Government shall give a reasonable 
opportunity to the Central Authority to make representations against the proposed supersession and shall 
consider representations, if any, of the Central Authority.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section ( 1), supe rseding the Central              
Authority,  — 
(a) the chairperson and other members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices 
as such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be 
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of  the Central Authority shall, until the Central Authority is 
reconstituted under sub -section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by the Central Government or such 
authority as the Central Government may specify in this behalf;  
(c) all properties owned or cont rolled by the Central Authority shall, until the Central Authority is 
reconstituted under sub -section ( 3), vest in the Central Government.  
(3) On or before the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under 
sub-section (1), the Central Government shall reconstitute the Central Authority by a fresh appointment 
of its chairperson and other members and in such case any person who had vacated his office under 
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) shall not be deemed to be disqualifi ed for re -appointment.  
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub -section ( 1) and a full report 
of any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid before each 
House of Parliament at th e earliest.  
113. Power of State Government to supersede State Authority .—(1) If at any time the Stat e 
Government is of the opinion — 
(a) that on account of circumstances beyond the control of the State Authority, it is unable to 
discharge the functions or perform the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or  
(b) that the State Authority has persistently defaulted in complying with any direction given by 
the State Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions or perform ance of the duties 
imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or  
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the pub lic interest so to do,  
the State Government may, by notification and for reasons to be specified therein, supersede  the State 
Authority for such period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification:  
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the State Government shall give a reasonable 
opportunity to the State Authority to make representat ions against the proposed supersession and shall 
consider representations, if any, of the State Authority.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section ( 1) superseding the State Authority,  — 
(a) the chairperson and other members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices 
as such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be 
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the State Authority shall, until the State Authority is 
reconstituted under sub -section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by the State Government or such 
authority as the State Government may specify in this behalf;  
(c) all properties owned or controlled by the State Authority shall, until the State Authority is  
reconstituted under sub -section ( 3), vest in the State Government.  47 
 (3) On or before the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under 
sub-section ( 1), the State Government shall reconstitute the State Authority by a f resh appointment of its 
chairperson and other members and in such case any person who had vacated his office under clause ( a) 
of sub -section ( 2) shall not be deemed to be disqualified for re -appointment.  
(4) The State Government shall cause a notification issued under sub -section ( 1) and a full report of 
any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid before the 
State Legislature at the earliest.  
114. Special provisions for States in north -east and hill States .—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall, taking into consideration the communication, 
travel and transportation difficulties, apply to the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura, Mizoram, 
Manipur, Nagaland, Arunachal  Pradesh and Sikkim, with fo llowing modifications, namely: — 
(a) under sub -section ( 3) of section 73, the chairperson of the Central Authority may constitute 
one or more Boards for all the States;  
(b) in sub -section ( 2) of section 80, reference to the period of “seven days ”, and in sub -section ( 3) 
of that section, reference to the period of “twenty -one days ” shall be construed as “ten days ” and 
“thirty days ”, respectively;  
(c) in sub -section ( 9) of section 87, reference  to the period of “seventy -two hours ” shall be 
construed as “one hundred twenty hours ”, and in sub -sections ( 3) and ( 12) of that section, reference 
to a period of “seven days ” shall be construed as “ten days ”; 
(d) in sub -section ( 3) of section 88, referenc e to the period of “twenty -four hours ” shall be 
construed as ” seventy -two hours ”; 
(e) in clauses ( a) and ( b) of sub -section ( 9) of section 89, reference to the period of “three days ” 
and “seven days ” shall be construed as “seven days ” and “ten days ” respectively;  
(f) in sub -section ( 3) of section 90, reference to the period of “seven days ” and in sub -section ( 4) 
of that section, reference to the period of “twenty -one days ” shall be construed as “ten days ” and 
“thirty days ” respectively;  
(g) in sub -section ( 4) of section 94, reference to the period of “seventy -two hours ” shall be 
construed as “one hundred twenty hours ”. 
(2) The provisions of clauses ( b) to ( g) of sub -section ( 1) shall also apply to the States of 
Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir and the Union territories of Lakshadweep and 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands.  
(3) The provisions of this section shall cease to have effect on the expiry of a period of ten years 
from the commencement of this Act, except as respects things done or omitted to be done before such 
cesser, and upon such cesser section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), shall apply as if 
this Act had then been repealed by a Central Act.   
115. Presumption of severe stress in case of attempt to commit suicide .—(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in  section 309  of the Indian Penal Code (45 of  1860)  any person who attempts to 
commit suicide shall be presumed, unless proved otherwise, to have severe stress and shall not be tried 
and punished under the said Code.  
(2) The appropriate Government shall have a duty to provide care, treatment and rehabilita tion to a 
person, having severe stress and who attempted to commit suicide, to reduce the risk of recurrence of 
attempt to commit suicide.  
116.  Bar of jurisdiction .—No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding 
in respect of any matter which the Authority or the Board is empowered by or under this Act to 
determine, and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action 
taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under thi s Act.  48 
 117.  Transitory provisions .—The Central Government may, if it considers so necessary in the 
interest of persons with mental illness being governed by the Mental Health Act, 1987 (14 of 1987), 
take appropriate interim measures by making necessary tr ansitory schemes.  
118. Chairperson, members and staff of Authority and Board to be public servants .—The 
chairperson, and other members and the officers and other employees of the Authority and Board shall 
be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21  of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
119. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the appropriate Government or against the chairperson or any other member of the Authority 
or the Board, as the case may be, for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder in the discharge of official d uties  
120. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force 
or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law  other than this Act.  
121. Power of Central Government and State Governments to make rules .—(1) The Central 
Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the State  Government may, with the previous 
approval of the Central Government, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this 
Act: 
Provided that the first rules shall be made by the Central Government, by notification.  
(3) In particular, and w ithout prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules made under 
sub-section ( 1) may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) qualifications relating to clinical psychologist under sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( g) of                    
sub-section ( 1) of section 2;  
(b) qualifications relating to psychiatric social worker under clause ( x) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2;  
(c) the manner of nomination of members of the Central Authority under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 34 ; 
(d) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
chairperson and other members of the Central Authority under sub -section ( 3) of section 35;  
(e) the procedure for registration (including the fees to be lev ied for such registration) of the 
mental health establishments under sub -section ( 2) of section 43;  
(f) the manner of nomination of members of the State Authority under sub -section ( 2) of            
section 46;  
(g) the salaries and allowances payable to, a nd the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
chairperson and other members of the State Authority under sub -section ( 3) of section 47;  
(h) the procedure for registration (including the fees to be levied for such registration) of the 
mental health e stablishments under sub -section ( 2) of section 55;  
(i) the form of accounts and other relevant records and annual statement of accounts under             
sub-section ( 1) of section 59;  
(j) the form in, and the time within which, an annual report shall be prepared under section 60;  
(k) the form of accounts and other relevant records and annual statement of accounts under              
sub-section ( 1) of section 63;  
(l) the form in, and the time within which, an annual report shall be prepared under section 6 4; 49 
 (m) the manner of constitution of the Board by the State Authority for a district or groups of 
districts in a State  under sub -section ( 3) of section 73 ; 
(n) other disqualifications of chairperson or members of the Board under clause ( e) of              
sub-section ( 2) of section 74; 
(o) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by rules or in respect for which 
provision is to be made by rules.  
(4) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules ma de under 
sub-section ( 2) may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of proof of mental healthcare and treatment under sub -section ( 1) of section 4;  
(b) provision of half -way homes, sheltered accommodation and supported accommodation under 
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 4) of section 18;  
(c) hospitals and community based rehabilitation establishment and services under clause ( d) of 
sub-section ( 4) of section 18;  
(d) basic medical records of which access is to be given to a pe rson with mental illness under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 25;  
(e) custodial institutions under sub -section ( 2) of section 27;  
(f) the form of application to be submitted by the mental health establishment with the 
undertaking that the mental health establ ishment fulfils the minimum standards, if any, specified by 
the Authority, under the Explanation to sub -section ( 2) of section 65;  
(g) the form of certificate of registration under sub -section ( 3) of section 65;  
(h) the form of application, the details, the fees to be accompanied with it under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 66;  
(i) the form of certificate of provisional registration containing particulars and information under 
sub-section ( 4) of section 66;  
(j) the fees for renewal of registration under sub-section ( 11) of section 66;  
(k) the person or persons (including representatives of the local community) for the purpose of 
conducting an audit of the registered mental health establishments under sub -section ( 1) and fees to 
be charged by the Authority  for conducting such audit under sub -section ( 2) of section 67;  
(l) the person or persons for the purpose of conducting and inspection or inquiry of the mental 
health establishments under sub -section ( 1) of section 68;  
(m) the manner to enter and search of  a mental health establishment operating without registration 
under sub -section ( 6) of section 68;  
(n) the fees for issuing a duplicate certificate under sub -section ( 2) of section 70;  
(o) the form and manner in which the Authority shall maintain in digita l format a register of 
mental health establishments, the particulars of the certificate of registration so granted in a separate 
register to be maintained under section 71;  
(p) constitution of the Boards under sub -section ( 3) of section 73;  
(q) the honorar ium and other allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service 
of, the chairperson and members of the Board under sub -section ( 3) of section 75;  
(r) method, modalities and procedure for transfer of prisoners under sub -section ( 2) of                 
section 103;  
(s) the standard and procedure to which the Central or State Health Authority shall confirm under 
sub-section ( 7) of section 103;  50 
 (t) the form for furnishing periodical information under section 110; and  
(u) any other matter which  is required to be, or may be, specified by rules or in respect for which 
provision is to be made by rules.  
122. Power of Central Authority to make regulations .—(1) The Central Authority may, by 
notification, make regulations, consistent with the provision s of this Act and the rules made thereunder, 
to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations 
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of making an advance directive under section 6;  
(b) additional regulations, regarding the procedure of advance directive to protect the rights of 
persons with mental illness under sub -section ( 3) of section 12;  
(c) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service 
(including the qualifications, experience and manner of appointment) of, the chief executive officer 
and other officers and employees of the Central Authority under sub -section ( 3) of section 40;  
(d) the times and places of meetings of the Central Authority and rules of procedure in regard to 
the transaction of business at its meetings (including quorum at such meetings) under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 44;  
(e) the minimum standards of facilities and  services under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 4) of          
section 65;  
(f) the minimum qualifications for the personnel engaged in mental health establishment under 
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 4) of section 65;  
(g) the provisions for maintenance of records and reporting under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 4) of 
section 65;  
(h) any other conditions under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 4) of section 65;  
(i) categories of different mental health establishment under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 5) of 
section 65;  
(j) the form of application to be made by the mental health establishment and the fees to be 
accompanied with it under sub -section ( 12) of section 66;  
(k) the manner of submitting evidence under sub -section ( 13) of section 66;  
(l) the manner of filing objections under sub -section ( 14) of section 66;  
(m) regulations under sub -section ( 2) of section 96 and under sub -section ( 8) of section 97;  
(n) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations or in respect of 
which provision is to be m ade by regulations.  
123. Power of State Authority to make regulations .—(1) The State Authority may, by notification, 
make regulations, consistent with the provision of this Act and the rules made thereunder, to carry out 
the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations 
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the minimum quality standards of mental health services under sub -section ( 9) of section 18;  
(b) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service 
(including the qualifications, experience and manner of appointment) of the chief executive officer 
and other officers and employees of the State Authority under sub -section ( 3) of section 52;  51 
 (c) the manner in which the State Authority shall publish the list of registered mental health 
professionals under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 55;  
(d) the times and places of meetings of the State Authority and rule s of procedure in regard to the 
transaction of business at its meetings (including quorum at such meetings) under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 56;  
(e) the form of application to be made by the mental health establishment and the fees to be 
accompanied with i t under sub -section ( 12) of section 66;  
(f) the manner of filing objections under sub -section (14) of section 66;  
(g) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations or in respect of 
which provision is to be made by regulation s. 
124. Laying of rules and regulations .—(1) Every rule made by the Central Government and every 
regulation made by the Central Authority under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in ma king 
any modification in the rule or regulation, as the case may be, or both Houses agree that the rule or 
regulation, as the case may be, should not be made, the rule or regulation, as the case may be, shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified fo rm or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule or regulation, as the case may be.  
(2) Every rule made by the State Gover nment and every regulation made by the State Authority 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State 
Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before 
that House.  
125. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient 
for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
126. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Mental Health Act, 1987 (14 of 1 987) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal,  — 
(a) anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or taken (including any 
rule, notification, inspection, order or declaration made or any document or instrument executed or 
any direction given or any proceedings taken or any penalty or fine imposed) under the repealed Act 
shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done 
or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act;  
(b) the Central Authority for Mental Health Services, and the State Authority for Mental Health 
Services established under the repealed Act shall, continue to function under the corresponding 
provisions of this Act, unless and until the Central Authority and the State Authority are constituted 
under this Act;  
(c) any person appointed in the Central Auth ority for Mental Health Services, or the State 
Authority for Mental Health Services or any person appointed as the visitor under the repealed Act 
and holding office as such immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall, on such 52 
 commencement contin ue to hold their respective offices under the corresponding provisions of this 
Act, unless they are removed or until superannuated;  
(d) any person appointed under the provisions of the repealed Act and holding office as such 
immediately before the commence ment of this Act, shall, on such commencement continue to hold 
his office under the corresponding provisions of this Act, unless they are removed or until 
superannuated;  
(e) any licence granted under the provisions of the repealed Act, shall be deemed to h ave been 
granted under the corresponding provisions of this Act unless the same are cancelled or modified 
under this Act;  
(f) any proceeding pending in any court under the repealed Act on the commencement of this Act 
may be continued in that court as if th is Act had not been enacted;  
(g) any appeal preferred from the order of a Magistrate under the repealed Act but not disposed of 
before the commencement of this Act may be disposed of by the court as if this Act had not been 
enacted.  
(3) The mention of the particular matters in sub -section ( 2) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the 
general application of  section 6  of the General Clauses A ct, 1897 (10 of 1 897) with regard to the effect 
of repeal.  
--------------------------The Specified Bank Notes (Cessation of Liabilties) Act, 2017--------------------------
1 THE SPECIFIED BANK NOTES (CESSATION OF LIABILITIES) ACT, 2017 
___________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
__________ 
SECTIONS
1.Short title and commencement. 
2.Definitions. 
3.Specified bank notes to cease to be liability of Reserve Bank or Central Government. 
4.Exchange of specified bank notes. 
5.Prohibition on holding transferring or  receiving specified bank notes. 
6.Penalty for contravention of section 4. 
7.Penalty for contravention of section 5. 
8.Offences by companies. 
9.Special provisions relating to offences. 
10.Protection of action taken in good faith. 
11.Power to make rules. 
12.Power to remove difficulties. 
13.Repeal and savings. 2 THE SPECIFIED BANK NOTES (CESSATION OF LIABILITIES) ACT, 2017 
ACT NO. 2 OF 2017 
[27th February , 2017.] 
An Act to provide in the public interest for the cessation of liabilities on the specified bank 
notes and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1)This Act may be called the Specified Bank Notes 
(Cessation of Liabilities) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 31st day of December, 2016.
2.  Definitions. —(1)In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “appointed day” means the 31st day of December, 2016; 
(b) “grace period” means the period to be specified by the Central Government, by notification, 
during which the specified bank notes can be deposited in accordance with this Act;
(c)“notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette; 
(d) “Reserve Bank” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted by the Central Government 
under section 3 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);
(e)“specified bank note” means a bank note of the denominational value of five hundred rupees 
or one thousand rupees of the series existing on or before the 8th day of November, 2016.
(2)The words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934) or the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) shall have the meanings 
respectively assigned to them in those Acts. 
3. Specified bank notes to cease to be liability of Reserve Bank or Central Government. —On 
and from the appointed day, notwithstanding anything contained in the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934         
(2 of 1934) or any other law for the time being in force, the specified bank notes which have ceased to be 
legal tender, in view of the notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Finance, number S.O. 
3407(E), dated the 8th November, 2016, issued under sub-section ( 2)of section 26 of the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934, shall cease to be liabilities of the Reserve Bank under section 34 and shall cease to have the 
guarantee of the Central Government under sub-section ( 1)of section 26 of the said Act. 
4.Exchange of specified bank notes .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, the 
following persons holding specified bank notes on or before the 8th day of November, 2016 shall be entitled 
to tender within the grace period with such declarations or statements, at such offices of the Reserve Bank or 
in such other manner as may be specified by it, namely:— 
(i) a citizen of India who makes a declaration that he was outside India between the 9th November, 
2016 to 30th December, 2016, subject to such conditions as may be specified, by notification, by the 
Central Government; or 
(ii) such class of persons and for such reasons as may be specified by notification, by the 
Central Government. 
(2) The Reserve Bank may, if satisfied, after making such verifications as it may consider necessary that the 
reasons for failure to deposit the notes within the period specified in the notification referred to in section 3, are 
genuine, credit the value of the notes in his Know Your Customer compliant bank account in such manner as 
may be specified by it. 
(3) Any person, aggrieved by the refusal of the Reserve Bank to credit the value of the notes under 
sub-section ( 2),may make a representation to the Central Board of the Reserve Bank within fourteen 
days of the communication of such refusal to him. 3 Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the expression “Know Your Customer compliant bank 
account” means the account which complies with the conditions specified in the regulations made by the 
Reserve Bank under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949). 
5. Prohibition on holding transferring or receiving specified bank notes. —On and from the 
appointed day, no person shall, knowingly or voluntarily, hold, transfer or receive any specified bank 
note: 
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the holding of specified bank notes—  
(a) by any person— 
(i) up to the expiry of the grace period; or 
(ii) after the expiry of the grace period,— 
(A) not more than ten notes in total, irrespective of the denomination; or 
(B) not more than twenty-five notes for the purposes of study, research or numismatics; 
(b) by the Reserve Bank or its agencies, or any other person authorised by the Reserve Bank; 
(c) by any person on the direction of a court in relation to any case pending in the court. 
1[(d) by the law enforcement agencies, such as the Central Board of Direct Taxes, Central 
Board of Indirect Taxes and Enforcement Directorate on production of the documents authorising 
such seizure or confiscation, as the case may be.] 
6. Penalty for contravention of section 4 .—Whoever knowingly and wilfully makes any 
declaration or statement specified under sub-section ( 1) of section 4, which is false in material 
particulars, or omits to make a material statement, or makes a statement which he does not believe to be 
true, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees or five times the amount 
of the face value of the specified bank notes tendered, whichever is higher. 
7. Penalty for contravention of section 5 .—Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 5 shall 
be punishable with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or five times the amount of the face 
value of the specified bank notes involved in the contravention, whichever is higher. 
8. Offences by companies. —(1) Where a person committing a contravention or default referred to in 
section 6 or section 7 is a company, every person who, at the time the contravention or default was 
committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the 
company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the contravention or default and shall be 
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to punishment if 
he proves that the contravention or default was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the contravention or default. 
(2)Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the same was committed with the consent or connivance 
of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary, or other officer or 
employee of the company, such director, manager, secretary, other officer or employee shall also be 
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation. —For the purpose of this section,— 
(a) “a company” means any body corporate and includes a firm, a trust, a co-operative society 
and other association of individuals; 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm or trust, means a partner in the firm or a beneficiary in the 
trust. 
1. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 4149(E) dated 24th August 2018 (w.e.f. 24-8-2018) 4 9. Special provisions relating to offences. —Notwithstanding anything contained  in section 29 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the court of a Magistrate of the First Class or 
the court of a Metropolitan Magistrate may impose a fine, for contravention of the provisions of this 
Act. 
10. Protection of action taken in good faith. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Government, the Reserve Bank or any of their officers for anything done or intended to 
be done in good faith under this Act. 
11. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for  
carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
12. Power to remove difficulties .—(1)If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of two years 
from the date of commencement of this Act. 
(2)Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament. 
13. Repeal and savings .—(1)The Specified Bank Notes (Cessation of Liabilities) Ordinance, 2016 
(Ord. 10 of 2016) is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall 
be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
--------------------------The Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017--------------------------
1 THE UNION TERRITORY GOODS AND SERVICES TAX ACT, 2017 
______ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
______ 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY
SECTIONS
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
 2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ADMINISTRATION
3. Officers under this Act.  
4. Authorisation of officers.  
5. Powers of officers.  
6. Authorisation of officers of central tax as proper officer in certain circumstances. 
CHAPTER III 
LEVY AND COLLECTION OF TAX 
7. Levy and collection.  
8. Power to grant exemption from tax.  
CHAPTER IV  
PAYMENT OF TAX 
9. Payment of tax.  
9A. Utilisation of input tax credit. 
9B. Order of utilisation of input tax credit. 
10. Transfer of input tax credit.  
CHAPTER V 
INSPECTION , SEARCH, SEIZURE AND ARREST 
11. Officers required to assist proper officers.  
CHAPTER VI 
DEMANDS AND RECOVERY 
12. Tax wrongfully collected and paid to Central Government or Union territory Government.  
13.  Recovery of tax.  
CHAPTER VII  
ADVANCE RULING
14.Definitions.  
15. Constitution of Authority for Advance Ruling.  
16.Constitution of Appellate Authority for Advance Ruling.  2 SECTIONS
CHAPTER VIII 
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 
17. Migration of existing tax payers.  
18.Transitional arrangements for input tax credit.
19. Transitional provisions relating to job work.  
20.  Miscellaneous transitional provisions.  
CHAPTER IX  
MISCELLANEOUS 
21. Application of provisions of Central Goods and Services Tax Act.  
22. Power to make rules. 
23. General power to make regulations. 
24. Laying of rules, regulations and notifications. 
25. Power to issue instructions or directions. 
26. Removal of difficulties. 3 THE UNION TERRITORY GOODS AND SERVICES TAX ACT, 2017 
 ACT NO. 14 OF 2017 
[12th April, 2017.] 
An Act to make a provision for levy and collection of tax on intra-State supply of goods or services or 
both by the Union territories and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Union Territory Goods and 
Services Tax Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the Union territories of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep, Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu, Chandigarh and other territory. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint: 
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming 
into force of that provision. 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(1) “appointed day” means the date on which the provisions of this Act shall come into force; 
(2) “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of Union territory tax appointed under section 3; 
(3) “designated authority” means such authority as may be notified by the Commissioner; 
(4) “exempt supply” means supply of any goods or services or both which attracts nil rate of tax 
or which may be exempt from tax under section 8, or under section 6 of the Integrated Goods and 
Services Tax Act, and includes non-taxable supply; 
(5) “existing law” means any law, notification, order, rule or regulation relating to levy and 
collection of duty or tax on goods or services or both passed or made before the commencement of 
this Act by Parliament or any Authority or person having the power to make such law, notification, 
order, rule or regulation; 
(6) “Government” means the Administrator or any Authority or officer authorised to act as 
Administrator by the Central Government; 
(7) “output tax” in relation to a taxable person, means the Union territory tax chargeable under 
this Act on taxable supply of goods or services or both made by him or by his agent but excludes tax 
payable by him on reverse charge basis; 
(8) “Union territory” means the territory of,— 
(i) the Andaman and Nicobar Islands; 
(ii) Lakshadweep; 
(iii) Dadra and Nagar Haveli; 
(iv) Daman and Diu; 
(v) Chandigarh; or 
(vi) other territory. 
1. 22nd, June, 2017 for sections 1, 2, 3,4,5, 17, 21 and 22 vide notification No. G.S.R. 616(E) dated the 21st June, 2017, see
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( i). 
1st July, 2017 for sections 6 to 16, 18 to 20 and 23 to 26 vide notification No. G.S.R. 701(E) dated the 28th June, 2017, see
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( i)  4 Explanation .—For the purposes of this Act, each of the territories specified in sub-clauses ( i) to (vi) 
shall be considered to be a separate Union territory;
(9) “Union territory tax” means the tax levied under this Act; 
(10) words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Central Goods and 
Services Tax Act, the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, the State Goods and Services Tax Act, and 
the Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to States) Act, shall have the same meaning as assigned to 
them in those Acts. 
CHAPTER II  
ADMINISTRATION
3. Officers under this Act .—The Administrator may, by notification, appoint Commissioners and such 
other class of officers as may be required for carrying out the purposes of this Act and such officers shall be 
deemed to be proper officers for such purposes as may be specified therein: 
Provided that the officers appointed under the existing law shall be deemed to be the officers 
appointed under the provisions of this Act. 
4. Authorisation of officers .—The Administrator may, by order, authorise any officer to appoint 
officers of Union territory tax below the rank of Assistant Commissioner of Union territory tax for the 
administration of this Act.
5. Powers of officers. —(1) Subject to such conditions and limitations as the Commissioner may 
impose, an officer of the Union territory tax may exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred 
or imposed on him under this Act.
(2) An officer of a Union territory tax may exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred or 
imposed under this Act on any other officer of a Union territory tax who is subordinate to him. 
(3) The Commissioner may, subject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified in this behalf 
by him, delegate his powers to any other officer subordinate to him. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, an Appellate Authority shall not exercise the 
powers and discharge the duties conferred or imposed on any other officer of Union territory tax. 
6. Authorisation of officers of central tax as proper officer in certain circumstances. —(1) Without 
prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the officers appointed under the Central Goods and Services Tax Act 
are authorised to be the proper officers for the purposes of this Act, subject to such conditions as the 
Government shall, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify.
(2) Subject to the conditions specified in the notification issued under sub-section ( 1),— 
(a) where any proper officer issues an order under this Act, he shall also issue an order under the 
Central Goods and Services Tax Act, as authorised by the said Act under intimation to the 
jurisdictional officer of central tax; 
(b) where a proper officer under the Central Goods and Services Tax Act has initiated any 
proceedings on a subject matter, no proceedings shall be initiated by the proper officer under this Act 
on the same subject matter. 
(3) Any proceedings for rectification, appeal and revision, wherever applicable, of any order passed 
by an officer appointed under this Act, shall not lie before an officer appointed under the Central Goods 
and Services Tax Act. 
CHAPTER III 
LEVY AND COLLECTION OF TAX 
7. Levy and collection .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 2), there shall be levied a tax 
called the Union territory tax on all intra-State supplies of goods or services or both, except on the supply of 
alcoholic liquor for human consumption, on the value determined under section 15 of the Central Goods and 
Services Tax Act and at such rates, not exceeding twenty per cent., as may be notified by the Central 5 Government on the recommendations of the Council and collected in such manner as may be prescribed and 
shall be paid by the taxable person.
(2) The Union territory tax on the supply of petroleum crude, high speed diesel, motor spirit (commonly 
known as petrol), natural gas and aviation turbine fuel shall be levied with effect from such date as may be 
notified by the Central Government on the recommendations of the Council. 
(3) The Central Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify 
categories of supply of goods or services or both, the tax on which shall be paid on reverse charge basis 
by the recipient of such goods or services or both and all the provisions of this Act shall apply to such 
recipient as if he is the person liable for paying the tax in relation to the supply of such goods or services 
or both. 
1[(4) The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify a class of 
registered persons who shall, in respect of supply of specified categories of goods or services or both 
received from an unregistered supplier, pay the tax on reverse charge basis as the recipient of such supply 
of goods or services or both, and all the provisions of this Act shall apply to such recipient as if he is the 
person liable for paying the tax in relation to such supply of goods or services or both.]  
(5) The Central Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify 
categories of services the tax on intra-State supplies of which shall be paid by the electronic commerce 
operator if such services are supplied through it, and all the provisions of this Act shall apply to such 
electronic commerce operator as if he is the supplier liable for paying the tax in relation to the supply of 
such services: 
Provided that where an electronic commerce operator does not have a physical presence in the 
taxable territory, any person representing such electronic commerce operator for any purpose in the 
taxable territory shall be liable to pay tax: 
Provided further that where an electronic commerce operator does not have a physical presence in 
the taxable territory and also he does not have a representative in the said territory, such electronic 
commerce operator shall appoint a person in the taxable territory for the purpose of paying tax and such 
person shall be liable to pay tax. 
8. Power to grant exemption from tax .—(1) Where the Central Government is satisfied that it is 
necessary in the public interest so to do, it may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, 
exempt generally either absolutely or subject to such conditions as may be specified therein, goods or 
services or both of any specified description from the whole or any part of the tax leviable thereon with 
effect from such date as may be specified in such notification.
(2) Where the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary in the public interest so to do, it 
may, on the recommendations of the Council, by special order in each case, under circumstances of an 
exceptional nature to be stated in such order, exempt from payment of tax any goods or services or both 
on which tax is leviable. 
(3) The Central Government may, if it considers necessary or expedient so to do for the purpose of 
clarifying the scope or applicability of any notification issued under sub-section ( 1) or order issued under 
sub-section ( 2), insert an explanation in such notification or order, as the case may be, by notification at 
any time within one year of issue of the notification under sub-section ( 1) or order under sub-section ( 2), 
and every such explanation shall have effect as if it had always been the part of the first such notification 
or order, as the case may be. 
(4) Any notification issued by the Central Government under sub-section ( 1) of section 11 or order 
issued under sub-section ( 2) of the said section of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act shall be 
deemed to be a notification or, as the case may be, an order issued under this Act. 
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2018, s. 2 for sub-section ( 4) (w.e.f. 1-2-2019)  6 Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, where an exemption in respect of any goods or services 
or both from the whole or part of the tax leviable thereon has been granted absolutely, the registered person 
supplying such goods or services or both shall not collect the tax, in excess of the effective rate, on such 
supply of goods or services or both.
CHAPTER IV  
PAYMENT OF TAX 
9. Payment of tax. —The amount of input tax credit available in the electronic credit ledger of the 
registered person on account of,—
(a) integrated tax shall first be utilised towards payment of integrated tax and the amount 
remaining, if any, may be utilised towards the payment of central tax and State tax, or as the case may 
be, Union territory tax, in that order; 
(b) the Union territory tax shall first be utilised towards payment of Union territory tax and the 
amount remaining, if any, may be utilised towards payment of integrated tax: 
1[Provided that the input tax credit on account of Union territory tax shall be utilised towards 
payment of integrated tax only where the balance of the input tax credit on account of central tax is 
not available for payment of integrated tax.]; 
(c) the Union territory tax shall not be utilised towards payment of central tax. 
2[9A. Utilisation of input tax credit. —Notwithstanding anything contained in section 9, the input 
tax credit on account of Union territory tax shall be utilised towards payment of integrated tax or Union 
territory tax, as the case may be, only after the input tax credit available on account of integrated tax has 
first been utilised towards such payment. 
9B. Order of utilisation of input tax credit. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter 
and subject to the provisions of clause (c) of section 9, the Government may, on the recommendations of 
the Council, prescribe the order and manner of utilisation of the input tax credit on account of integrated 
tax, Central tax, State tax or Union territory tax, as the case may be, towards payment of any such tax.] 
10. Transfer of input tax credit. —On utilisation of input tax credit of Union territory tax for payment 
of tax dues under the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act in accordance with the provisions of sub-
section ( 5) of section 49 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, as reflected in the valid return 
furnished under sub-section ( 1) of section 39 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, the amount 
collected as Union territory tax shall stand reduced by an amount equal to such credit so utilised and the 
Central Government shall transfer an amount equal to the amount so reduced from the Union territory tax 
account to the integrated tax account in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER V 
INSPECTION , SEARCH, SEIZURE AND ARREST
11.Officers required to assist proper officers. —(1) All officers of Police, Railways, Customs, and 
those officers engaged in the collection of land revenue, including village officers, and officers of central 
tax and officers of the State tax shall assist the proper officers in the implementation of this Act. 
(2) The Government may, by notification, empower and require any other class of officers to assist 
the proper officers in the implementation of this Act when called upon to do so by the Commissioner. 
CHAPTER VI 
DEMANDS AND RECOVERY 
1. The proviso ins. by Act 33 of 2018, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-2-2019)  
2. Ins. by s. 4, ibid., (w.e.f. 1-2-2019) 7 12. Tax wrongfully collected and paid to Central Government or Union territory     
Government. —(1) A registered person who has paid the central tax and the Union territory tax on a 
transaction considered by him to be an intra-State supply, but which is subsequently held to be an inter-
State supply, shall be refunded the amount of taxes so paid in such manner and subject to such conditions 
as may be prescribed. 
(2) A registered person who has paid integrated tax on a transaction considered by him to be an inter-
State supply, but which is subsequently held to be an intra-State supply, shall not be required to pay any 
interest on the amount of the central tax and the Union territory tax payable. 
13.  Recovery of tax. —(1) Where any amount of tax, interest or penalty is payable by a person to the 
Government under any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder and which remains 
unpaid, the proper officer of central tax, during the course of recovery of said tax arrears, may recover the 
amount from the said person as if it were an arrear of central tax and credit the amount so recovered to the 
account of the Government under the appropriate head of Union territory tax. 
(2) Where the amount recovered under sub-section ( 1) is less than the amount due to the Government 
under this Act and the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, the amount to be credited to the account of 
the Government shall be in proportion to the amount due as Union territory tax and central tax. 
CHAPTER VII  
ADVANCE RULING
14.Definitions. —In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “advance ruling” means a decision provided by the Authority or the Appellate Authority to an 
applicant on matters or on questions specified in sub-section ( 2) of section 97 or sub-section ( 1) of          
section 100 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, in relation to the supply of goods or services or 
both being undertaken or proposed to be undertaken by the applicant; 
(b) “Appellate Authority” means the Appellate Authority for Advance Ruling constituted under 
section 16; 
(c) “applicant” means any person registered or desirous of obtaining registration under this Act; 
(d) “application” means an application made to the Authority under sub-section ( 1) of section 97 
of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act; 
(e) “Authority” means the Authority for Advance Ruling, constituted under section 15. 
15. Constitution of Authority for Advance Ruling. —(1) The Central Government shall, by 
notification, constitute an Authority to be known as the (name of the Union territory) Authority for 
Advance Ruling: 
Provided that the Central Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, notify any 
Authority located in any State or any other Union territory to act as the Authority for the purposes of this 
Act. 
(2) The Authority shall consist of— 
(i) one member from amongst the officers of central tax; and 
(ii) one member from amongst the officers of Union territory tax,  
to be appointed by the Central Government. 
(3) The qualifications, the method of appointment of the members and the terms and conditions of 
their service shall be such as may be prescribed. 
16.Constitution of Appellate Authority for Advance Ruling.  — (1) The Central Government shall, 
by notification, constitute an Appellate Authority to be known as the (name of the Union territory) Appellate 8 Authority for Advance Ruling for Goods and Services Tax for hearing appeals against the advance ruling 
pronounced by the Advance Ruling Authority:
Provided that the Central Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, notify any 
Appellate Authority located in any State or any other Union territory to act as the Appellate Authority for 
the purposes of this Act. 
(2) The Appellate Authority shall consist of— 
(i) the Chief Commissioner of central tax as designated by the Board; and 
(ii) the Commissioner of Union territory tax having jurisdiction over the applicant. 
CHAPTER VIII 
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 
17. Migration of existing tax payers. —(1) On and from the appointed day, every person registered 
under any of the existing laws and having a valid Permanent Account Number shall be issued a certificate 
of registration on provisional basis, subject to such conditions and in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed, which unless replaced by a final certificate of registration under sub-section ( 2), shall be liable 
to be cancelled if the conditions so prescribed are not complied with.
(2) The final certificate of registration shall be granted in such form and manner and subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed. 
(3) The certificate of registration issued to a person under sub-section ( 1) shall be deemed to have not 
been issued if the said registration is cancelled in pursuance of an application filed by such person that he 
was not liable to registration under section 22 or section 24 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act. 
18.Transitional arrangements for input tax credit. —(1) A registered person, other than a person 
opting to pay tax under section 10 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, shall be entitled to take, in 
his electronic credit ledger, credit of the amount of Value Added Tax and Entry Tax, if any, carried 
forward in the return relating to the period ending with the day immediately preceding the appointed day, 
furnished by him under the existing law, not later than ninety days after the said day, in such manner as 
may be prescribed:
Provided that the registered person shall not be allowed to take credit in the following circumstances, 
namely:— 
(i) where the said amount of credit is not admissible as input tax credit under this Act; or 
(ii) where he has not furnished all the returns required under the existing law for the period of six 
months immediately preceding the appointed day; or 
(iii) where the said amount of credit relates to goods sold under such exemption notifications as 
are notified by the Government:   
Provided further that so much of the said credit as is attributable to any claim related to section 3, 
sub-section ( 3) of section 5, section 6 or section 6A or sub-section ( 8) of section 8 of the Central Sales Tax 
Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) that is not substantiated in the manner, and within the period, prescribed in rule 12 of 
the Central Sales Tax (Registration and Turnover) Rules, 1957 shall not be eligible to be credited to the 
electronic credit ledger: 
Provided also that an amount equivalent to the credit specified in the second proviso shall be refunded 
under the existing law when the said claims are substantiated in the manner prescribed in rule 12 of the Central 
Sales Tax (Registration and Turnover) Rules, 1957. 
(2) A registered person, other than a person opting to pay tax under section 10 of the Central Goods 
and Services Tax Act,  shall be entitled to take, in his electronic credit ledger, credit of the unavailed input 
tax credit in respect of capital goods, not carried forward in a return, furnished under the existing law by 
him, for the period ending with the day immediately preceding the appointed day in such manner as may 
be prescribed: 9 Provided that the registered person shall not be allowed to take credit unless the said credit was 
admissible as input tax credit under the existing law and is also admissible as input tax credit under this 
Act. 
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the expression “unavailed input tax credit” means the 
amount that remains after subtracting the amount of input tax credit already availed in respect of capital 
goods by the taxable person under the existing law from the aggregate amount of input tax credit to which 
the said person was entitled in respect of the said capital goods under the existing law.
(3) A registered person, who was not liable to be registered under the existing law or who was 
engaged in the sale of exempted goods or tax free goods or goods which have suffered tax at first point of 
their sale in the Union territory and the subsequent sales of which are not subject to tax in the Union 
territory under the existing law but which are liable to tax under this Act or where the person was entitled 
to the credit of input tax at the time of sale of goods, shall be entitled to take, in his electronic credit 
ledger, credit of the value added tax and entry tax, if any, in respect of inputs held in stock and inputs 
contained in semi-finished or finished goods held in stock on the appointed day subject to the following 
conditions, namely:— 
(i) such inputs or goods are used or intended to be used for making taxable supplies under this 
Act; 
(ii) the said registered person is eligible for input tax credit on such inputs under this Act; 
(iii) the said registered person is in possession of invoice or other prescribed documents 
evidencing payment of tax under the existing law in respect of such inputs; and 
(iv) such invoices or other prescribed documents were issued not earlier than twelve months 
immediately preceding the appointed day: 
Provided that where a registered person, other than a manufacturer or a supplier of services, is not in 
possession of an invoice or any other documents evidencing payment of tax in respect of inputs, then, such 
registered person shall, subject to such conditions, limitations and safeguards as may be prescribed, 
including that the said taxable person shall pass on the benefit of such credit by way of reduced prices to 
the recipient, be allowed to take credit at such rate and in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(4) A registered person, who was engaged in the sale of taxable goods as well as exempted goods or 
tax free goods under the existing law but which are liable to tax under this Act, shall be entitled to take, in 
his electronic credit ledger,— 
(a) the amount of credit of the value added tax and entry tax, if any, carried forward in a return 
furnished under the existing law by him in accordance with the provisions of sub-section ( 1); and 
(b) the amount of credit of the value added tax and entry tax, if any, in respect of inputs held in 
stock and inputs contained in semi-finished or finished goods held in stock on the appointed day, 
relating to such exempted goods or tax free goods in accordance with the provisions of                   
sub-section ( 3). 
(5) A registered person shall be entitled to take, in his electronic credit ledger, credit of value added 
tax and entry tax, if any, in respect of inputs received on or after the appointed day but the tax in respect 
of which has been paid by the supplier under the existing law, subject to the condition that the invoice or 
any other tax paying document of the same was recorded in the books of account of such person within a 
period of thirty days from the appointed day: 
Provided that the period of thirty days may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended by the 
Commissioner for a further period not exceeding thirty days: 
Provided further that the said registered person shall furnish a statement, in such manner as may be 
prescribed, in respect of credit that has been taken under this sub-section. 
(6) A registered person, who was either paying tax at a fixed rate or paying a fixed amount in lieu of 
the tax payable under the existing law shall be entitled to take, in his electronic credit ledger, credit of 10 value added tax in respect of inputs held in stock and inputs contained in semi-finished or finished goods 
held in stock on the appointed day subject to the following conditions, namely:— 
(i) such inputs or goods are used or intended to be used for making taxable supplies under this 
Act; 
(ii) the said registered person is not paying tax under section 10 of the Central Goods and 
Services Tax Act; 
(iii) the said registered person is eligible for input tax credit on such inputs under this Act; 
(iv) the said registered person is in possession of invoice or other prescribed documents evidencing 
payment of tax under the existing law in respect of inputs; and 
(v) such invoices or other prescribed documents were issued not earlier than twelve months 
immediately preceding the appointed day. 
(7) The amount of credit under sub-sections ( 3), (4) and ( 6) shall be calculated in such manner as may 
be prescribed. 
19. Transitional provisions relating to job work. —(1) Where any inputs received at a place of 
business had been dispatched as such or dispatched after being partially processed to a job worker for 
further processing, testing, repair, reconditioning or any other purpose in accordance with the provisions of 
existing law prior to the appointed day and such inputs are returned to the said place on or after the 
appointed day, no tax shall be payable if such inputs, after completion of the job work or otherwise, are 
returned to the said place within six months from the appointed day:
Provided that the period of six months may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended by the 
Commissioner for a further period not exceeding two months: 
Provided further that if such inputs are not returned within a period of six months or the extended 
period from the appointed day, the input tax credit shall be liable to be recovered in accordance with the 
provisions of clause ( a) of sub-section ( 8) of section 142 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act. 
(2) Where any semi-finished goods had been despatched from any place of business to any other premises 
for carrying out certain manufacturing processes in accordance with the provisions of existing law prior to the 
appointed day and such goods (hereinafter in this section referred to as “the said goods”) are returned to the 
said place on or after the appointed day, no tax shall be payable if the said goods, after undergoing 
manufacturing processes or otherwise, are returned to the said place within six months from the appointed day: 
Provided that the period of six months may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended by the 
Commissioner for a further period not exceeding two months: 
Provided further that if the said goods are not returned within a period specified in this sub-section, 
the input tax credit shall be liable to be recovered in accordance with the provisions of clause ( a) of       
sub-section ( 8) of section 142 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act: 
Provided also that the person despatching the goods may, in accordance with the provisions of the 
existing law, transfer the said goods to the premises of any registered person for the purpose of supplying 
therefrom on payment of tax in India or without payment of tax for exports within six months or the 
extended period, as the case may be, from the appointed day. 
(3) Where any goods had been despatched from the place of business without payment of tax for 
carrying out tests or any other process to any other premises, whether registered or not, in accordance 
with the provisions of existing law prior to the appointed day and such goods are returned to the said 
place of business on or after the appointed day, no tax shall be payable if the said goods, after undergoing 
tests or any other process, are returned to such place within six months from the appointed day: 
Provided that the period of six months may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended by the 
Commissioner for a further period not exceeding two months: 11 Provided further that if the said goods are not returned within the period specified in this sub-section, 
the input tax credit shall be liable to be recovered in accordance with the provisions of clause ( a) of      
sub-section ( 8) of section 142 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act: 
Provided also that the person despatching the goods may, in accordance with the provisions of the 
existing law, transfer the said goods from the said other premises on payment of tax in India or without 
payment of tax for exports within six months or the extended period, as the case may be, from the 
appointed day. 
(4) The tax under sub-sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3) shall not be payable only if the person despatching the 
goods and the job worker declare the details of the inputs or goods held in stock by the job worker on 
behalf of the said person on the appointed day in such form and manner and within such time as may be 
prescribed. 
20. Miscellaneous transitional provisions. —(1) Where any goods on which tax, if any, had been 
paid under the existing law at the time of sale thereof, not being earlier than six months prior to the 
appointed day, are returned to any place of business on or after the appointed day, the registered person shall 
be eligible for refund of the tax paid under the existing law where such goods are returned 
by a person, other than a registered person, to the said place of business within a period of six months 
from the appointed day and such goods are identifiable to the satisfaction of the proper officer: 
Provided that if the said goods are returned by a registered person, the return of such goods shall be 
deemed to be a supply. 
(2) (a) Where, in pursuance of a contract entered into prior to the appointed day, the price of any goods 
is revised upwards on or after the appointed day, the registered person who had sold such goods shall issue 
to the recipient a supplementary invoice or debit note, containing such particulars as may be prescribed, 
within thirty days of such price revision and for the purposes of this Act, such supplementary invoice or 
debit note shall be deemed to have been issued in respect of an outward supply made under this Act. 
(b) Where, in pursuance of a contract entered into prior to the appointed day, the price of any goods is 
revised downwards on or after the appointed day, the registered person who had sold such goods may 
issue to the recipient a credit note, containing such particulars as may be prescribed, within thirty days of 
such price revision and for the purposes of this Act such credit note shall be deemed to have been issued 
in respect of an outward supply made under this Act: 
Provided that the registered person shall be allowed to reduce his tax liability on account of issue of 
the credit note only if the recipient of the credit note has reduced his input tax credit corresponding to 
such reduction of tax liability. 
(3) Every claim for refund filed by any person before, on or after the appointed day, for refund of any 
amount of input tax credit, tax, interest or any other amount paid under the existing law, shall be disposed 
of in accordance with the provisions of existing law and any amount eventually accruing to him shall be 
refunded to him in cash in accordance with the provisions of the said law: 
Provided that where any claim for refund of the amount of input tax credit is fully or partially 
rejected, the amount so rejected shall lapse: 
Provided further that no refund shall be allowed of any amount of input tax credit where the balance 
of the said amount as on the appointed day has been carried forward under this Act. 
(4) Every claim for refund filed after the appointed day for refund of any tax paid under the existing 
law in respect of the goods exported before or after the appointed day shall be disposed of in accordance 
with the provisions of the existing law: 
Provided that where any for refund of input tax credit is fully or partially rejected, the amount so 
rejected shall lapse: 
Provided further that no refund shall be allowed of any amount of input tax credit where the balance 
of the said amount as on the appointed day has been carried forward under this Act. 12 (5) (a) Every proceeding of appeal, revision, review or reference relating to a claim for input tax 
credit initiated whether before, on or after the appointed day, under the existing law shall be disposed of 
in accordance with the provisions of the existing law, and any amount of credit found to be admissible to 
the claimant shall be refunded to him in cash in accordance with the provisions of the existing law and the 
amount rejected, if any, shall not be admissible as input tax credit under this Act: 
Provided that no refund shall be allowed of any amount of input tax credit where the balance of the said 
amount as on the appointed day has been carried forward under this Act. 
(b) Every proceeding of appeal, revision, review or reference relating to recovery of input tax credit 
initiated whether before, on or after the appointed day, under the existing law shall be disposed of in 
accordance with the provisions of the existing law, and if any amount of credit becomes recoverable as a 
result of such appeal, revision, review or reference, the same shall, unless recovered under the existing 
law, be recovered as an arrear of tax under this Act and the amount so recovered shall not be admissible 
as input tax credit under this Act. 
(6) (a) Every proceeding of appeal, revision, review or reference relating to any output tax liability 
initiated whether before, on or after the appointed day under the existing law, shall be disposed of in 
accordance with the provisions of the existing law, and if any amount becomes recoverable as a result of such 
appeal, revision, review or reference, the same shall, unless recovered under the existing law, be recovered as 
an arrear of tax under this Act and amount so recovered shall not be admissible as input tax credit under this 
Act. 
(b) Every proceeding of appeal, revision, review or reference relating to any output tax liability initiated 
whether before, on or after the appointed day under the existing law, shall be disposed of in accordance with 
the provisions of the existing law, and any amount found to be admissible to the claimant shall be refunded to 
him in cash in accordance with the provisions of the existing law and the amount rejected, if any, shall not be 
admissible as input tax credit under this Act. 
(7) (a) Where in pursuance of an assessment or adjudication proceedings instituted, whether before, on 
or after the appointed day, under the existing law, any amount of tax, interest, fine or penalty becomes 
recoverable from the person, the same shall, unless recovered under the existing law, be recovered as an 
arrear of tax under this Act and the amount so recovered shall not be admissible as input tax credit under 
this Act. 
(b) Where in pursuance of an assessment or adjudication proceedings instituted, whether before, on or 
after the appointed day under the existing law, any amount of tax, interest, fine or penalty becomes 
refundable to the taxable person, the same shall be refunded to him in cash under the said law and the 
amount rejected, if any, shall not be admissible as input tax credit under this Act. 
(8) (a) Where any return, furnished under the existing law, is revised after the appointed day and if, 
pursuant to such revision, any amount is found to be recoverable or any amount of input tax credit is found to 
be inadmissible, the same shall, unless recovered under the existing law, be recovered as an arrear of tax under 
this Act and the amount so recovered shall not be admissible as input tax credit under this Act. 
(b) Where any return, furnished under the existing law, is revised after the appointed day but within 
the time limit specified for such revision under the existing law and if, pursuant to such revision, any 
amount is found to be refundable or input tax credit is found to be admissible to any taxable person, the 
same shall be refunded to him in cash under the existing law and the amount rejected, if any, shall not be 
admissible as input tax credit under this Act. 
(9) Save as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the goods or services or both supplied on or after the 
appointed day in pursuance of a contract entered into prior to the appointed day shall be liable to tax 
under the provisions of this Act. 
(10) (a) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 12 of the Central Goods and Services Tax 
Act, no tax shall be payable on goods under this Act to the extent the tax was leviable on the said goods 
under the existing law. 13 (b) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 13 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, no 
tax shall be payable on services under this Act to the extent the tax was leviable on the said services under 
Chapter V of the Finance Act, 1994 (32 of 1994). 
(c) Where tax was paid on any supply, both under any existing law relating to sale of goods and under 
Chapter V of the Finance Act, 1994 (32 of 1994), tax shall be leviable under this Act and the taxable 
person shall be entitled to take credit of value added tax or service tax paid under the existing law to the 
extent of supplies made after the appointed day and such credit shall be calculated in such manner as may 
be prescribed. 
(11) Where any goods sent on approval basis, not earlier than six months before the appointed day, 
are rejected or not approved by the buyer and returned to the seller on or after the appointed day, no tax 
shall be payable thereon if such goods are returned within six months from the appointed day: 
Provided that the said period of six months may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended by the 
Commissioner for a further period not exceeding two months: 
Provided further that the tax shall be payable by the person returning the goods if such goods are 
liable to tax under this Act and are returned after the period specified in this sub-section: 
Provided also that tax shall be payable by the person who has sent the goods on approval basis if such 
goods are liable to tax under this Act, and are not returned within the period specified in this sub-section. 
(12) Where a supplier has made any sale of goods in respect of which tax was required to be deducted at 
source under any existing law relating to sale of goods and has also issued an invoice for the same before the 
appointed day, no deduction of tax at source under section 51 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, as 
made applicable to this Act, shall be made by the deductor under the said section where payment to the said 
supplier is made on or after the appointed day. 
Explanation. —For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression “capital goods” shall have the same 
meaning as assigned to it in any existing law relating to sale of goods.
CHAPTER IX  
MISCELLANEOUS 
21. Application of provisions of Central Goods and Services Tax Act. —Subject to the provisions 
of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the provisions of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 
relating to,— 
(i) scope of supply; 
(ii) composition levy; 
(iii) composite supply and mixed supply; 
(iv) time and value of supply; 
(v) input tax credit; 
(vi) registration; 
(vii) tax invoice, credit and debit notes; 
(viii) accounts and records; 
(ix) returns; 
(x) payment of tax; 
(xi) tax deduction at source; 
(xii) collection of tax at source; 
(xiii) assessment; 14 (xiv) refunds; 
(xv) audit; 
(xvi) inspection, search, seizure and arrest; 
(xvii) demands and recovery; 
(xviii) liability to pay in certain cases; 
(xix) advance ruling; 
(xx) appeals and revision; 
(xxi) presumption as to documents; 
(xxii) offences and penalties; 
(xxiii) job work; 
(xxiv) electronic commerce; 
(xxv) settlement of funds; 
(xxvi) transitional provisions; and 
(xxvii ) miscellaneous provisions including the provisions relating to the imposition of interest and 
penalty, 
shall, mutatis mutandis , apply,— 
(a) so far as may be, in relation to Union territory tax as they apply in relation to central tax as if 
they were enacted under this Act; 
(b) subject to the following modifications and alterations which the Central Government 
considers necessary and desirable to adapt those provisions to the circumstances, namely:— 
(i) references to “this Act” shall be deemed to be references to “the Union Territory Goods 
and Services Tax Act, 2017”; 
(ii) references to “Commissioner” shall be deemed to be references to “Commissioner” of 
Union territory tax as defined in clause ( 2) of section 2 of this Act; 
(iii) references to “officers of central tax” shall be deemed to be references to “officers of 
Union territory tax”; 
(iv) references to “central tax” shall be deemed to be references to “Union territory tax” and 
vice versa ; 
(v) references to “Commissioner of State tax or Commissioner of Union territory tax” shall be 
deemed to be references to “Commissioner of central tax”; 
(vi) references to “State Goods and Services Tax Act or Union Territory Goods and Services 
Tax Act” shall be deemed to be references to “Central Goods and Services Tax Act”; 
(vii) references to “State tax or Union territory tax” shall be deemed to be references to 
“central tax”. 
22. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, on the recommendations of the 
Council, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the Central Government 
may make rules for all or any of the matters which by this Act are required to be, or may be, prescribed or 
in respect of which provisions are to be or may be made by rules. 15 (3) The power to make rules conferred by this section shall include the power to give retrospective 
effect to the rules or any of them from a date not earlier than the date on which the provisions of this Act 
come into force. 
(4) Any rules made under sub-section ( 1) may provide that a contravention thereof shall be liable to a 
penalty not exceeding ten thousand rupees. 
23. General power to make regulations. —The Board may, by notification, make regulations 
consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act.
24. Laying of rules, regulations and notifications .—Every rule made by the Central Government, 
every regulation made by the Board and every notification issued by the Central Government under this Act, 
shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made or issued, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or in 
the notification, as the case may be, or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation or the notification 
should not be made, the rule or regulation or notification, as the case may be, shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or 
regulation or notification, as the case may be. 
25. Power to issue instructions or directions. —The Commissioner may, if he considers it necessary or 
expedient so to do for the purpose of uniformity in the implementation of this Act, issue such orders, 
instructions or directions to the Union territory tax officers as he may deem fit, and thereupon all such 
officers and all other persons employed in the implementation of this Act shall observe and follow such 
orders, instructions or directions. 
26. Removal of difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any provision of this Act, the 
Central Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by a general or a special order published 
in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or the rules or 
regulations made thereunder, as may be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the said 
difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years from the date of 
commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament. 
