--------------------------The Fugitive Economic Offenders Act, 2018--------------------------
1 THE FUGITIVE ECONOMIC OFFENDERS ACT, 2018 
__________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
__________ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
SECTIONS
1.Short title, extent and commencement.
2.Definitions.
3.Application of Act.
CHAPTER II 
DECLARATION OF FUGITIVE ECONOMIC OFFENDERS AND CONFISCATION OF PROPERTY 
4.Application for declaration of fugitive economic offender and procedure therefor . 
5.Attachment of property.
6.Powers of Director and other officers.
7.Power of survey.
8.Search and seizure.
9.Search of persons.
10.Notice . 
11.Procedure for hearing application.
12.Declaration of fugitive economic offender . 
13.Supplementary application . 
14.Power to disallow civil claims . 
15.Management of properties confiscated under this Act.
CHAPTER III 
MISCELLANEOUS
16.Rules of evidence. 
17.Appeal. 
18.Bar of jurisdiction. 
19.Protection of action taken in good faith. 
20.Power of Central Government to amend Schedule. 
21.Overriding effect. 
22.Application of other laws not barred. 
23.Power to make rules. 
24.Laying of rules before Parliament. 
25.Power to remove difficulties. 
26.Repeal and saving. 
THE SCHEDULE. 2 THE FUGITIVE ECONOMIC OFFENDERS ACT, 2018 
ACT NO 17 OF 2018 
[31st July , 2018.] 
An Act to provide for measures to deter fugitive economic offenders from evading the 
process of law in India by staying outside the jurisdiction of Indian courts, to preserve the 
sanctity of the rule of law in India and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Fugitive Economic 
Offenders Act, 2018. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 21st day of April, 2018. 
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–– 
(a) “Administrator” means an Administrator appointed under sub-section ( 1) of section 15; 
(b) “benami  property” and “ benami  transaction” shall have the same meanings as assigned to 
them under clauses ( 8) and ( 9) respectively of section 2 of the Prohibition of Benami  Property 
Transactions Act, 1988 (45 of 1988); 
(c) “contracting State” means any country or place outside India in respect of which 
arrangements have been made by the Central Government with the Government of such country 
through a treaty or otherwise; 
(d) “Deputy Director” means the Deputy Director appointed under sub-section ( 1) of section 49 
of the Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002 (15 of 2003); 
(e) “Director” means the Director appointed under sub-section ( 1) of section 49 of the 
Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002 (15 of 2003); 
(f) “fugitive economic offender” means any individual against whom a warrant for arrest in 
relation to a Scheduled Offence has been issued by any Court in India, who— 
(i) has left India so as to avoid criminal prosecution; or 
(ii) being abroad, refuses to return to India to face criminal prosecution; 
(g) “key managerial personnel” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( 51) of 
section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013); 
(h) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression 
“notify” shall be construed accordingly; 
(i) “person” includes— 
(i) an individual; 
(ii) a Hindu Undivided Family; 
(iii) a company; 
(iv) a trust; 
(v) a partnership; 
(vi) a limited liability partnership; 3 (vii) an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated or not; 
(viii) every artificial juridical person not falling within any of the preceding sub-clauses; and 
(ix) any agency, office or branch owned or controlled by any of the above persons 
mentioned in the preceding sub-clauses; 
(j) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(k) “proceeds of crime” means any property derived or obtained, directly or indirectly, by any 
person as a result of criminal activity relating to a Scheduled Offence, or the value of any such 
property, or where such property is taken or held outside the country, then the property equivalent 
in value held within the country or abroad; 
(l) “Schedule” means the Schedule appended to this Act; 
(m) “Scheduled Offence” means an offence specified in the Schedule, if the total value 
involved in such offence or offences is one hundred crore rupees or more; 
(n) “Special Court” means a Court of Session designated as a Special Court under                 
sub-section ( 1) of section 43 of the Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002 (15 of 2003).  
(2) The words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Prevention of 
Money-laundering Act, 2002 (15 of 2003) shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in 
that Act.  
3. Application of Act .—The provisions of this Act shall apply to any individual who is, or 
becomes, a fugitive economic offender on or after the date of coming into force of this Act. 
CHAPTER II 
DECLARATION OF FUGITIVE ECONOMIC OFFENDERS AND CONFISCATION OF PROPERTY 
4. Application for declaration of fugitive economic offender and procedure                  
therefor .—(1) Where the Director or any other officer not below the rank of Deputy Director 
authorised by the Director for the purposes of this section, has reason to believe (the reasons for such 
belief to be recorded in writing), on the basis of material in his possession, that any individual is a 
fugitive economic offender, he may file an application in such form and manner as may be prescribed 
in the Special Court that such individual may be declared as a fugitive economic offender. 
(2) The application referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall contain— 
(a) reasons for the belief that an individual is a fugitive economic offender; 
(b) any information available as to the whereabouts of the fugitive economic offender; 
(c) a list of properties or the value of such properties believed to be the proceeds of crime, 
including any such property outside India for which confiscation is sought; 
(d) a list of properties or benami  properties owned by the individual in India or abroad for 
which confiscation is sought; and 
(e) a list of persons who may have an interest in any of the properties listed under clauses ( c) 
and ( d). 
(3) The Authorities appointed for the purposes of the Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002 
(15 of 2003) shall be the Authorities for the purposes of this Act.  
5. Attachment of property. —(1) The Director or any other officer authorised by the Director, not 
below the rank of Deputy Director, may, with the permission of the Special Court, attach any property 
mentioned in the application under section 4 by an order in writing in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 4 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1) or section 4, the Director or any other 
officer, not below the rank of Deputy Director, authorised by the Director, may, by an order in 
writing, at any time prior to the filing of the application under section 4, attach any property— 
(a) for which there is a reason to believe that the property is proceeds of crime, or is a property 
or benami  property owned by an individual who is a fugitive economic offender; and 
(b) which is being or is likely to be dealt within a manner which may result in the property 
being unavailable for confiscation: 
Provided that the Director or any other officer who provisionally attaches any property under this 
sub-section shall, within a period of thirty days from the date of such attachment, file an application 
under section 4 before the Special Court. 
(3) The attachment of any property under this section shall continue for a period of one hundred 
and eighty days from the date of order of attachment or such other period as may be extended by the 
Special Court before the expiry of such period. 
(4) Nothing in this section shall prevent the person interested in the enjoyment of the immovable 
property attached under sub-section ( 1) from such enjoyment.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression “person interested”, in relation 
to any immovable property includes all persons claiming or entitled to claim any interest in the 
property. 
6. Powers of Director and other officers .—The Director or any other officer shall, for the 
purposes of section 4, have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) discovery and inspection; 
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person, including any officer of a reporting entity and 
examining him on oath; 
(c) compelling the production of records; 
(d) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(e) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses and documents; and 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
7. Power of survey. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act, 
where a Director or any other officer authorised by the Director, on the basis of material in his 
possession, has reason to believe (the reasons for such belief to be recorded in writing), that an 
individual may be a fugitive economic offender, he may enter any place— 
(i) within the limits of the area assigned to him; or 
(ii) in respect of which he is authorised for the purposes of this section, by such other authority, 
who is assigned the area within which such place is situated. 
(2) Where the Director or any other officer authorised by him, on the basis of material in his 
possession, has reason to believe (the reasons for such belief to be recorded in writing) that an 
individual may be a fugitive economic offender and it is necessary to enter any place as mentioned in 
sub-section ( 1), he may request any proprietor, employee or any other person who may be present at 
that time, to— 
(a) afford him the necessary facility to inspect such records as he may require and which may 
be available at such place; 
(b) afford him the necessary facility to check or verify the proceeds of crime or any transaction 
related to proceeds of crime which may be found therein; and 5 (c) furnish such information as he may require as to any matter which may be useful for, or 
relevant to any proceedings under this Act. 
(3) The Director, or any other officer acting under this section may— 
(i) place marks of identification on the records inspected by him and make or cause to be 
made extracts or copies therefrom; 
(ii) make an inventory of any property checked or verified by him; and 
(iii) record the statement of any person present at the property which may be useful for, or 
relevant to, any proceeding under this Act.  
8. Search and seizure .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, where the Director or any other officer not below the rank of Deputy Director 
authorised by him for the purposes of this section, on the basis of information in his possession, has 
reason to believe (the reason for such belief to be recorded in writing) that any person— 
(i) may be declared as a fugitive economic offender; 
(ii) is in possession of any proceeds of crime; 
(iii) is in possession of any records which may relate to proceeds of crime; or   
(iv) is in possession of any property related to proceeds of crime,  
then, subject to any rules made in this behalf, he may authorise any officer subordinate to him to— 
(a) enter and search any building, place, vessel, vehicle or aircraft where he has reason to 
suspect that such records or proceeds of crime are kept; 
(b) break open the lock of any door, box, locker, safe, almirah or other receptacle for exercising 
the powers conferred by clause ( a) where the keys thereof are not available; 
(c) seize any record or property found as a result of such search; 
(d) place marks of identification on such record or property, if required or make or cause to be 
made extracts or copies therefrom; 
(e) make a note or an inventory of such record or property; and 
(f) examine on oath any person, who is found to be in possession or control of any record or 
property, in respect of all matters relevant for the purposes of any investigation under this Act. 
(2) Where an authority, upon information obtained during survey under section 7, is satisfied that 
any evidence shall be or is likely to be concealed or tampered with, he may, for reasons to be recorded 
in writing, enter and search the building or place where such evidence is located and seize that 
evidence. 
 9. Search of persons .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being 
in force— 
(a) if an authority, authorised in this behalf by the Central Government by general or special 
order, has reason to believe (the reason for such belief to be recorded in writing) that any person 
has secreted about his person or anything under his possession, ownership or control, any record or 
proceeds of crime which may be useful for or relevant to any proceedings under this Act, he may 
search that person and seize such record or property which may be useful for or relevant to any 
proceedings under this Act; 
(b) where an authority is about to search any person, he shall, if such person so requires, take 
such person within twenty-four hours to the nearest Gazetted Officer, superior in rank to him, or a 
Magistrate: 
Provided that the period of twenty-four hours shall exclude the time necessary for the journey 
undertaken to take such person to the nearest Gazetted Officer, superior in rank to him, or the 
Magistrate’s Court; 6 (c) if the requisition under clause ( b) is made, the authority shall not detain the person for more 
than twenty-four hours prior to taking him before the Gazetted Officer, superior in rank to him, or 
the Magistrate referred to in that clause: 
Provided that the period of twenty-four hours shall exclude the time necessary for the journey 
from the place of detention to the office of the Gazetted Officer, superior in rank to him, or the 
Magistrate’s Court; 
(d) the Gazetted Officer or the Magistrate before whom any such person is brought shall, if he 
sees no reasonable ground for search, forthwith discharge such person but otherwise shall direct 
that search be made; 
(e) before making the search under clause ( a) or clause ( d), the authority shall call upon two or 
more persons to attend and witness the search and the search shall be made in the presence of such 
persons; 
(f) the authority shall prepare a list of record or property seized in the course of the search and 
obtain the signatures of the witnesses on the list;  
(g) no female shall be searched by anyone except a female; and 
(h) the authority shall record the statement of the person searched under clause ( a) or clause ( d) 
in respect of the records or proceeds of crime found or seized in the course of the search.  
10. Notice .—(1) Where an application under section 4 has been duly filed, the Special Court shall 
issue a notice to an individual who is alleged to be a fugitive economic offender. 
(2) The notice referred to in sub-section ( 1), shall also be issued to any other person who has 
any interest in the property mentioned in the application under sub-section ( 2) of section 4. 
(3) A notice under sub-section ( 1) shall— 
(a) require the individual to appear at a specified place and time not less than six weeks 
from the date of issue of such notice; and 
(b) state that failure to appear on the specified place and time shall result in a declaration of 
the individual as a fugitive economic offender and confiscation of property under this Act. 
(4) A notice under sub-section ( 1) shall be forwarded to such authority, as the Central 
Government may notify, for effecting service in a contracting State. 
(5) The authority referred to in sub-section ( 4) shall make efforts to serve the notice within a 
period of two weeks in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(6) A notice under sub-section ( 1) may also be served to the individual alleged to be a fugitive 
economic offender by electronic means to— 
(a) his electronic mail address submitted in connection with an application for allotment of 
Permanent Account Number under section 139A of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961); 
(b) his electronic mail address submitted in connection with an application for enrolment 
under section 3 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits 
and Services) Act, 2016 (18 of 2016); or 
(c) any other electronic account as may be prescribed, belonging to the individual which is 
accessed by him over the internet, subject to the satisfaction of the Special Court that such 
account has been recently accessed by the individual and constitutes a reasonable method for 
communication of the notice to the individual.  
11. Procedure for hearing application. —(1) Where any individual to whom notice has been 
issued under sub-section ( 1) of section 10 appears in person at the place and time specified in the 
notice, the Special Court may terminate the proceedings under this Act. 
(2) Where any individual to whom notice has been issued under sub-section ( 1) of section 10 fails 
to appear at the place and time specified in the notice, but enters appearance through counsel, the 7 Special Court may in its discretion give a period of one week to file a reply to the application under 
section 4. 
(3) Where any individual to whom notice has been issued under sub-section ( 1) of section 10 fails 
to enter appearance either in person or through counsel, and the Special Court is satisfied— 
(a) that service of notice has been effected on such party; or 
(b) that notice could not be served in spite of best efforts because such individual has evaded 
service of notice,  
it may, after recording reasons in writing, proceed to hear the application.  
(4) The Special Court may also give any person to whom notice has been issued under                       
sub-section ( 2) of section 10 a period of one week to file a reply to the application under section 4.  
12. Declaration of fugitive economic offender .—(1) After hearing the application under              
section 4, if the Special Court is satisfied that an individual is a fugitive economic offender, it may, by 
an order, declare the individual as a fugitive economic offender for reasons to be recorded in writing. 
(2) On a declaration under sub-section ( 1), the Special Court may order that any of the following 
properties stand confiscated to the Central Government— 
(a) the proceeds of crime in India or abroad, whether or not such property is owned by the 
fugitive economic offender; and 
(b) any other property or benami  property in India or abroad, owned by the fugitive economic 
offender. 
(3) The confiscation order of the Special Court shall, to the extent possible, identify the properties 
in India or abroad that constitute proceeds of crime which are to be confiscated and in case such 
properties cannot be identified, quantify the value of the proceeds of crime. 
(4) The confiscation order of the Special Court shall separately list any other property owned by 
the fugitive economic offender in India which is to be confiscated. 
(5) Where the Special Court has made an order for confiscation of any property under               
sub-section ( 2), and such property is in a contracting State, the Special Court may issue a letter of 
request to a Court or authority in the contracting State for execution of such order. 
(6) Every letter of request to be transmitted to a contracting State under sub-section ( 5) shall be 
transmitted in such form and manner as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this 
behalf. 
(7) The Special Court may, while making the confiscation order, exempt from confiscation any 
property which is a proceed of crime in which any other person, other than the fugitive economic 
offender, has an interest if it is satisfied that such interest was acquired bona fide  and without 
knowledge of the fact that the property was proceeds of crime. 
(8) All the rights and title in the confiscated property shall, from the date of the confiscation order, 
vest in the Central Government, free from all encumbrances. 
(9) Where on the conclusion of the proceedings, the Special Court finds that the individual is not a 
fugitive economic offender, the Special Court shall order release of property or record attached or 
seized under this Act to the person entitled to receive it. 
(10) Where an order releasing the property has been made by the Special Court under                        
sub-section ( 9), the Director or any other officer authorised by him in this behalf may withhold the 
release of any such property or record for a period of ninety days from the date of receipt of such 
order, if he is of the opinion that such property is relevant for the appeal proceedings under this Act. 
13. Supplementary application .—(1) Where at any time after the institution of the application 
under section 4, any other property is discovered or identified which constitutes proceeds of crime or 
is property or benami  property owned by the individual in India or abroad who is a fugitive economic 8 offender liable to be confiscated under this Act, the Director or any other officer not below the rank of 
Deputy Director authorised by the Director for the purposes of this section, may file a supplementary 
application in the Special Court seeking confiscation of such properties.  
(2) The provisions of sections 4 to 12 shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to such application 
as they apply in relation to an application under section 4. 
14. Power to disallow civil claims .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force,— 
(a) on a declaration of an individual as a fugitive economic offender, any Court or tribunal in 
India, in any civil proceeding before it, may, disallow such individual from putting forward or 
defending any civil claim; and  
(b) any Court or tribunal in India in any civil proceeding before it, may, disallow any company 
or limited liability partnership from putting forward or defending any civil claim, if an individual 
filing the claim on behalf of the company or the limited liability partnership, or any promoter or 
key managerial personnel or majority shareholder of the company or an individual having a 
controlling interest in the limited liability partnership has been declared as a fugitive economic 
offender. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expressions— 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm, or other association of 
persons; and 
(b) “limited liability partnership” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( n) 
of sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009). 
15. Management of properties confiscated under this Act .—(1) The Central Government 
may, by order published in the Official Gazette, appoint as many of its officers (not below the rank 
of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India) as it thinks fit, to perform the functions of an 
Administrator. 
(2) The Administrator appointed under sub-section ( 1) shall receive and manage the property in 
relation to which an order has been made under sub-section ( 2) of section 12 in such manner and 
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed. 
(3) The Administrator shall also take such measures, as the Central Government may direct, to 
dispose of the property which is vested in the Central Government under section 12: 
Provided that the Central Government or the Administrator shall not dispose of any property for 
a period of ninety days from the date of the order under sub-section ( 2) of section 12. 
CHAPTER III 
MISCELLANEOUS
16. Rules of evidence .—(1) The burden of proof for establishing— 
(a) that an individual is a fugitive economic offender; or 
(b) that a property is the proceeds of crime or any other property in which the individual alleged 
to be a fugitive economic offender has an interest, 
shall be on the Director or the person authorised by the Director to file the application under section 4. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, where any 
person referred to in sub-section ( 2) of section 10 claims that any interest in any property was 
acquired bona fide  and without knowledge of the fact that, such property constitutes proceeds of 
crime, the burden of proving such fact shall lie upon him. 
(3) The standard of proof applicable to the determination of facts by the Special Court under this 
Act shall be preponderance of probabilities. 9 17. Appeal .—(1) An appeal shall lie from any judgment or order, not being an interlocutory order, 
of a Special Court to the High Court both on facts and on law. 
(2) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of thirty days from the date 
of the judgment or order appealed from: 
Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty 
days, if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the 
period of thirty days: 
Provided further that no appeal shall be entertained after the expiry of period of ninety days.  
18. Bar of jurisdiction.— No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding 
in respect of any matter which the Special Court is empowered by or under this Act to determine and 
no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be 
taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act.  
19. Protection of action taken in good faith.— No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government or Presiding Officer of the Special Court or Director or 
Deputy Director or any other officer authorised by the Director for anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done under this Act or any rule made thereunder. 
20.Power of Central Government to amend Schedule.— (1) The Central Government may, 
having regard to the objects of this Act, and if it considers necessary or expedient so to do, by 
notification add to, or as the case may be, omit from the Schedule any offences specified therein. 
(2) Every such notification shall, as soon as after it is issued, be laid before each House of 
Parliament. 
21. Overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force. 
22. Application of other laws not barred .—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and 
not in derogation of any other law for the time being in force. 
23. Power to make rules.—( 1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the form and manner of filing application under sub-section ( 1) of section 4; 
(b) the manner of attachment of property under sub-section ( 1) of section 5; 
(c) other matters under clause ( f) of section 6; 
(d) the procedure for conducting search and seizure under section 8; 
(e) the manner in which the notice shall be served under sub-section ( 5) of section 10; 
(f) any other electronic account under clause ( c) of sub-section ( 6) of section 10; 
(g) the manner and conditions subject to which the Administrator shall receive and manage the 
property confiscated under sub-section ( 2) of section 15; and 
(h) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of which 
provision is to be made by rules.  
24. Laying of rules before Parliament .—Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 10 as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
25.Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing 
the difficulty: 
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of five years from the date 
of commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament.  
26. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Fugitive Economic Offenders Ordinance, 2018 (Ord. 1 of 2018), 
is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance, shall 
be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act. 11 THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 2( l) and ( m)] 
Section Description of offence 
I. Offences under the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860)
120B read with 
any offence in 
this Schedule Punishment of criminal conspiracy. 
255 Counterfeiting Government stamp. 
257 Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting Government stamp. 
258  Sale of counterfeit Government stamp. 
259  Having possession of counterfeit Government stamp. 
260  Using as genuine a Government stamp known to be counterfeit. 
417  Punishment for cheating. 
418  Cheating with knowledge that wrongful loss may ensue to person whose interest 
offender is bound to protect. 
420  Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property. 
421  Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent 
distribution among creditors. 
422  Dishonestly or fraudulently preventing debt being available for creditors. 
423  Dishonest or fraudulent execution of deed of transfer containing false statement 
of consideration. 
424  Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property. 
467  Forgery of valuable security, will, etc. 
471  Using as genuine a forged [document or electronic record]. 
472  Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc., with intent to commit forgery 
punishable under section 467.
473  Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc., intent to commit forgery punishable 
otherwise. 
475  Counterfeiting device or mark used for authenticating documents described in 
section 467, or possessing counterfeit marked material. 
476  Counterfeiting device or mark used for authenticating documents other than those 
described in section 467, or possessing counterfeit marked material. 
481  Using a false property mark. 482 Punishment for using a false property mark. 
483  Counterfeiting a property mark used by another. 
484  Counterfeiting a mark used by a public servant. 
485  Making or possession of any instrument for counterfeiting a property mark. 
486  Selling goods marked with a counterfeit property mark. 
487  Making a false mark upon any receptacle containing goods. 
488  Punishment for making use of any such false mark. 12 Section Description of offence 
489A  Counterfeiting currency notes or bank notes. 
489B  Using as genuine, forged or counterfeit currency notes or bank notes. 
II. Offences under the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (26 of 1881) 
138  Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency, etc., of funds in the account. 
III. Offences under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934)  
58B  Penalties. 
IV. Offences under the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) 
Section 9 Offences and Penalties. 
V. Offences under the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962) 
135  Evasion of duty or prohibitions.
VI. Offences under the Prohibition of Benami  Property Transactions Act, 1988 (45 of 1988) 
3  Prohibition of benami  transactions. 
VII. Offences under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (49 of 1988) 
7  Public servant taking gratification other than legal remuneration in respect of an 
official act. 
8  Taking gratification in order, by corrupt or illegal means, to influence public 
servant. 
9  Taking gratification for exercise of personal influence with public servant. 
10  Punishment for abetment by public servant of offences defined in section 8 or 
section 9 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
13  Criminal misconduct by a public servant.
VIII. Offences under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) 
12A read with 
section 24 Prohibition of manipulative and deceptive devices, insider trading and substantial 
acquisition of securities or control. 
24  Offences for contravention of the provisions of the Act.
IX. Offences under the Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002 (15 of 2003) 
3  Offence of money-laundering.
4  Punishment for money-laundering.
X. Offences under the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009) 
Sub-section ( 2) of 
section 30 Carrying on business with intent or purpose to defraud creditors of the Limited 
Liability Partnership or any other person or for any other fraudulent purpose. 
XI. Offences under the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 (42 of 2010) 
34  Penalty for article or currency or security obtained in contravention of section 10. 
35  Punishment for contravention of any provision of the Act. 13 Section Description of offence 
XII. Offences under the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013) 
Sub-section ( 4) of 
section 42 of the 
Companies Act, 
2013 read with 
section 24 of the 
Securities and 
Exchange Board 
of India Act, 
1992 
(15 of 1992) Offer or invitation for subscription of securities on private placement. 
74  Repayment of deposits, etc., accepted before commencement of the Companies 
Act, 2013. 
76A  Punishment for contravention of section 73 or section 76 of the Companies Act, 
2013. 
Second proviso to 
sub-section ( 4) of 
section 206 Carrying on business of a company for a fraudulent or unlawful purpose.
Clause ( b) of 
section 213 Conducting the business of a company with intent to defraud its creditors, 
members or any other persons or otherwise for a fraudulent or unlawful purpose, 
or in a manner oppressive to any of its members or that the company was formed 
for any fraudulent or unlawful purpose. 
447  Punishment for fraud. 
452  Punishment for wrongful withholding of property. 
XIII. Offences under the Black Money (Undisclosed Foreign Income and Assets) and Imposition 
of Tax Act, 2015 (22 of 2015) 
51  Punishment for wilful attempt to evade tax. 
XIV. Offences under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016) 
69  Punishment for transactions defrauding creditors.
XV. Offences under the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 (12 of 2017) 
Sub-section ( 5) of 
section 132 Punishment for certain offences. 
--------------------------The Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy Act, 2017--------------------------
1 THE INDIAN INSTITUTE OF PETROLEUM AND ENERGY ACT, 2017 
_________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
___________ 
SECTIONS
1.Short title and commencement. 
2.Declaration of Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy as an institution of national 
importance. 
3.Definitions. 
4.Incorporation of Institute. 
5.Constitution of Board of Governors. 
6.Term of office of, vacancies among, and allowances payable to, members of Board. 
7.Vesting of properties. 
8.Effect of incorporation of Institute. 
9.Functions of Institute. 
10.Powers of Board. 
11.Institute to be open to all races, creeds and classes. 
12.Teaching at the Institute. 
13.Visitor. 
14.Authorities of Institute. 
15.Constitution of General Council. 
16.Powers and functions of General Council. 
17.Senate. 
18.Functions of Senate. 
19.President of Board. 
20.Director. 
21.Registrar. 
22.Powers and duties of other authorities and officers. 
23.Grants by Central Government. 
24.Fund of Institute. 
25.Setting-up of endowment fund. 
26.Budget of Institute. 
27.Accounts and audit 
28.Annual report. 
29.Pension, provident fund, etc. 
30.Authentication of orders and instruments of Institute. 
31.Appointment. 
32.Statutes. 
33.Statutes how made. 
34.Ordinances. 
35.Ordinances how made. 
36.Conduct of business by authorities of Institute. 
37.Tribunal of Arbitration. 
38.Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies. 
39.Grant of degrees, etc., by Institute. 
40.Sponsored schemes. 
41.Control by Central Government. 
42.Resolution of differences. 
43.Power to remove difficulties. 
44.Transitional provisions. 
45.Statutes, Ordinances and notifications to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid 
before Parliament. 2 THE INDIAN INSTITUTE OF PETROLEUM AND ENERGY ACT, 2017 
ACT NO. 3 OF 2018 
[5th January, 2018.] 
An Act to declare the institution known as the Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy to be an 
institution of national importance and to provide for its incorporation and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Indian Institute of Petroleum and 
Energy Act, 2017. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. 
2. Declaration of India Institute of Petroleum and Energy as an institution of national 
importance. —Whereas the objects of the institution known as the Indian Institute of Petroleum and 
Energy, Vishakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh are such as to make the institution one of national 
importance, it is hereby declared that the institution known as the Indian Institute of Petroleum and 
Energy is an institution of national importance. 
3. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appointed day” means the date appointed under sub-section ( 2) of section 1 for coming 
into force of this Act; 
(b) “Board” means the Board of Governors of the Institute constituted under sub-section ( 1) of 
section 5; 
(c)  “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the General Council; 
(d) “Director” means the Director of the Institute appointed under section 20; 
(e) “fund” means the fund of the Institute to be maintained under section 24; 
(f) “General Council” means the General Council constituted under sub-section ( 1) of            
section 15; 
(g) “Institute” means the Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy incorporated under section 4; 
(h) “President” means the President of the Board appointed under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) 
of section 5; 
(i) “Registrar” means the Registrar of the Institute referred to in section 21; 
(j) “Senate” means the Senate of the Institute referred to in section 17; 
(k) “Society” means the Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy Society, Vishakhapatnam, 
Andhra Pradesh registered under the Andhra Pradesh Societies Registration Act, 2001 (Andhra 
Pradesh Act 35 of 2001); and 
(l) “Statutes” and “Ordinances” mean, respectively, the Statutes and the Ordinances of the 
Institute made under this Act. 
4. Incorporation of Institute. —The Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy, Vishakhapatnam, 
Andhra Pradesh, an institution registered under the Andhra Pradesh Societies Registration Act, 2001, 
shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract, and shall, by that 
name, sue and be sued. 
1. 22nd January, 2018, vide notification No. S.O. 272(E), dated 17th January, 2018, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,          
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 3 5. Constitution of Board of Governors. —(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be constituted by the 
Central Government for the purposes of this Act, a Board to be known as the Board of Governors 
consisting of the following members, namely:— 
(a) the President to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
provided by the Statutes: 
Provided that the first President shall be appointed by the Central Government on such terms and 
conditions as it deems fit, for a period not exceeding six months from the date the first Statutes comes 
into force; 
(b) the Director of the Institute, ex officio ; 
(c) two persons from the Board of Directors of the promoting companies to be nominated by 
the Central Government. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, promoting companies mean those companies 
contributing to the endowment fund referred to in section 25; 
(d) one Professor of the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore to be nominated by the Director 
of that Institute; 
(e) five eminent experts in the field of petroleum technology, renewable and non-renewable energy 
covering the entire hydrocarbon value chain having specialised knowledge or operational experience 
in respect of education, research, engineering and technology to be nominated by the General 
Council, in consultation with the Director of the Institute; 
( f) two Professors of the Institute to be nominated by the Senate of the Institute; and 
(g) one representative of the graduates of the Institute to be nominated by the Executive 
Committee of the Alumni Association. 
(2) The Registrar of the Institute shall act as the Secretary of the Board. 
(3) The Board shall ordinarily meet four times during a calendar year. 
6. Term of office of, vacancies among, and allowances payable to, members of Board. —(1) 
Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of office of the President or any other member of 
the Board, other than ex officio members, shall be three years from the date of his appointment or 
nomination thereto. 
(2) An ex officio member shall cease to be a member of the Board as soon as he vacates the office 
by virtue of which he is a member of the Board. 
(3) The term of a member nominated to fill a casual vacancy shall continue for the remainder of 
the term of the member in whose place he has been nominated. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, an outgoing member shall, unless the 
Central Government otherwise directs, continue in office until another person is nominated as a 
member in his place. 
(5) The members of the Board shall be entitled to such allowances, if any, from the Institute, as 
may be provided for in the Statutes, but no member other than the member referred to in clause ( f) of 
section 5 shall be entitled to any salary. 
7. Vesting of properties. —On and from the appointed day and subject to the other provisions of 
this Act, all properties which had vested in the Society immediately before that day, shall, on and 
from that day, vest in the Institute. 
8. Effect of incorporation of Institute. —On and from the appointed day,— 
(a) any reference to the Society in any contract or other instrument shall be deemed as a 
reference to the Institute; 
(b) all the rights and liabilities of the Society shall be transferred to, and be the rights and 
liabilities of, the Institute. 4 9. Functions of Institute. —The Institute shall perform the following functions, namely:— 
(i) nurture and promote quality and excellence in education and research in the area of 
petroleum and hydrocarbons and energy; 
(ii) provide for programmes and courses of instruction and research leading to the award of the 
Bachelors, Masters and Doctoral degrees in engineering and technology, management, sciences 
and arts in the area of petroleum and hydrocarbons and energy; 
(iii) grant, subject to such conditions as the Institute may determine, degrees, diplomas, certificates 
or other academic distinctions or titles at various academic levels to candidates who have attained the 
prescribed standard of proficiency as judged on the basis of examination or on any other basis of 
testing and evaluation and to withdraw any such degrees, diplomas, certificates or other academic 
distinctions or titles for good and sufficient reasons; 
(iv) confer honorary degrees or other distinctions and to institute and award fellowships, 
scholarships, exhibitions, prizes and medals; 
(v) lay down standards of admission to the Institute through an examination or any other 
method of testing and evaluation; 
(vi) manage the content, quality, design and continuous evaluation of its academic and research 
programmes in a manner that earns accreditation of an international stature; 
(vii) promote research and development for the benefit of oil, gas and petrochemical industry 
and the energy sector through the integration of teaching and research; 
(viii) foster close educational and research interaction through networking with national, 
regional and international players in the oil, gas and petrochemical industry and the energy sector; 
(ix) co-operate with educational and research institutions in any part of the world having objects 
wholly or partly similar to those of the Institute by exchange of teachers and scholars, conduct of 
joint research, undertaking sponsored research and consultancy projects, etc; 
(x) organise national and international symposia, seminars and conferences in the area of 
petroleum and hydrocarbons and energy; 
(xi) establish, maintain and manage halls, residences and hostels for students and to lay down 
conditions for residing in the halls and hostels; 
(xii) supervise, control and regulate the discipline of all categories of employees of the Institute 
and to make arrangements for promoting their health and general welfare; 
(xiii) supervise and regulate the discipline of students and to make arrangements for promoting 
their health, general welfare and cultural and corporate life; 
(xiv) frame Statutes and to alter, modify or rescind the same; 
(xv) deal with any property belonging to or vested in the Institute in such manner as the 
Institute may deem fit for advancing its objects; 
(xvi) receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from the Central Government and the State 
Governments and to receive bequests, donations, grants and transfers of movable or immovable 
properties from testators, donors, transferors, alumni, industry or any other person; 
(xvii) borrow money for the purposes of the Institute with or without security of the property of 
the Institute; 
(xviii) integrate new technology in the classroom to encourage student-centric learning 
strategies and the development of an attitude for learning; 
(xix) develop and maintain an information resource centre of print and non-print knowledge 
resources in the field of petroleum sector covering the entire hydrocarbon value chain as well as other 
related areas of energy, science and technology; 
(xx) provide for further education to the working professionals and other employees of the 
Institute in the advanced areas of technology relating to oil, gas, complete hydrocarbon value chain 
and energy; 5 (xxi) offering customised programmes that serve the current and ongoing needs of working 
professionals for continuing education at the cutting-edge of petroleum and energy sector at the 
campus of the Institute or at company site; 
(xxii) encouraging industry to sponsor their staff to join the Institute for higher degrees and 
work on problems that interest the sponsoring industry thus helping develop deeper interactions 
and a research environment in the industry; 
(xxiii) fostering the creation of new basic knowledge and applied technology and its active 
transmission to companies for the benefit of the nation and for this purpose establishing an 
Intellectual Property Rights cell to patent the new developments made at the Institute and to license 
them nationally and internationally; 
(xxiv) being proactive in supporting the skill development programmes of the Government of 
India by training people in various related areas by way of certificate and diploma courses at the 
campus of the Institute or at other locations and involving industry in design and conduct of 
curricula; 
(xxv) giving broad focus to the functioning of the Institute in the area of petroleum and petroleum 
related technologies under the wide umbrella of energy; and 
(xxvi) doing all such things, not specifically covered above, as may be necessary, incidental or 
conducive to the attainment of all or any of the objects of the Institute. 
10. Powers of Board. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board shall be responsible for 
the general superintendence, direction and control of the affairs of the Institute and shall exercise all 
the powers not otherwise provided for by this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, and shall have the 
power to review the acts of the Senate.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the Board shall— 
(a) take decisions on questions of policy relating to the administration and working of the 
Institute; 
(b) lay down policy regarding the duration of the courses, nomenclature of the degrees and 
other distinctions to be conferred by the Institute; 
(c) institute courses of study and to lay down standards of proficiency and other academic 
distinctions in respect of the courses offered by the Institute; 
(d) lay down policy regarding the cadre structure, qualification, the method of recruitment and 
conditions of service of the teaching and research faculty as well as other employees of the 
Institute; 
(e) guide resource mobilisation of the Institute and to lay down policies for investment; 
(f) consider and approve proposals for taking loans for purposes of the Institute with or without 
security of the property of the Institute; 
(g) frame Statutes and to alter, modify or rescind the same; 
(h) consider and pass resolutions on the annual report, the annual accounts and the budget 
estimates of the Institute for the next financial year as it thinks fit together with a statement of its 
development plans; 
(i) create academic, administrative, technical and other posts and to make appointments thereto 
and to provide avenues for their growth and development; 
(j) examine and approve the development plans of the Institute and the financial implications of 
such plans; 
(k) examine and approve the annual operation and capital budget estimates of Institute for the 
next financial year and to sanction expenditure within the limits of the approved budget; 
(l) receive gifts, grants, bequests, donations or benefactions and transfer of movable or 
immovable properties from the Central Government and the State Governments and from testators, 
donors, or transferors, as the case may be, and to have custody of the funds of the Institute; 
(m) fix, demand and receive fees and other charges; 6 (n) to sue and defend all legal proceedings on behalf of the Institute; and 
 (o) do all such things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment of all or 
any of the aforesaid powers. 
(3) The Board shall have the power to appoint such committees as it considers necessary for the 
exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties under this Act. 
(4) The Board shall have the power to establish campus and academic centres at any place within 
or outside India: 
Provided that no campus or academic centre shall be established outside India without the prior 
approval of the Central Government. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 4, the Board shall not dispose of in any manner, 
any immovable property of the Institute without prior approval of the Central Government. 
(6) The Board may, through a specific resolution to this effect, delegate any of its powers and 
duties to the President, Director, any officer or any authority of the Institute subject to reserving the 
right to review the action that may be taken under such delegated authority. 
11.  Institute to be open to all races, creeds and classes. —(1) The Institute shall be open to 
persons of either sex and of whatever race, creed, caste or class, and no test or condition shall be 
imposed as to religious belief or profession in admitting students, appointing teachers or employees or 
in any other connection whatsoever. 
(2) No bequest, donation or transfer of any property shall be accepted by the Institute which in the 
opinion of the Board involves conditions or obligations opposed to the spirit and object of this 
section. 
12. Teaching at the Institute. —All teaching and other academic activities at the Institute shall be 
conducted by or in the name of the Institute in accordance with the Statutes and the Ordinances made 
in this behalf. 
13.  Visitor. —(1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the Institute. 
(2) The Visitor may appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress of the Institute 
and to hold inquiries into the affairs thereof and to report thereon in such manner as the Visitor may 
direct. 
(3) Upon receipt of any such report, the Visitor may take such action and issue such directions as 
he considers necessary in respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report and the Institute shall 
be bound to comply with such directions. 
14. Authorities of Institute. —The following shall be the authorities of the Institute, namely:— 
(a) the General Council; 
(b) the Board of Governors; 
(c) the Senate; and 
(d) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the 
Institute. 
15. Constitution of General Council. —(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be constituted, for the purposes of this 
Act, a body to be known as the General Council. 
(2) The General Council shall consist of the following members, namely:— 
(a) the Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in the Central Government, ex officio , 
who shall be the Chairperson; 
(b) the Chairman, Indian Oil Corporation Limited, ex officio ; 
(c) the Chairman and Managing Director, Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, ex officio ; 
(d) the Chairman and Managing Director, Oil and Natural Gas Corporation, ex officio ; 7 (e) the Chairman and Managing Director, Gas Authority of India Limited, ex officio ; 
(f) the Director General of Hydrocarbons, ex officio ; 
(g) the Principal Advisor (Energy), NITI Aayog, ex officio ; 
(h) the Executive Director, Oil Industry Safety Directorate, ex officio ; 
(i) the Director, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, ex officio ; 
(j) the Director, Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad, ex officio ; 
(k)the Secretary, Oil Industry Development Board, ex officio ; 
(l) the President of the Board, ex officio ; 
(m) the Director of the Institute , ex officio ; and 
(n) persons, not less than two but not exceeding four, representing the private entities in the 
field of petroleum sector operating in the country, to be nominated by the Chairperson. 
(3) The Registrar of the Institute shall be the ex officio Secretary of the General Council. 
(4)  The Chairperson shall have the power to invite any person who is not a member of the General 
Council to attend its meeting but such invitee shall not be entitled to vote. 
16. Powers and functions of General Council. —Subject to the provisions of this Act, the 
General Council shall have the following powers and functions, namely:— 
(a) review from time to time the broad policies and programmes of the Institute and to suggest 
measures for the improvement, development and expansion of the Institute thereof; 
(b) consider the annual statement of accounts including a balance-sheet together with the audit 
report thereto and the observations of the Board of Governors thereon and to suggest improvements in 
fiscal management of the Institute; 
(c) review and evaluate overall quality and effectiveness of the Institute and to advise measures 
for improvement of performance and for confidence-building between the Institute and its 
stakeholders; 
(d) provide credibility, aura, connectivity and contacts for the Institute especially with regard to 
student placement and resource mobilisation; 
(e) advise the Institute and its Board in respect to new cutting edge areas of technology in the 
domain of energy and hydrocarbon development including oil, gas, renewable and non-renewable 
energy, etc., that the Institute needs to pursue, as well as in respect of any other matter referred to 
it by the Board for advice; and 
(f) advise the Institute and its Board in respect of the advanced areas of technology in the field 
of petroleum sector covering the entire hydrocarbon value chain as well as in respect of any other 
matter that may be referred to it for advice by the Board. 
17. Senate.— The Senate of the Institute shall be the principal academic body and its 
composition shall be such as may be provided by the Statutes.
18. Functions of Senate. —Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, 
the Senate shall have the control and general regulation, and be responsible for the maintenance of 
standards of instruction, education and examination in the Institute and shall exercise such other 
powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed upon it by the Statutes.
19. President of Board. —(1) The President shall ordinarily preside at the meetings of the Board 
and at the Convocations of the Institute. 
(2) It shall be the duty of the President to ensure that the decisions taken by the Board are 
implemented. 
(3) The President shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be 
assigned to him by this Act or the Statutes. 8 20. Director. —(1) The Director of the Institute shall be appointed by the Central Government in 
such manner and on such terms and conditions as may be provided by the Statutes:
Provided that the first Director shall be appointed by the Central Government on such terms and 
conditions as it deems fit, for a period not exceeding one year from the date the first Statutes come 
into force. 
(2) The Director shall be the principal academic and executive officer of the Institute and shall be 
responsible for the proper administration and academic performance of the Institute and for imparting of 
instruction and maintenance of discipline therein. 
(3) The Director shall submit annual reports and accounts to the Board. 
(4) The Director shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be 
assigned to him by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances. 
21. Registrar. —(1) The Registrar of the Institute shall be appointed in such manner and on such 
terms and conditions as may be provided by the Statutes and shall be the custodian of records, the 
common seal, the funds of the Institute and such other property of the Institute as the Board shall 
commit to his charge. 
(2) The Registrar shall act as the Secretary of the General Council, the Board, the Senate and such 
committees as may be provided by the Statutes. 
(3) The Registrar shall be responsible to the Director for the proper discharge of his functions. 
(4) The Registrar shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be 
assigned to him by this Act, the Statutes or by the Director. 
22. Powers and duties of other authorities and officers. —The powers and duties of authorities 
and officers, other than those hereinbefore mentioned, shall be determined by the Statutes. 
23. Grants by Central Government. —For the purpose of enabling the Institute to discharge its 
functions efficiently under this Act, the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Institute such sums of money and in such manner as it 
may think fit. 
24. Fund of Institute. —(1) The Institute shall maintain a fund to which shall be credited—
(a) all moneys provided by the Central Government; 
(b) all fees and other charges; 
(c) all moneys received by the Institute by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, 
bequests or transfers; and 
(d) all moneys received by the Institute in any other manner or from any other source. 
(2) All moneys credited to the fund shall be deposited in such banks or invested in such manner as 
may be decided by the Board. 
(3) The fund shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of the Institute including expenses 
incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its duties under this Act. 
25. Setting-up of endowment fund. —Notwithstanding anything contained in section 24, the 
Institute may,— 
(a) set-up an endowment fund and any other fund for a specified purpose; and 
(b) transfer money from its fund to the endowment fund or any other fund. 
26. Budget of Institute. —The Institute shall prepare, in such form and at such time every year, a 
budget in respect of the financial year next ensuing, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of 
the Institute and shall forward to the Central Government such number of copies thereof as may be 
provided by the Statutes. 
27. Accounts and audit. —(1) The Institute shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the balance-sheet, in such form as may 9 be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India. 
(2) The accounts of the Institute shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the 
Institute to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Institute shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India has in connection with the 
audit of the Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the offices of the 
Institute. 
(4) The accounts of the Institute as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or 
any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be 
forwarded annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid 
before each House of Parliament. 
28. Annual report. —The Institute shall prepare for every year a report of its activities during that 
year and submit the report to the Central Government in such form and on or before such date as may 
be provided by the Statutes and a copy of this report shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament 
within one month of its receipt. 
29. Pension, provident fund, etc. —(1) The Institute shall constitute for the benefit of its 
employees, including the Director, such pension, insurance and provident fund scheme as it deems fit, 
in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be provided by the Statutes. 
(2) Where any such provident fund has been so constituted, the Central Government may declare 
that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925) shall apply to such fund as if it were 
a Government provident fund. 
30.  Authentication of orders and instruments of Institute. —All orders and decisions of the 
Institute shall be authenticated by the Director or any other member authorised by the Institute in this 
behalf and all other instruments shall be authenticated by the signature of the Director or such officers 
as may be authorised by the Institute.
31. Appointment. —All appointments of the staff of the Institute, except that of the Director shall 
be made in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Statutes,— 
(a) by the Board, if the appointment is made on the academic staff in the post of Assistant Professor 
or above or if the appointment is made on the non-academic staff in any cadre, the maximum of the 
pay scale for which is the same or higher than that of Assistant Professor; and 
(b) by the Director, in any other case. 
32. Statutes. —Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:—
(a) the formation of departments of teaching and other academic units; 
(b) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes; 
(c) the classification of posts, term of office, method of appointment, powers and duties and 
other terms and conditions of service of the officers of the Institute including the President, the 
Director, the Registrar, and such other officers as may be declared as officers of the Institute by the 
Statutes; 
(d) the classification, the method of appointment and the determination of the terms and 
conditions of service of officers, teachers and other staff of the Institute; 
(e) the reservation of posts for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and other categories 
of persons as may be determined by the Central Government; 
(f) the form in which and the time at which the budget and reports shall be prepared by the 
Institute; 
(g) the form of annual report; 10 (h) the constitution of pension, insurance and provident funds for the benefit of the officers, 
teachers and other staff of the Institute; 
(i) the constitution, powers and duties of the other authorities of the Institute referred to in 
clause ( d) of section 14; 
(j) the delegation of powers; 
(k) the code of conduct, disciplinary actions thereto for misconduct including removal from 
service of employees on account of misconduct and the procedure for appeal against the actions of 
an officer or authority of the Institute; 
(l) the conferment of honorary degrees; 
(m) the establishment and maintenance of halls, residences and hostels; 
(n) he authentication of the orders and decisions of the Board; and 
(o) any other matter which by this Act is to be, or may be, provided by the Statutes. 
33. Statutes how made. —(1) The first Statutes of the Institute shall be framed by the Central 
Government and a copy of the same shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament. 
(2) The Board may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend or repeal the 
Statutes in the manner hereafter in this section provided. 
(3) A new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require 
the previous approval of the General Council who may assent thereto or withhold assent or remit it to 
the Board for consideration. 
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity 
unless it has been assented to by the General Council. 
34. Ordinances. —Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the admission of the students to the Institute; 
(b) the reservation for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and other categories of 
persons; 
(c) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of the 
Institute; 
(d) the conditions under which students shall be admitted to the degree, diploma and certificate 
courses and to the examinations of the Institute and the eligibility conditions for awarding the 
same; 
(e) the conditions of award of the fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes; 
(f) the conditions and manner of appointment and duties of examining bodies, examiners and 
moderators; 
(g) the conduct of examinations; 
(h) the maintenance of discipline among the students of the Institute; 
(i) the fees to be charged for courses of study at the Institute and for admission to the 
examinations; 
(j) the conditions of residence of students of the Institute and the levying of the fees for 
residence in the halls and hostels and of other charges; and 
(k) any other matter which by this Act or the Statutes is to be, or may be, provided for by the 
Ordinances. 
35.  Ordinances how made. —(1) The First Ordinance of the Institute shall be framed by the Central 
Government. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this section, Ordinances shall be made by the Senate. 11 (3) All Ordinances made by the Senate shall have effect from such date as it may direct, but every 
Ordinance so made shall be submitted, as soon as may be, to the Board and shall be considered by the 
Board at its next succeeding meeting. 
(4) The Board shall have power by resolution to modify or cancel any such Ordinance and such 
Ordinance shall from the date of such resolution stand modified accordingly or cancelled, as the case 
may be. 
36. Conduct of business by authorities of Institute. —The authorities of the Institute may have 
their own rules of procedure, consistent with the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances 
for the conduct of their own business and that of the committees, if any, appointed by them and not 
provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances. 
37. Tribunal of Arbitration. —(1) Any dispute arising out of a contract between the Institute and any 
of its employees shall, at the request of the employee concerned or at the instance of the Institute, be 
referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by the Institute, one member 
nominated by the employee, and an umpire appointed by the Visitor. 
(2) The decision of the Tribunal of Arbitration shall be final. 
(3) No suit or proceeding shall lie in any court in respect of any matter which is required by          
sub-section ( 1) to be referred to the Tribunal of Arbitration. 
(4) The Tribunal of Arbitration shall have power to regulate its own procedure. 
(5) Nothing in any law for the time being in force relating to arbitration shall apply to arbitrations 
under this section. 
38. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies. —No act of the Institute or the 
General Council or Board or Senate or any other body set-up under this Act or the Statutes, shall be 
invalid merely by reasons of— 
(a) any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution thereof, or 
(b) any defect in the election, nomination or appointment of a person acting as a member 
thereof, or 
(c) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the case. 
39. Grant of degrees, etc., by Institute. —Notwithstanding anything in the University Grants 
Commission Act, 1956 (3 of 1956)  or in any other law for the time being in force, the Institute shall 
have power to grant degrees and other academic distinctions and titles under this Act. 
40. Sponsored schemes. —Notwithstanding anything in this Act, whenever the Institute receives 
funds from any Government, the University Grants Commission or any other agency including 
industry sponsoring a research scheme, a consultancy assignment, a teaching programme or a chaired 
professorship or a scholarship, to be executed or endowed at the Institute,— 
(a) the amount received shall be kept by the Institute separately from the fund of the Institute 
and utilised only for the purpose of the scheme; and 
(b) the staff required to execute the same shall be recruited in accordance with the terms and 
conditions stipulated by the sponsoring organisation: 
Provided that any money remaining unutilised under clause ( a) shall be transferred to the 
endowment fund created under section 25. 
41. Control by Central Government. —The Institute shall carry out such directions as may be 
issued to it from time to time by the Central Government for the efficient administration of this Act. 
42. Resolution of differences. —If in, or in connection with, the exercise of its powers and 
discharge of its functions by the Institute under this Act, any dispute or difference arises between the 
Institute and the Central Government, the decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final.
43. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 12 or give such directions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or 
expedient for removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the appointed day. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament. 
44. Transitional provisions. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,— 
(a) the Board of Governors of the Society functioning as such immediately before the 
commencement of this Act shall continue to so function until a new Board is constituted for the 
Institute under this Act, but on the constitution of a new Board under this Act, the members of the 
Board holding office before such constitution shall cease to hold office; and 
(b) until the first Statutes and the Ordinances are made under this Act, the Statutes and the 
Ordinances of the Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy Society, as in force, immediately 
before the commencement of this Act, shall continue to apply to the Institute insofar as they are 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act. 
45. Statutes, Ordinances and notifications to be published in the Official Gazette and to be 
laid before Parliament. —(1) Every Statute and every Ordinance made or notification issued under 
this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette. 
(2) Every Statute and every Ordinance made or notification issued under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the Statute, Ordinance or notification or 
both Houses agree that the Statute, Ordinance or notification should not be made or issued, the 
Statute, Ordinance or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that Statute, Ordinance or notification. 
(3) The power to make the Statutes, Ordinances or notifications shall include the power to give 
retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the Statutes, 
Ordinances, notifications or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any Statute, 
Ordinance or notification so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such 
Statute, Ordinance or notification may be applicable. 
--------------------------The National Commission for Backward Classes (Repeal) Act, 2018--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR BACKWARD CLASSES  
(REPEAL) ACT, 2018  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Repeal and savings . 
  2 
 THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR BACKWARD CLASSES  
(REPEAL) ACT, 2018  
ACT NO. 24 OF 2018  
[14th August, 2018.]  
An Act to repeal the National Commission for Backward Classes Act, 1993.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the National Commission for 
Backward Classes (Repeal) Act, 2018.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint.  
2. Repeal and savings. —(1) The National Commission for Backward Classes  Act, 1993           (27 of 
1993) is hereby repealed and the National Commission for Backward Classes constituted under sub -
section ( 1) of section 3 of the said Act shall stand dissolved.  
(2) The repeal of the National Commission for Backward Classes Act, 1993  (27 of 1993) shall, 
however, not affect, — 
(i) the previous operation of the Act so repealed or anything duly done or suffered thereunder; or  
(ii) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the Act so repealed; 
or 
(iii) any penalty, confiscation or punishment incurred in respect of any contravention under the Act so 
repealed; or  
(iv) any proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, 
confiscation or punishment as afore said, and any such proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or 
enforced, and any such penalty, confiscation or punishment may be imposed or made as if that Act had not 
been repealed.  
(3) The mention of the particular matters referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall not be held to prejudice or 
affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897  (10 of 1897) with regard to the 
effect of repeal.  
 
                                                   
1. 15th August, 2018, vide notification No. S.O. 3988(E), dated 14th August, 2018, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 
3(ii). 
--------------------------The National Sports University Act--------------------------
1 THE NATIONAL SPORTS UNIVERSITY ACT, 2018 
__________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
__________ 
SECTIONS
1.Short title, extent and commencement. 
2.Definitions. 
3.Establishment of University. 
4.Objects of University. 
5.Powers and functions of University. 
6.University to be open to all caste, creed, race or class. 
7.Central Government to review work and progress of University. 
8.Officers of University. 
9.Chancellor. 
10.Vice-Chancellor. 
11.Deans of Schools. 
12.Registrar. 
13.Finance Officer. 
14.Controller of Examinations. 
15.Librarian. 
16.Other officers. 
17.Authorities of University. 
18.The Court. 
19.Executive Council. 
20.Academic and Activity Council. 
21.Board of Sports Studies. 
22.Finance Committee. 
23.Other authorities of University. 
24.Power to make Statutes. 
25.Statutes, how to be made. 
26.Power to make Ordinances. 
27.Regulations. 
28.Annual report. 
29.Annual accounts. 
30.Fund of University. 
31.Returns and information. 
32.Conditions of service of employees, etc. 
33.Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students. 
34.Rights to appeals. 
35.Provident and pension funds. 
36.Disputes as to constitution of authorities and bodies. 
37.Filing of casual vacancies. 
38.Proceedings of authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies. 
39.Protection of action taken in good faith. 
40.Mode of proof of University record. 
41.Power to remove difficulties. 
42.Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid 
before Parliament. 
43.Transitional provisions. 
44.Repeal and savings. 
THE SCHEDULE. 2 THE NATIONAL SPORTS UNIVERSITY ACT, 2018 
ACT NO. 25 OF 2018 
[17th August, 2018.] 
An Act to establish and incorporate a National Sports University in the State of Manipur, a specialised 
University first of its kind, to promote sports education in the areas of sports sciences, sports 
technology, sports management and sports coaching besides functioning as the national training 
centre for select sports disciplines by adopting best international practices and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the National Sports University 
Act, 2018. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 31st day of May, 2018. 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Academic and Activity Council” means the Academic and Activity Council of the 
University; 
(b) “academic staff” means such categories of staff as are designated as academic staff by the 
Ordinances; 
(c) “Board of Sports Studies” means the Board of Sports Studies of a Department of the 
University; 
(d) “Chancellor” means the Chancellor of the University; 
(e) “College” means a college or other academic institution established or maintained by, or 
admitted to the privileges of, the University; 
(f) “Court” means the Court of the University; 
(g) “Department” means a Department of Studies and includes a Centre of Studies; 
(h) “employee” means any person appointed by the University and includes teachers and other 
staff of the University; 
(i) “Executive Council” means the Executive Council of the University; 
(j) “Finance Committee” means the Finance Committee of the University; 
(k) “Fund” means the University Fund referred to in section 30; 
(l) “Hall” means a unit of residence or of corporate life for the students of the University, or of 
an Outlying Campus or of a College or an Institution, maintained by the University; 
(m) “Head of the Department” means the head of any teaching department of the University; 
(n) “Institution” means an academic institution, not being a College, maintained by, or admitted 
to the privileges of, the University; 
(o) “Outlying Campus” means the campus of the University as may be established by it at any 
place within or outside India; 
(p) “Principal” means the Head of a College or an Institution maintained by the University and 
includes, where there is no Principal, the person for the time being duly appointed to act as Principal, 
and in the absence of the Principal, or the acting Principal, a Vice-Principal duly appointed as such; 
(q) “Regional Centre” means a centre established or maintained by the University for the purpose of 
coordinating and supervising the work of Study Centres in any region and for performing such other 
functions as may be conferred on such centre by the Executive Council; 3 (r) “Regulations” means the regulations made by any authority of the University under this Act 
for the time being in force; 
(s) “School” means a School of Studies of the University; 
(t) “section” means the section of this Act; 
(u) “State” includes a Union territory; 
(v) “Statutes” and “Ordinances” mean, respectively, the Statutes and the Ordinances of the 
University for the time being in force; 
(w) “Study Centre” means a centre established, maintained or recognised by the University for 
the purpose of advising, counselling, training or for rendering any other assistance required by the 
students; 
(x) “teachers of the University” means Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant Professors 
and such other persons as may be appointed for imparting instructions, training or conducting 
research in the University or in any Outlying Campus, College or Institution or Regional Centres 
and Study Centres maintained by the University and are designated as teachers by the Ordinances; 
(y) “University” means the National Sports University established and incorporated as a 
University under this Act; 
(z) “Vice-Chancellor” means the Vice-Chancellor of the University. 
3. Establishment of University. —(1) There shall be established a University by the name of 
“National Sports University”. 
(2) The headquarters of the University shall be in the State of Manipur and it may establish or 
maintain Outlying Campuses, Colleges, Regional Centres and Study Centres at such other places in 
India as it may deem fit: 
Provided that the University may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, also 
establish Outlying Campuses and Study Centres outside India. 
(3) The first Chancellor, the first Vice-Chancellor and the first members of the Court, the 
Executive Council and the Academic and Activity Council, and all such persons who may hereafter 
become such officers or members, so long as they continue to hold such office or membership, are 
hereby constituted a body corporate by the name of “National Sports University”. 
(4) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal, and shall sue and be sued 
by the said name. 
4. Objects of University .—The objects of the University shall be–– 
(i) to evolve as an institute of advanced study in the field of physical education and sports 
sciences; 
(ii) to provide for research and development and dissemination of knowledge in physical 
education and sports sciences by providing specially designed academic and training programmes 
in various areas of physical education and sports sciences and training in advanced technologies of 
sports; 
(iii) to strengthen physical education and sports training programmes to promote sports 
including traditional and tribal sports and games; 
(iv) to establish centres and institutions of excellence for imparting state of the art educational 
training and research in the fields of physical education and sports sciences, sports technology and 
high performance training for all sports and games; 
(v) to provide professional and academic leadership to other institutions in the field of physical 
education and sports sciences; 4 (vi) to provide vocational guidance and placement services in physical education, sports sciences, 
sports medicine, sports technology and other related fields; 
(vii) to generate capabilities for the development of knowledge, skills and competences at 
various levels in the fields of physical education and sports sciences, sports technology and high 
performance training for all sports and games; 
(viii) to generate capabilities to provide infrastructure of international standard for education, 
training and research in the areas related to physical education and sports sciences, sports 
technology and high performance training for all sports and games; 
(ix) to prepare highly qualified professionals in the fields of physical education and sports 
sciences, sports technology and high performance training for all sports and games; 
(x) to serve as a Centre of Excellence for the elite and other talented sportspersons of all sports and 
games and innovation in physical education and sports sciences and to carry out, endorse and propagate 
research; 
(xi) to function as a leading resource centre for knowledge and development in the areas of 
physical education and sports sciences, sports technology and high performance training for all 
sports and games; 
(xii) to provide international collaboration in the fields of physical education and sports 
sciences, sports technology and high performance training for all sports and games; 
(xiii) to establish close linkage with sports academies, schools, colleges, sports and recreation 
clubs, sports associations and international federations for the purpose of teaching, training and 
research in physical education and sports sciences, sports technology and high performance 
training for all sports and games; 
(xiv) to train talented athletes so as to help them to evolve into elite athletes of international 
level; 
(xv) to make India become a sporting power; 
(xvi) such other objects, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, which the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette , specify in this behalf. 
5.Powers and functions of University. —(1) The University shall have the following powers and 
functions, namely:––
(i) to plan, design, develop and prescribe courses of study and conduct appropriate academic and 
training programmes in physical education and sports sciences including sports technology and to 
provide for instruction and training in such branches of learning as the University may, from time to 
time, determine and to make provisions for research and for the advancement and dissemination of 
knowledge; 
(ii) to grant, subject to such conditions as the University may determine, diplomas or 
certificates to, and confer degrees or other academic distinctions on, persons, on the basis of 
examinations, evaluation or any method of testing, and to withdraw any such certificates, 
diplomas, degrees or other academic distinctions for good and sufficient cause; 
(iii) to provide opportunities to the students of the University to participate in the sports 
tournaments and competitions in co-ordination with established International Sports Federations, 
National Sports Federations, Indian Olympic Association and Association of Indian Universities; 
(iv) to have liaison or membership with various international professional organisations or 
bodies; 
(v) to establish and maintain, with the prior approval of the Central Government, such Outlying 
Campuses, Regional Centres, specialised laboratories or other units for research, instruction and 
training as are, in the opinion of the University, necessary for the furtherance of its objects; 
(vi) to establish, maintain or recognise Study Centres in the manner laid down by the Statutes; 
(vii) to establish and maintain Colleges, Institutions and Halls; 5 (viii) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner prescribed by the Statutes; 
(ix) to institute Principalships, Professorships, Associate Professorships, Assistant 
Professorships and other teaching or academic positions, required by the University and to appoint 
persons to such Principalships, Professorships, Associate Professorships, Assistant Professorships 
or other teaching or academic positions; 
(x) to appoint persons working in any University or academic institution, including those located 
outside the country, as teachers of the University for a specified period; 
(xi) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make appointments thereto; 
(xii) to co-operate or collaborate or associate with any other University or authority or 
Institution of higher learning, including those located outside the country, in such manner and for 
such purposes as the University, may determine; 
(xiii) to provide facilities through the distance education system to such persons and in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes; 
(xiv) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentship, medals and prizes for raising 
academic standards and research; 
(xv) to organise and to undertake extramural studies, training and extension services; 
(xvi) to make provision for research and advisory services and for that purpose, to enter into 
such arrangements with other institutions, industrial or other organisations, as the University may 
deem necessary; 
(xvii) to organise and conduct refresher courses, workshops, seminars and other programmes 
for teachers, evaluators, other academic staff and students; 
(xviii) to appoint on contract or otherwise visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors, Consultants and 
such other persons who may contribute to the advancement of the objects of the University; 
(xix) to determine standards of admission to the University, which may include examination, 
evaluation or any other method of testing; 
(xx) to demand and receive payment of fees and other charges; 
(xxi) to supervise the residences of the students of the University and to make arrangements for 
promoting their health and general welfare; 
(xxii) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, including their code of 
conduct; 
(xxiii) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the employees, and to take 
such disciplinary measures in this regard as may be deemed by the University to be necessary; 
(xxiv) to make arrangements for promoting the health and general welfare of the employees; 
(xxv) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold and manage, and to 
dispose of, with the previous approval of the Central Government, any property, movable or 
immovable, including trust and endowment properties, for the purposes of the University; 
(xxvi) to borrow, with the previous approval of the Central Government, on the security of the 
property of the University, money for the purposes of the University; 
(xxvii) to conduct innovative experiments and promote new methods and technologies in the 
fields of physical education, sports sciences, sports medicine, sports technology, sports 
management and other related fields; 
(xxviii ) to purchase or to take on lease any land or building or sports complex or sports 
infrastructure and scientific sports research equipment or indoor stadium or works which may be 
necessary or convenient for the purposes of the University, on such terms and conditions as it may 
think fit and proper and to construct, alter and maintain any such building or work; 
(xxix) to start any new allied course or research programme or diploma or training programme 
and discontinue any course or training programme; 6 (xxx) to invest the funds of the University in or upon such securities and transpose any 
investment from time to time in such manner as it may deem fit in the interest of the University; 
(xxxi) to execute conveyances regarding transfers, mortgages, leases, licenses, agreements and 
other conveyances in respect of the property, movable or immovable, including Government 
securities, belonging to the University or to be acquired for the purposes of the University, after taking 
prior permission of the Central Government; 
(xxxii) to act as a technical advisory body to Government of India and other National 
Organisations, State Governments and National Sports Federations on all matters related to sports; 
(xxxiii ) to provide training, coaching and other back up to high level sports persons for 
achieving success in different national and international sports competitions; 
(xxxiv ) to give effect to the procedures and standards provided under the Khelo India Scheme or 
the National Sports Talent Search and Identification Scheme; 
(xxxv) to confer autonomous status on a College or an Institution in the manner laid down by 
the Statutes; 
(xxxvi ) to admit to its privileges any College or Institution in or outside India subject to such 
conditions as may be laid down by the Statutes: 
Provided that no College or Institution shall be so admitted except with the prior approval of 
the Central Government; 
(xxxvii ) to provide for the preparation of instructional and training materials, including films, 
cassettes, tapes, video cassettes and other software; 
(xxxviii ) to recognise persons for imparting instructions in any College or Institution admitted 
to the privileges of the University; and 
(xxxix ) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the 
attainment of all or any of its objects. 
(2) The University shall in the exercise of its powers have jurisdiction over the whole of India and 
to the Outlying Campuses and Study Centres outside India. 
(3) In exercising its powers referred to in sub-section ( 1), it shall be the endeavour of the University 
to maintain an all-India character and high standards of teaching, training and research, and the 
University shall, among other measures which may be necessary for the said purpose, take, in particular, 
the following measures, namely:— 
(i) admissions of students and recruitment of faculty shall be made on all-India basis through 
appropriate procedures approved by the Executive Council of the University; 
(ii) foreign students shall be admitted by the University to various courses and programmes as 
per the policy and schemes of the Government of India and the procedure approved by the 
Executive Council of the National Sports University; 
(iii) inter-University mobility of faculty with portable pension scheme benefits, if any, and 
protection of seniority shall be encouraged; 
(iv) semester system, continuous evaluation and choice-based credit system shall be introduced and 
the University shall enter into agreement with other Universities and academic institutions for credit 
transfer and joint degree programmes; 
(v) innovative courses and programmes of studies shall be introduced with a provision for 
periodic review and restructuring; 
(vi) active participation of students shall be ensured in all academic activities of the University, 
including evaluation of teachers; 
(vii) accreditation shall be obtained from the National Assessment and Accreditation Council or 
any other accrediting agency at the national level; and 
(viii) e-governance shall be introduced with effective management information. 7 6. University to be open to all caste, creed, race or class .—The University shall be open to 
persons of any sex and of whatever caste, creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the 
University to adopt or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in 
order to entitle such person to be appointed as a teacher of the University or to hold any other office 
therein or to be admitted as a student in the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise 
any privilege thereof: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University from making 
special provisions for the employment or admission of women, persons with disabilities or of persons 
belonging to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes, the 
Scheduled Tribes and the other socially and educationally backward classes of citizens: 
Provided further that no such special provision shall be made on the ground of domicile. 
7. Central Government to review work and progress of University .—(1) The Central 
Government may, from time to time, appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress of 
the University, including Outlying Campuses, Colleges, Institutions, Regional Centres and Study 
Centres maintained by it, and to submit a report thereon; and upon receipt of that report, the Central 
Government may, after obtaining the views of the Executive Council thereon through the Vice-
Chancellor, take such action and issue such directions, as it considers necessary, in respect of any of 
the matters dealt with in the report and the University shall abide by such action and be bound to 
comply with such directions. 
(2) The Central Government shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made by such person or 
persons, as it may direct, of the University, its buildings, sports complexes, libraries, laboratories and 
equipment, and of any Outlying Campus or College or Institution or Regional Centres or Study Centres 
maintained by the University; and also of the examinations, teaching and other work conducted or done 
by the University and to cause an inquiry to be made in like manner in respect of any matter connected 
with the administration or finances of the University, Colleges or Institutions or Regional Centres or 
Study Centres. 
(3) The Central Government shall, in every matter referred to in sub-section ( 2), give notice of its 
intention to cause an inspection or inquiry to be made, to the University, and the University shall have 
the right to make such representations to the Central Government, as it may consider necessary. 
(4) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University, the Central Government 
may cause to be made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in sub-section ( 3). 
(5) Where any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Central Government, the 
University shall be entitled to appoint a representative, who shall have the right to be present and be 
heard at such inspection or inquiry. 
(6) The Central Government may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of the University or 
any Outlying Campus or College or Institution or Regional Centre or Study Centre established or 
maintained by it, address the Vice-Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or inquiry 
together with such views and advice with regard to the action to be taken thereon, as the Central 
Government may be pleased to offer, and on receipt of address made by the Central Government, the 
Vice-Chancellor shall communicate to the Executive Council the views of the Central Government with 
such advice as the Central Government may offer upon the action to be taken thereon. 
(7) The Executive Council shall communicate through the Vice-Chancellor to the Central 
Government such action, if any, as it proposes to take or has been taken upon the result of such 
inspection or inquiry. 
(8) Where, the Executive Council does not, within a reasonable time, take action to the satisfaction 
of the Central Government, it may, after considering any explanation furnished or representation 
made by the Executive Council, issue such directions, as it may think fit, and the Executive Council 
shall comply with such directions. 
(9) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Central Government may, by 
order in writing, annul any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with the 
provisions of this Act or the Statutes or the Ordinances: 8 Provided that before making any such order, the Central Government shall call upon the Vice-
Chancellor to show cause why such an order should not be made, and, if any cause is shown within a 
reasonable time, it shall consider the same. 
(10) The Central Government shall have such other powers, in respect of the affairs of the 
University, as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 
8. Officers of University .—The following shall be the officers of the University, namely:—
(a) the Chancellor; 
(b) the Vice-Chancellor; 
(c) the Deans of Schools; 
(d) the Registrar; 
(e) the Finance Officer; 
(f) the Controller of Examinations; 
(g) the Librarian; and 
(h) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be the officers of the University. 
9. Chancellor. —(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Central Government in such manner 
as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the head of the University and shall, if 
present, preside at the Convocations of the University held for conferring degrees and other 
ceremonial functions and also the meetings of the Court. 
10. Vice-Chancellor. —(1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Central Government in 
such manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 
(2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of the University 
and shall exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of the University and give effect to 
the decisions of all the authorities of the University. 
(3) The Vice-Chancellor may, if he is of the opinion that immediate action is necessary on any 
matter, exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under this Act and shall 
apprise such authority at its next meeting the action taken by him on such matter: 
Provided that if the authority concerned is of the opinion that such action ought not to have been 
taken, it may refer the matter to the Central Government whose decision thereon shall be final: 
Provided further that any person in the service of the University who is aggrieved by the action 
taken by the Vice-Chancellor under this sub-section shall have the right to represent against such 
action to the Executive Council within three months from the date on which decision on such action is 
communicated to him and thereupon the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the action 
taken by the Vice-Chancellor. 
(4) Where the Vice-Chancellor is of the opinion that any decision taken by any authority of the University 
is beyond the powers of the authority conferred under the provisions of this Act or the Statutes or the 
Ordinances, or that any decision taken by the authority is not in the interest of the University, he may 
ask the authority concerned to review its decision within sixty days of such decision and if the authority 
refuses to review the decision either in whole or in part or no decision is taken by it within the said 
period of sixty days, the matter shall be referred to the Central Government whose decision thereon shall 
be final. 
(5) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances. 
11. Deans of Schools. —Every Dean of School shall be appointed in such manner, and on such 
terms and conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes. 
12. Registrar. —(1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner, and on such terms and 
conditions of service, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.9 (2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreements, sign documents and authenticate 
records on behalf of the University, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may 
be prescribed by the Statutes. 
13. Finance Officer .—The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner, and shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 
14. Controller of Examinations .—Controller of Examinations shall be appointed in such manner 
and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 
15. Librarian. —The Librarian shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and conditions 
of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the 
Statutes. 
16. Other officers.— The manner of appointment and powers and duties of other officers of the 
University shall be prescribed by the Statutes. 
17. Authorities of University . The following shall be the authorities of the University, namely:—
(a) the Court; 
(b) the Executive Council; 
(c) the Academic and Activity Council; 
(d) the Board of Sports Studies; 
(e) the Finance Committee; 
(f) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the 
University. 
18. The Court .—(1) The constitution of the Court and the term of office of its members shall be 
prescribed by the Statutes.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall have the following powers and 
functions, namely:— 
(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of the University, and 
to suggest measures for the improvement and development of the University; 
(b) to consider and pass resolutions on the annual report and the annual accounts of the 
University and the audit report on such accounts; 
(c) to advise the Central Government in respect of any matter which may be referred to it for 
advice; and 
(d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 
19.Executive Council. —(1) The Executive Council shall be the principal executive body of the 
University. 
(2) The constitution of the Executive Council, the term of office of its members and its powers and 
functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes. 
20. Academic and Activity Council .—(1) The Academic and Activity Council shall be the principal 
academic body of the University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the 
Ordinances, co-ordinate and exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University. 
(2) The constitution of the Academic and Activity Council, the term of office of its members and 
its powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes: 
Provided that the Academic and Activity Council shall have sports persons who have achieved 
distinction in Olympics or world championships. 
21. Board of Sports Studies .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Sports 
Studies shall be prescribed by the Statutes. 
22. Finance Committee.— The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee shall 
be prescribed by the Statutes. 10 23. Other authorities of University .—The constitution, powers and functions of other authorities, 
as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the University, shall be prescribed by the 
Statutes. 
24. Power to make Statutes .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for 
all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of authorities and other bodies of the University, as 
may be constituted from time to time; 
(b) the appointment and continuance in office of the members of the said authorities and bodies, 
the filling up of vacancies of members, and all other matters relating to those authorities and other 
bodies for which it may be necessary or desirable to provide; 
(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the University and their emoluments; 
(d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees of the University, the 
emoluments and conditions of service; 
(e) the appointment of teachers and academic staff working in any other University or 
organisation for a specific period for undertaking a joint project; 
(f) the conditions of service of employees including provisions for pension, insurance, provident 
fund, the manner of termination of service and disciplinary action; 
(g) the principles governing the seniority of service of the employees of the University; 
(h) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or students and the 
University; 
(i) the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council by any employee or student against the 
action of any officer or authority of the University; 
(j) the conferment of autonomous status on a College or an Institution or a Department; 
(k) the establishment and abolition of Schools, Departments, Centres, Halls, Colleges, 
Institutions, Regional Centres and Study Centres; 
(l) the conferment of honorary degrees; 
(m) the conferment and withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic 
distinctions; 
(n) the management of Colleges, Institutions, Regional Centres and Study Centres established 
and maintained by the University; 
(o) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the University; 
(p) the maintenance of discipline among the employees and students; and 
(q) all other matters which by this Act are to be, or may be, provided for by the Statutes. 
25. Statutes, how to be made. —(1) The first Statutes are those set out in the Schedule to this Act. 
(2) The Executive Council may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend 
or repeal any Statutes referred to in sub-section ( 1): 
Provided that the Executive Council shall not make, amend or repeal any Statutes affecting the 
status, powers or constitution of any authority of the University until such authority has been given an 
opportunity of expressing an opinion in writing on proposed changes, and any opinion so expressed 
shall be considered by the Executive Council. 
(3) Every new Statutes or Statutes amending or repealing existing Statutes shall require the approval of 
the Central Government and unless so approved, they shall be invalid. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-sections, the Central Government may 
make new or additional Statutes or amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub-section ( 1), during the 
period of three years immediately after the commencement of this Act: 11 Provided that the Central Government may, on the expiry of the said period of three years, make, 
within one year from the date of such expiry, such detailed Statutes as it may consider necessary and such 
detailed Statutes shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Central Government may direct the 
University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by it and if the Executive 
Council is unable to implement such direction within sixty days of its receipt, the Central Government 
may, after considering the reasons, if any, communicated by the Executive Council for its inability to 
comply with such direction, make or amend the Statutes suitably. 
26. Power to make Ordinance. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the 
Ordinances may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such; 
(b) the courses of study and their duration to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and 
certificates of the University; 
(c) the medium of instruction and examination; 
(d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions, the 
qualifications for the same and the means to be taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the 
same; 
(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission to 
examinations, degrees and diplomas of the University; 
(f) the conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes; 
(g) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and manner of appointment 
and the duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators; 
(h) the conditions of residence of the students of the University; 
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence and teaching of 
women students and the prescribing of special courses of studies for them; 
(j) the establishment of Centres of Studies, Board of Studies, Specialised Laboratories and 
other Committees; 
(k) the manner of co-operation and collaboration with other Universities, institutions and 
other agencies including learned bodies or associations; 
(l) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is considered necessary 
for improving the academic life of the University; 
(m) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes; 
(n) the setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances of employees and students; and 
(o) any other matter which, by this Act or the Statutes, is to be or may be, provided for by 
the Ordinances. 
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice-Chancellor with previous approval of the 
Executive Council and the Ordinances so made may also be amended or repealed at any time by the 
Executive Council in the manner prescribed by the Statutes. 
27. Regulations .—The authorities of the University may make Regulations, consistent with this 
Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, for the conduct of their own business and that of the 
Committees, if any, appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the 
Ordinances, in the manner prescribed by the Statutes. 
28. Annual report. —(1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the 
directions of Executive Council, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the 
University towards the fulfilment of its objects and shall be submitted to the Court on or before such 
date as may be prescribed by the Statutes and the Court shall consider the report in its annual 
meeting. 12 (2) The Court shall submit the annual report to the Central Government along with its comments, 
if any. 
(3) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, cause a copy of the annual report to be laid 
before both the Houses of Parliament. 
29. Annual accounts. —(1) The annual accounts and balance-sheet of the University shall be 
prepared under the directions of the Executive Council and shall, once at least every year and at 
intervals of not more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India or by such persons as he may authorise in this behalf. 
(2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report thereon shall be submitted to the 
Court and the Central Government along with the observations of the Executive Council. 
(3) Any observations made by the Central Government on the annual accounts shall be brought to 
the notice of the Court and the observations of the Court, if any, shall, after being considered by the 
Executive Council, be submitted to the Central Government. 
(4) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, cause the copy of the annual accounts 
together with the audit report to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament. 
(5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before both the Houses of Parliament shall 
be published in the Official Gazette. 
30. Fund of University. ––(1) There shall be a University Fund which shall include––  
(a) any contribution or grant made by the University Grants Commission or the Central 
Government; 
(b) any contribution or grant made by the State Government; 
(c) any contribution made by Government, semi-Government or autonomous bodies; 
(d) any loans, gifts, bequests, donations, endowments or other grants, if any; 
(e) income received by the University from fees and charges; 
(f) the moneys received by the University from the collaborating industries in terms of the 
provisions of the Memorandum of Understanding entered between the University and the industry 
for the establishment of sponsored chairs, fellowships or infrastructure facilities of the University; 
and 
(g) amounts received in any other manner from any other source. 
(2) All funds of the University shall be deposited in such banks or invested in such manner as the 
Board may decide on the recommendation of the Finance Committee. 
(3) The funds of the University shall be applied towards the expenses of the University including 
expenses incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions by or under this Act. 
31. Returns and information. ––The University shall furnish to the Central Government such 
returns or other information with respect to its property or activities, within such period, as the Central 
Government may, from time to time, require.
32. Conditions of service of employees, etc. ––(1) Every employee of the University shall be 
appointed under a written contract, which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which 
shall be furnished to the employee concerned.
(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any employee shall, at the 
request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed 
by the Executive Council, one member nominated by the employee concerned and an umpire 
appointed by the Central Government. 
(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final and no suit shall lie in any civil court in respect of 
the matters decided by the Tribunal: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall preclude the employee from availing of judicial 
remedies available under articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution. 13 (4) Every request made by the employee under sub-section ( 2) shall be deemed to be a submission 
to arbitration upon the terms of this section within the meaning of the Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act, 1996 (26 of 1996). 
(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall be prescribed by the Statutes. 
33. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students. ––(1) Any student 
or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed from the rolls of the University by the 
orders or resolution of the Vice-Chancellor, Discipline Committee or Examination Committee, as the 
case may be, and who has been debarred from appearing at the examinations of the University for more 
than one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt of such orders or copy of such resolution by 
him, appeal to the Executive Council and the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the 
decision of the Vice-Chancellor or the Committee, as the case may be.
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against a student shall, 
at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of sub-sections 
(2), (3), (4) and ( 5) of section 32 shall, as far as may be, apply to a reference made under this                  
sub-section. 
34. Right to appeals. ––Every employee or student of the University or of a College or an 
Institution or a Regional Centre or a Study Centre established or maintained by the University shall, 
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, have a right to appeal to the Executive Council within 
such time, as may be prescribed by the Statutes, against the decision of any officer or authority of the 
University, or of the Principal or the management of any College or Institution or Regional Centre or 
Study Centre, as the case may be, and thereupon, the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse 
the decision appealed against. 
35. Provident and pension funds. ––(1) The University shall constitute for benefit of its 
employees such provident fund or any other similar fund or provide such insurance schemes, as it may 
deem fit, in such manner and subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 
(2) Where such provident fund or other similar fund has been so constituted, the Central 
Government may declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925) shall 
apply to such fund, as if it were a Government provident fund. 
36. Disputes as to constitution of authorities and bodies. ––If any question arises as to whether any 
person has been duly elected or appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority or other body 
of the University, the matter shall be referred to the Central Government whose decision thereon shall be 
final. 
37. Filling of casual vacancies. ––All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio 
members) of any authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the 
person or body who appoints, elects or co-opts the member whose place has become vacant and the 
persons appointed, elected or co-opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority or 
body for the residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member. 
38.Proceedings of authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies. ––No act or proceedings 
of any authority or other body of the University shall be invalid merely by reason of the existence of a 
vacancy or vacancies among its members. 
39. Protection of action taken in good faith.–– No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
any officer or other employee of the University for anything which is in good faith done or intended 
to be done in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances. 
40. Mode of proof of University record.–– Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) or in any other law for the time being in force, a copy of any receipt, 
application, notice, order, proceeding or resolution of any authority or other body of the University, or any 
other document in possession of the University, or any entry in any register duly maintained by the 
University, if certified by the Registrar, shall be received as prima facie evidence of such receipt, 
application, notice, order, proceeding, resolution or document or the existence of entry in the register and 
shall be admitted as evidence of the matters and transactions therein where the original thereof would, if 
produced, have been admissible in evidence. 14 41. Power to remove difficulties.–– (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or 
expedient for removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from 
the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under sub-section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the order or both Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that order. 
42. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be 
laid before Parliament.–– (1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be 
published in the Official Gazette. 
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry 
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the Statute, Ordinances or Regulations or both Houses agree that the 
Statute, Ordinances or Regulations should not be made, the Statute, Ordinances or Regulations shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under the Statute, Ordinances or Regulations. 
(3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shall include the power to give 
retrospective effect, from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the Statutes, 
Ordinances or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any Statutes, 
Ordinances or Regulations so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such Statutes, 
Ordinances or Regulations may be applicable. 
43. Transitional provisions. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the Statutes,—
(a) the first Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Central Government in such manner and 
on such conditions as may be deemed fit and the said officer shall hold office for such term, not 
exceeding five years, as may be specified by the Central Government; 
(b) the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Central 
Government and each of the said officers shall hold office for a term of three years; 
(c) the first Court and the first Executive Council shall consist of not more than thirty-one 
members and eleven members, respectively, who shall be nominated by the Central Government and 
shall hold office for a term of three years; and 
(d) the first Academic and Activity Council shall consist of not more than twenty-one 
members, who shall be nominated by the Central Government and they shall hold office for a 
term of three years: 
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or authorities, the same shall be filled by 
appointment or nomination, as the case may be, by the Central Government and the person so 
appointed or nominated shall hold office for so long as the officer or member in whose place he is 
appointed or nominated would have held office, if such vacancy had not occurred. 
44. Repeal and savings. —(1) The National Sports University Ordinance, 2018 (Ord. 5 of 
2018) is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 15 THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 25( 1)] 
The Statutes of the University 
1. Chancellor .—(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Central Government from a panel of 
names of not less than three persons recommended by the Executive Council: 
Provided that if the Central Government does not approve any of the persons included in the panel, 
it may call for an extended fresh panel. 
(2) The Chancellor shall be an eminent person in the field of sports who shall either be a sports 
person himself or a Sports Administrator or a Sports Academician. 
(3) The Chancellor shall hold office for the term of five years and shall not be eligible for re-
appointment: 
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office, the Chancellor shall continue to 
hold office until his successor enters upon his office. 
2. Vice-Chancellor .—(1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Central Government from 
out of a panel of names recommended by a Committee as constituted under clause ( 2): 
Provided that if the Central Government does not approve any of the persons included in the panel, 
it may call for an extended fresh panel. 
(2) The Committee referred to in clause ( 1) shall consist of five persons, out of whom three shall be 
nominated by the Executive Council and two by the Central Government, and one of the nominees of the 
Central Government shall be the convener of the Committee: 
Provided that none of the members of the Committee shall be an employee of the University or of 
a College or Institution or Regional Centre or Study Centre established or maintained by the 
University or a member of any authority of the University. 
(3) The Vice-Chancellor shall be a whole-time salaried officer of the University. 
(4) The Vice-Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters 
upon his office, or until he attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier, and he shall not be 
eligible for re-appointment: 
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of five years, he shall continue in office 
until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office: 
Provided further that the Central Government may direct any Vice-Chancellor after his term has 
expired, to continue in office for such period, not exceeding a total period of one year, as may be 
specified by it: 
Provided also that when the office of the Vice-Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, 
resignation or otherwise, or, as the case may be, due to illness or such other cause, the Executive 
Council may appoint the senior-most Dean to perform the functions of the Vice-Chancellor until a 
new Vice-Chancellor is appointed or, as the case may be, the existing Vice-Chancellor resumes his 
duties. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( 4), the Central Government may, at any time 
after the Vice-Chancellor has entered upon his office, by an order in writing, remove the Vice-
Chancellor from office on grounds of incapacity, misconduct or violation of statutory provisions: 
Provided that no such order shall be made by the Central Government unless the Vice-Chancellor 
has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken 
against him: 
Provided further that the Central Government may, at any time before making such order, place 
the Vice-Chancellor under suspension, pending enquiry. 
(6) (a) The Vice-Chancellor shall be paid a monthly salary and allowances, other than house rent 
allowance, at the rates fixed by the Central Government from time to time and he shall be entitled, 16 without payment of rent, to use a furnished residence throughout his term of office and no charge 
shall fall on the Vice-Chancellor in respect of the maintenance of such residence. 
(b) The Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to such terminal benefits and allowances as may be fixed 
by the Central Government from time to time: 
Provided that where an employee of the University or of a College, Institution, Regional Centre or 
Study Centre established or maintained by the University, or of any other University or any College or 
Institution admitted to the privileges of the University or such other University, is appointed as the Vice-
Chancellor, he may be allowed to continue to contribute to any provident fund of which he is a member 
and the University shall contribute to the account of such person in that provident fund at the same rate 
at which the person had been contributing immediately before his appointment as the Vice-Chancellor: 
Provided further that where such employee had been a member of any pension scheme, the 
University shall make the necessary contribution to such scheme. 
(c) The Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to travelling allowance at such rates as may be fixed by 
the Executive Council. 
(d) The Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full pay at the rate of thirty days in a calendar 
year and the leave shall be credited to his account in advance in two half-yearly instalments of fifteen 
days each on the first day of January and July every year: 
Provided that if the Vice-Chancellor assumes or relinquishes charge of the office of the Vice-
Chancellor during the currency of a half-year, the leave shall be credited proportionately at the rate of 
two and-a-half days for each completed month of service. 
(e) In addition to the leave referred to in sub-clause ( d), the Vice-Chancellor shall also be entitled to 
half-pay leave at the rate of twenty days for each completed year of service, and half-pay leave may also be 
availed of as commuted leave on full pay on medical certificate: 
Provided that when such commuted leave is availed of, twice the amount of half-pay leave shall be 
debited against half-pay leave due. 
3. Powers and duties of Vice-Chancellor. —(1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be ex officio Chairman 
of the Executive Council, the Academic and Activity Council and the Finance Committee and shall, in 
the absence of the Chancellor, preside at the Convocations held for conferring degrees and at 
meetings of the Court. 
(2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and address, any meeting of any 
authority or other body of the University, but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he is a 
member of such authority or body. 
(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice-Chancellor to see that this Act, the Statutes, the Ordinances and 
the Regulations are duly observed and he shall have all the powers necessary to ensure such 
observance. 
(4) The Vice-Chancellor shall have all the powers necessary for the proper maintenance of 
discipline in the University and he may delegate any such powers to such person or persons as he 
deems fit. 
(5) The Vice-Chancellor shall have the power to convene or cause to be convened the meetings of 
the Executive Council, the Academic and Activity Council and the Finance Committee. 
4. Deans of Schools .—(1) Every Dean of School shall be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor from 
amongst the Professors in the School by rotation in order of seniority for a period of three years: 
Provided that in case there is only one Professor or no Professor in a School, the Dean shall be 
appointed, for the time being, from amongst the Professor, if any, and the Associate Professors in the 
School, by rotation in the order of seniority: 
Provided further that a Dean on attaining the age of sixty-five years shall cease to hold office as 
such. 17 (2) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness, absence or any 
other cause, unable to perform duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by the 
senior-most Professor or Associate Professor, as the case may be, in the School. 
(3) The Dean shall be the Head of the School and shall be responsible for the conduct and 
maintenance of the standards of teaching and research in the School and shall have such other 
functions as may be prescribed by the Ordinances. 
(4) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at any meeting of the Boards of Sports 
Studies or Committees of the School, as the case may be, but shall not have the right to vote thereat 
unless he is a member thereof. 
5. Registrar .—(1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the 
recommendation of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and shall be whole-time 
salaried officer of University. 
(2) The Registrar shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for re-
appointment. 
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Registrar shall be such as 
may be prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time: 
Provided that the Registrar shall retire on attaining the age of sixty-two years. 
(4) When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar is, by reason of illness, 
absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be 
performed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor may appoint for the purpose. 
(5) (a) The Registrar shall have power to take disciplinary action against such of the employees, 
excluding teachers and other academic staff, as may be specified in the order of the Executive Council 
and to suspend them pending inquiry, to administer warnings to them or to impose on them the 
penalty of censure or the withholding of increment: 
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him. 
(b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice-Chancellor against any order of the Registrar imposing any of 
the penalties specified in sub-clause ( a). 
(c) In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the power of the Registrar is 
called for, the Registrar shall, upon the conclusion of the inquiry, make a report to the Vice-
Chancellor along with his recommendation: 
Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Executive Council against an order of the Vice-Chancellor 
imposing any penalty. 
(6) The Registrar shall be ex officio Secretary of the Executive Council and the Academic and 
Activity Council, but shall not be deemed to be member of either of these authorities and he shall be 
ex officio Member-Secretary of the Court. 
(7) It shall be the duty of the Registrar— 
(a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such other property of the 
University as the Executive Council shall commit to his charge; 
(b) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic 
and Activity Council and of any Committee appointed by those authorities; 
(c) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic 
and Activity Council and of any Committees appointed by those authorities; 
(d) to conduct the official correspondence of the Court, the Executive Council and the 
Academic and Activity Council; 
(e) to supply to the Central Government, copies of the agenda of the meetings of the 
authorities of the University as soon as they are issued and the minutes of such meetings; 18 (f) to represent the University in suits or proceedings by or against the University, sign powers 
of attorney and verify pleadings or depute his representative for the purpose; and 
(g) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances or 
Regulations or as may be required from time to time by the Executive Council. 
6. Finance Officer .—(1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Executive Council on 
the recommendations of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and shall be a whole-
time salaried officer of the University. 
(2) The Finance Officer shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for re-
appointment. 
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Finance Officer shall be such 
as may be prescribed by the Executive Council form time to time: 
Provided that the Finance Officer shall retire on attaining the age of sixty-two years. 
(4) When the office of the Finance Officer is vacant or when the Finance Officer is, by reason of 
illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office 
shall be performed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor may appoint for the purpose. 
(5) The Finance Officer shall be ex officio Secretary of the Finance Committee, but shall not be 
deemed to be a member of such Committee. 
(6) The Finance Officer shall— 
(a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the University and shall advise it as regards 
its financial policy; and 
(b) perform such other financial function as may be assigned to him by the Executive Council 
or as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances. 
(7) Subject to the control of the Executive Council, the Finance Officer shall— 
(a) hold and manage the property and investments of the University including trust and 
endowed property; 
(b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Executive Council for recurring and non-recurring 
expenditure for a year are not exceeded and that all moneys are expended on the purpose for which 
they are granted or allotted; 
(c) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget of the University and 
for their presentation to the Executive Council; 
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank balances and on the state of 
investments; 
(e) watch the progress of the collection of revenues and advise on the methods of collection 
employed; 
(f) ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture and equipment are maintained up to date and 
that stock-checking is conducted, of equipment and other consumable materials in all offices, 
Departments, Centres and Specialised Laboratories; 
(g) bring to the notice of the Vice-Chancellor any unauthorised expenditure and other financial 
irregularities and suggest disciplinary action against persons at fault; and 
(h) call for, from any office, Department, Centre, Laboratory, College, Institution, Regional 
Centre or Study Centre established or maintained by the University, any information or returns that 
he may consider necessary for the performance of his duties. 19 (8) Any receipt given by the Finance Officer or the person or persons duly authorised in this behalf by 
the Executive Council for any money payable to University shall be sufficient discharge for payment of 
such money. 
7. Controller of Examination .—(1) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed by the 
Executive Council on the recommendations of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and 
he shall be a whole-time salaried officer of the University. 
(2) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible 
for re-appointment. 
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Controller of Examinations shall 
be such as may be prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time: 
Provided that the Controller of Examinations shall retire on attaining the age of sixty-two years. 
(4) When the officer of the Controller of Examinations is vacant or when the Controller of 
Examinations is, by reason of illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his 
office, shall be performed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor may appoint for the purpose. 
(5) The Controller of Examinations shall arrange for and superintend the examinations of the 
University in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances. 
8. Librarian .—(1) The Librarian shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendations of 
the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole-time salaried officer of the 
University. 
(2) The Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to him 
by the Executive Council. 
9. Constitution and meetings of Court .—(1) The Court shall consist of the following members 
who shall hold office for a period of three years, namely:— 
(a) Ex officio Members:— 
(i) the Chancellor; 
(ii) the Vice-Chancellor; 
(iii) the Proctor; 
(iv) the Deans of Schools; 
(v) the Dean of Students' Welfare; 
(vi) the Finance Officer; 
(vii) one Senior Warden, by rotation; 
(viii) the Librarian of the University; 
(ix) the President, Alumni Association; 
(b) other Members: 
(i) Heads of Departments or Professors who are members of the Academic and Activity 
Council; 
(ii) one representative from each institution recognised by the university, nominated by the 
Vice-Chancellor on recommendations of the Head of the Institution; 
(iii) not more than four persons from amongst eminent sports scientists, sports 
academicians and sports administrators to be nominated by the Central Government; 
(iv) not more than two persons representing sports industry, to be nominated by the Central 
Government; 
(v) not more than ten persons from amongst eminent sports persons and highly recognised 
coaches to be nominated by the Central Government; 
(c) the Registrar, who shall be the ex officio Member Secretary. 20 (2) An annual meeting of the Court shall be held on a date to be fixed by the Executive Council unless 
some other date has been fixed by the Court in respect of any year. 
(3) At an annual meeting of the Court, a report on the working of the University during the 
previous year, together with a statement of the receipts and expenditure, the balance-sheet as audited, 
and financial estimates for the next year shall be presented. 
(4) A copy of the statement of receipts and expenditure, the balance-sheet and the financial 
estimates referred to in clause ( 2) shall be sent to every member of the Court at least seven days 
before the date of the annual meeting. 
(5) Special meetings of the Court may be convened by the Executive Council or the Vice-
Chancellor or if there is no Vice-Chancellor, by the Registrar. 
(6) Eleven members of the Court shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Court. 
10. Quorum for meeting of Executive Council .—Seven members of the Executive Council shall 
form a quorum for a meeting of the Executive Council. 
11. Constitution, powers and functions of Executive Council .—(1) The Executive Council shall 
consist of the following members to be nominated by the Central Government who shall hold office for a 
period of two years, namely:— 
(a) Ex officio Members: 
(i) the Vice-Chancellor; 
(ii) the Proctor; 
(iii) the Deans of Students' Welfare; 
(iv) the Additional Secretary and Financial Advisor, Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports; 
(v) the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports; 
(vi) the Deans of Schools; 
(b) Other Members: 
(i) three Senior Professors by rotation; 
(ii) four persons from amongst sports scientists, sports administrators, eminent sports 
persons and distinguished coaches. 
(2) The Executive Council shall have the power of management and administration of the revenue 
and property of the University and the conduct of all administrative affairs of the University not 
otherwise provided for. 
(3) Subject to the provision of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Executive Council 
shall, in addition to all other powers vested in it, have the following powers, namely:— 
(i) to create teaching and other academic posts including Chairs, to determine the number and 
emoluments of such posts and to define the duties and conditions of service of Professors, 
Associate Professors, Assistant Professors and other academic staff: 
Provided that no action shall be taken by the Executive Council in respect of the number and 
qualifications of teachers and other academic staff otherwise than after consideration of the 
recommendations of the Academic and Activity Council; 
(ii) to appoint such Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant Professors and other academic 
staff including Chair, as may be necessary, on the recommendation of the Selection Committee 
constituted for the purpose and to fill up temporary vacancies therein; 
(iii) to promote interfacial research by making joint appointments of teaching staff in different 
Schools, Department and Centres; 
(iv) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts and to define their duties and 
conditions of their service and to make appointments thereto in the manner prescribed by the 
Ordinances; 21 (v) to grant leave of absence to any officer of the University other than the Chancellor and the 
Vice-Chancellor, and to make necessary arrangements for the discharge of the functions of such 
officer during his absence; 
(vi) to regulate and enforce discipline among employees in accordance with the Statutes and the 
Ordinances; 
(vii) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, investments, property, business and all 
other administrative affairs of the University and for that purpose to appoint such agents as it may 
think fit; 
(viii) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non-recurring expenditure for a year on the 
recommendation of the Finance Committee; 
(ix) to invest any money belonging to the University, including any unapplied income, in such 
stocks, funds, share or securities, from time to time, as it may think fit or in the purchase of 
immovable property in India, with the like powers of varying such investment from time to time; 
(x) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immovable property on behalf of the 
University; 
(xi) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus and other means needed for carrying 
on the work of the University; 
(xii) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on behalf of the University; 
(xiii) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and if thought fit, to redress any grievances of the 
employees and students of the University who may, for any reason, feel aggrieved; 
(xiv) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if necessary, to remove them, and to fix their 
fees, emoluments and travelling and other allowances, after consulting the Academic and Activity 
Council; 
(xv) to select a common seal for the University and provide for the use of such seal; 
(xvi) to make such special arrangements as may be necessary for the residence of women 
students; 
(xvii) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes; 
(xviii) to provide for the appointment of Visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors, Consultants 
and Scholars and determine the terms and conditions of such appointments; 
(xix) to enter into partnership with industry and non-Government agencies for the advancement 
of knowledge and establish a corpus of funds out of the profits of such partnership; and 
(xx) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or 
imposed on it by this Act or these Statutes. 
12. Members of Academic and Activity  Council and quorum for meeting .—(1) The members 
of the Academic and Activity Council shall include sports persons who have achieved distinction in 
Olympics or world championships. 
(2) Nine members of the Academic and Activity Council shall form quorum for the meeting of the 
Academic and Activity Council. 
13. Powers and functions of Academic and Activity Council .—Subject to the provisions of this 
Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Academic and Activity Council shall, in addition to all other 
powers vested in it, have the following powers, namely:— 
(a) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University and to give 
directions regarding methods of instruction, co-ordination of teaching among the Colleges, 
Institutions, Regional Centres and Study Centres and evaluation of research and improvement of 
academic standards; 
(b) to bring about and promote inter-School co-ordination and to establish or appoint such 
committees or boards as may be deemed necessary for the purpose; 22 (c) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own initiative, or on a 
reference by a School or the Executive Council, and to take appropriate action thereon; 
(d) to frame such regulations and rules consistent with the Statutes and the Ordinances 
regarding the academic functioning of the University, discipline, residence, admissions, award of 
fellowships and studentships, fees, concessions, corporate life and attendance. 
14. Schools of Studies and Departments. —(1) The University shall have such Schools of Studies 
as may be specified in the Statutes. 
(2) Every School shall have a School Board and the members of the first School Board shall be 
nominated by the Executive Council for a period of three years. 
(3) The composition, powers and functions of a School Board shall be prescribed by the 
Ordinances. 
(4) The conduct of the meetings of a School Board and the quorum required for such meetings 
shall be prescribed by the Ordinances. 
(5) (a) Every School shall consist of such Departments as may be assigned to it by the Ordinances: 
Provided that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic and Activity 
Council, establish Centres of Studies to which may be assigned such teachers of the University as the 
Executive Council may consider necessary. 
(b) Each Department shall consist of the following members, namely:— 
(i) teachers of the Department; 
(ii) persons conducting research in the Department; 
(iii) Dean of the School; 
(iv) Honorary Professors, if any , attached to the Department; and 
(v) such other persons as may be members of the Department in accordance with the 
provisions of the Ordinances. 
15. Board of Sports Studies .—(1) Each Department shall have a Board of Sports Studies. 
(2) The term of office of the Board of Sports Studies and of its members shall be prescribed by the 
Ordinances. 
(3) Subject to the overall control and supervision of the Academic and Activity Council, the 
functions of a Board of Sports Studies shall be to approve subjects for research for various degrees and 
other requirements of research degrees and to recommend to the concerned School Board in the 
manner prescribed by the Ordinances,— 
(a) courses of studies and appointment of examiners for courses, but excluding research 
degrees; 
(b) appointment of supervisors for research; and 
(c) measures for the improvement of the standard of teaching and research: 
Provided that the above functions of a Board of Sports Studies shall, during the period of three 
years immediately after the commencement of this Act, be performed by the Department. 
16. Finance Committee. —(1) The Finance Committee shall consist of the following members, 
namely:— 
(i) the Vice-Chancellor; 
(ii) one person to be nominated by the Court; 
(iii) three persons to be nominated by the Executive Council, out of whom at least one shall be 
a member of the Executive Council; and 
(iv) three persons to be nominated by the Central Government. 
(2) Five members of the Finance Committee shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Finance 
Committee. 23 (3) All the members of the Finance Committee, other than ex officio members, shall hold office for 
a term of three years. 
(4) A member of the Finance Committee shall have the right to record a minute of dissent if he 
does not agree with any decision of the Finance Committee. 
(5) The Finance Committee shall meet at least thrice every year to examine the accounts and to 
scrutinise proposals for expenditure. 
(6) All proposals relating to creation of posts, and those items which have not been included in the 
budget, shall be examined by the Finance Committee before they are considered by the Executive 
Council. 
(7) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University prepared by the Finance 
Officer shall be laid before the Finance Committee for consideration and comments and thereafter 
submitted to the Executive Council for approval. 
(8) The Finance Committee shall recommend limits for the total recurring expenditure and the total 
non-recurring expenditure for the year, based on the income and resources of the University (which, in 
the case of productive works, may include the proceeds of loans). 
17. Selection Committees .—(1) There shall be Selection Committees for making 
recommendations to the Executive Council for appointment to the post of Professor, Associate 
Professor, Assistant Professor, Registrar, Finance Officer, Controller of Examinations, Librarian and 
Principals of Colleges, Institutions, Regional Centres and Study Centres established or maintained by 
the University. 
(2) The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts specified in column 1 of the Table below 
shall consist of the Vice-Chancellor, a nominee of the Central Government and the persons specified in 
the corresponding entry in column 2 of the said Table: 
TABLE 
1 2
Professor. (i) The Dean of the School.
(ii) The Head of the Department, if he is a Professor.
(iii) Three persons not in the service of the University, 
nominated by the Executive Council, out of a panel of names 
recommended by the Academic and Activity Council for their 
special knowledge of, or interest in, the subject with which the 
Professor will be concerned.
Associate Professor/ (i) The head of the Department.
Assistant Professor. (ii) One Professor nominated by the Vice -Chancellor.
(iii) Two persons not in the service of the University, nominated 
by the Executive Council, out of a panel of names recommended 
by the Academic and Activity Council for their special 
knowledge of, or interest in, the subject with which the 
Associate Professor or Assistant Professor will be conc erned.
Registrar/ Finance Officer/ 
Controller of Examination.(i) Two members of the Executive Council nominated by it.  
(ii) One person not in the service of the University nominated 
by the Executive Council.
Librarian. (i) One person not in the service of the University who has 
special knowledge of the subject of the Library Science or 
Library Administration nominated by the Executive Council.
(ii) One person not in the service of the University nominated 
by the Executive Council.24 1 2
Principal of College or 
Institution maintained by the 
University. Three persons not in the service of the University of whom 
two shall be nominated by the Executive Council and one by 
the Academic and Activity Council for their special 
knowledge of, or interest in, a subject in which instruction is 
being provided by the College or Institution .
Note 1: Where the appointment is being made for an inter-disciplinary project, the head of the 
project shall be deemed to be the Head of the Department concerned.
Note 2: The Professor to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor shall be a Professor concerned 
with the speciality for which the selection is being made and the Vice-Chancellor shall consult the 
Head of the Department and the Dean of the School before nominating the Professor.
(3) The Vice-Chancellor shall convene and preside at the meeting of the Selection Committee: 
Provided that the meeting of the Selection Committee shall be fixed after prior consultation 
with, and subject to the convenience of the Central Government's nominee and the experts 
nominated by the Executive Council: 
Provided further that the proceedings of the Selection Committee shall not be valid unless,— 
(a) where the number of the Central Government's nominee and the persons nominated by 
the Executive Council is four in all, at least three of them attend the meeting; and 
(b) where the number of the Central Government's nominee and the persons nominated by 
the Executive Council is three in all, at least two of them attend the meeting. 
(4) The procedure to be followed by the Selection Committee shall be laid down in the 
Ordinances. 
(5) If the Executive Council is unable to accept the recommendations made by the Selection 
Committee, it shall record its reasons and submit the case to the Central Government for final 
orders. 
(6) (a) Appointments to temporary posts shall,— 
(i) if the temporary vacancy is for duration longer than one academic session, be filled on the 
advice of the Selection Committee in accordance with the procedure indicated in the foregoing 
clauses: 
Provided that if the Vice-Chancellor is satisfied that in the interests of work it is necessary to 
fill the vacancy, the appointment may be made on a purely temporary basis on the advice of a 
local Selection Committee referred to in sub-clause ( ii) for a period not exceeding six months; 
(ii) if the temporary vacancy is for a period less than a year, be made on the recommendation 
of a local Selection Committee consisting of the Dean of the School concerned, the Head of the 
Department and a nominee of the Vice-Chancellor: 
Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and the Head of the 
Department, the Selection Committee may contain two nominees of the Vice-Chancellor: 
Provided further that in the case of sudden casual vacancies of teaching posts caused by 
death or any other reason, the Dean may, in consultation with the Head of the Department 
concerned, make a temporary appointment for a month and report to the Vice-Chancellor and 
the Registrar about such appointment. 
(b) No teacher appointed temporarily shall, if he is not recommended by a regular Selection 
Committee for appointment under the Statutes, be continued in service on such temporary 
employment, unless he is subsequently selected by a local Selection Committee or a regular 
Selection Committee, for a temporary or permanent appointment, as the case may be. 
18. Special mode of appointment. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 17, 
the Executive Council may invite a person of high academic distinction and professional 
attainments to accept a post of Professor or Associate Professor or any other equivalent academic 25 post in the University on such terms and conditions as it deems fit and on the person agreeing to do 
so appoint him to the post:
Provided that the Executive Council may also create supernumerary posts for a specified period for 
appointment of such persons: 
Provided further that the number of supernumerary posts so created should not exceed five          
per cent. of the total posts in the University. 
(2) The Executive Council may appoint a teacher or any other academic staff working in any other 
University or organistion for undertaking a joint project in accordance with the manner laid down in the 
Ordinances. 
19. Appointment for fixed tenure .—The Executive Council may appoint a person selected in 
accordance with the procedure laid down in Statute 17 for a fixed tenure on such terms and conditions 
as it deems fit. 
20. Committees .—(1) An authority of the University may appoint as many standing or special 
committees as it may deem fit, and may appoint to such committees persons who are not members of 
such authority. 
(2) A committee appointed under clause ( 1) may deal with any subject delegated to it subject to 
subsequent confirmation by the authority appointing it. 
21. Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of teachers, etc .—(1) All the teachers 
and other academic staff of the University shall, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, be 
governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as are specified in the Statutes, 
the Ordinances and the Regulations. 
(2) The emoluments of members of the academic staff shall be such as may be prescribed by the 
Ordinances. 
(3) Every teacher and member of the academic staff of the University shall be appointed on a 
written contract, the form of which shall be prescribed by the Ordinances. 
(4) A copy of every contract referred to in clause ( 3) shall be deposited with the Registrar. 
22. Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of other employees. —(1) All the 
employees of the University, other than the teachers and other academic staff shall, in the absence of 
any contract to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct 
as are specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations. 
(2) The manner of appointment and emoluments of employees, other than the teachers and other 
academic staff, shall be such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances. 
23. Seniority list. —(1) Whenever, in accordance with the Statutes, any person is to hold an office 
or be a member of an authority of the University by rotation according to seniority, such seniority 
shall be determined according to the length of continuous service of such person in his grade and in 
accordance with such other principles as the Executive Council may, from time to time, prescribe. 
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain in respect of each class of persons 
to whom the provisions of these Statutes apply, a complete and up-to-date seniority list in accordance 
with the provisions of clause ( 1). 
(3) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous service in a particular grade or the 
relative seniority of any person or persons is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar may, on his own 
motion and shall, at the request of any such person, submit the matter to the Executive Council whose 
decision thereon shall be final. 
24. Removal of employees of University. —(1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct against a 
teacher, a member of the academic staff or other employee of the University, the Vice-Chancellor, in the 
case of the teacher or a member of the academic staff, and the authority competent to appoint (hereinafter 
referred to as the appointing authority) in the case of other employee may, by order in 26 writing, place such teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee, as the case may be, 
under suspension and shall forthwith report to the Executive Council the circumstances in which the 
order was made: 
Provided that the Executive Council may, if it is of the opinion, that the circumstances of the case 
do not warrant the suspension of the teacher or a member of the academic staff, revoke such order. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of the contract of appointment or of any other 
terms and condition of service of the employees, the Executive Council in respect of teachers and 
other academic staff, and the appointing authority in respect of other employees, shall have the power 
to remove a teacher or a member of the academic staff or other employee, as the case may be, on 
grounds of misconduct. 
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Executive Council, or as the case may be, the appointing authority, shall 
not be entitled to remove any teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee except for a 
good cause and after giving three months' notice or on payment of three months' salary in lieu thereof. 
(4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall be removed under clause ( 2) 
or clause ( 3) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action 
proposed to be taken in regard to him. 
(5) The removal of a teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall take effect 
from the date on which the order of removal is made: 
Provided that where the teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee is under 
suspension at the time of his removal, such removal shall take effect from the date on which he was 
placed under suspension. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of the Statute, a teacher, 
member of the academic staff or other employee may resign,— 
(a) if he is a permanent employee, only after giving three months' notice in writing to the 
Executive Council or the appointing authority, as the case may be, or by paying three months' 
salary in lieu thereof; 
(b) if he is not a permanent employee, only after giving one month's notice in writing to the 
Executive Council or, as the case may be, the appointing authority or by paying one month's salary 
in lieu thereof: 
Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date on which the resignation is accepted by 
the Executive Council or the appointing authority, as the case may be. 
25. Honorary degrees .—(1) The Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the 
Academic and Activity Council and by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of 
the members present and voting, make proposals to the Central Government for the conferment of 
honorary degrees: 
Provided that in case of emergency, the Executive Council may, on its own motion, make such 
proposals. 
(2) The Executive Council may, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of 
the members present and voting, withdraw, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, any 
honorary degree conferred by the University. 
26. Withdrawal of degrees, etc .—The Executive Council may, by a resolution passed by a 
majority of not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw a degree or 
academic distinction conferred on, or any certificate or diploma granted to, any person by the 
University for good and sufficient cause: 
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been given to that 
person calling upon him to show cause within such time as may be specified in the notice as to why 
such a resolution should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may 
produce in support of them, have been considered by the Executive Council. 27 27. Maintenance of discipline amongst students of University. —(1) All powers relating to the 
maintenance of discipline and disciplinary action in relation to the students of the University shall vest 
in Vice-Chancellor. 
(2) There shall be Proctor of the University to assist the Vice-Chancellor in the exercise of the 
powers referred to in clause ( 1), who shall be appointed by the Executive Council from amongst the 
Professors and Associate Professors in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances. 
(3) The Vice-Chancellor may delegate all or any of the powers referred to in clause ( 1), as he 
deems proper, to the Proctor and to such other officers as he may specify in this behalf. 
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to the maintenance of discipline and 
taking such action, as may seem to him appropriate for the maintenance of discipline, the Vice-
Chancellor may, in exercise of such powers, by order, direct that any student or students be expelled or 
rusticated, for a specified period, or be not admitted to a course or courses of study in a College, 
Institution or Regional Centre or a Department or a School of the University for a stated period, or be 
punished with fine for an amount to be specified in the order, or be debarred from taking an examination 
or examinations conducted by the University, College, Institution or Regional Centre or Department or a 
School for one or more years, or that the results of the student or students concerned in the examination 
or examinations in which he or they have appeared be withheld or cancelled. 
(5) The Principals of Colleges, Institutions, Deans of Schools of Studies and Heads of teaching 
Departments in the University shall have the authority to exercise all such disciplinary powers over 
the students in their respective Colleges, Institutions, Schools and teaching Departments in the 
University, as may be necessary for the proper conduct of such Colleges, Institution, Schools and 
teaching Departments. 
(6) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice-Chancellor and the Principals and other persons 
specified in clause ( 5), detailed rules of discipline and proper conduct shall be made by the University 
and the Principals of Colleges, Institutions, Deans of Schools of Studies and Heads of teaching 
Departments in the University may also make such supplementary rules as they deem necessary for 
the purposes stated therein. 
(7) At the time of admission, every student shall be required to sign a declaration to the effect that 
he submits himself to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Vice-Chancellor and other authorities of the 
University. 
28. Convocations. —Convocations of the University for the conferring of degrees or for other 
purposes shall be held in such manner as may be prescribed by the Ordinances. 
29. Acting Chairman of meetings. —Where no provision is made for Chairman to preside over a 
meeting of any authority of the University or any Committee of such authority or when the Chairman 
so provided for is absent, the members present shall elect one from among themselves to preside at 
such meeting. 
30. Resignation. —Any member, other than an ex officio member of the Court, the Executive 
Council, the Academic and Activity Council or any other authority of the University or any 
Committee of such authority may resign by letter addressed to the Registrar and the resignation shall 
take effect as soon as such letter is received by the Registrar. 
31. Disqualification .—(1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of 
any of the authorities, or for being appointed as, and for being, an officer, of the University if— 
(i) he is of unsound mind; 
(ii) he is an undischarged insolvent; or 
(iii) he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving moral turpitude and 
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months. 
(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of the 
disqualifications mentioned in sub-clause ( i), the question shall be referred to the Central Government 28 and its decision shall be final and no suit or other proceeding shall lie in any civil court against such 
decision. 
32. Residence conditions for membership and office.— Notwithstanding anything contained in 
the Statutes, a person who is not ordinarily resident in India shall not be eligible to be an officer of the 
University or a member of any authority of the University. 
33. Membership of authorities of virtue of membership of other bodies .—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Statutes, a person who holds any post in the University or is a member of 
any authority or body of the University in his capacity as a member of a particular authority or body 
or as the holder of a particular appointment shall hold such office or membership only for so long as 
he continues to be a member of that particular authority or body or the holder of that particular 
appointment, as the case may be. 
34. Alumni Association.—  (1) There shall be an Alumni Association for the University. 
(2) The subscription for membership of the Alumni Association shall be prescribed by the 
Ordinances. 
(3) No member of the Alumni Association shall be entitled to vote or stand for election unless he 
has been a member of the Association for at least one year prior to the date of election and is a degree 
holder of the University of at least five years standing: 
Provided that the condition relating to the completion of one year's membership shall not apply in 
the case of the first election. 
35. Students Council .—(1) There shall be constituted in the University, a Students' Council for 
every academic year, consisting of,— 
(i) the Dean of Students' Welfare who shall be the Chairman of the Students' Council; 
(ii) twenty students to be nominated by the Academic and Activity Council on the basis of 
merit in studies, sports and extra-curricular activities; and 
(iii) twenty students to be elected by the students as their representatives: 
Provided that any student of the University shall have the right to bring up any matter concerning 
the University before the Students' Council, if so permitted by the Chairman, and he shall have the 
right to participate in the discussions at any meeting when the matter is taken up for consideration. 
(2) The functions of the Students' Council shall be to make suggestions to the appropriate 
authorities of the University in regard to the programmes of studies, students' welfare and other 
matters of importance, in regard to the working of the University in general and such suggestions shall 
be made on the basis of consensus of opinion. 
(3) The Students' Council shall meet at least twice in every academic year and the first meeting of 
the Council be held in the beginning of the academic session. 
36. Ordinance how to be made .—(1) The first Ordinances made under sub-section ( 2) of section 
26 may be amended or repealed at any time by the Executive Council in the manner specified in the 
following clauses. 
(2) No Ordinances in respect of the matters enumerated in sub-section ( 1) of section 26 of this Act 
shall be made by the Executive Council unless a draft of such Ordinances has been proposed by the 
Academic and Activity Council. 
(3) The Executive Council shall not have power to amend any draft of any Ordinances proposed by the 
Academic and Activity Council under clause ( 2), but may reject the proposal or return the draft to the 
Academic and Activity Council for re-consideration, either in whole or in part, together with any 
amendment which the Executive Council may suggest. 
(4) Where the Executive Council has rejected or returned the draft of an Ordinances proposed by 
the Academic and Activity Council, the Academic and Activity Council may consider the question 
afresh and in case the original draft is reaffirmed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the 
members present and voting and more than half of the total number of members of the Academic and 29 Activity Council, the draft may be sent back to the Executive Council which shall either adopt it or 
refer it to the Central Government whose decision shall be final. 
(5) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall come into effect immediately. 
(6) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall be submitted to the Central Government 
within two weeks from the date of its adoption. 
(7) The Central Government shall have the power to direct the University to suspend the operation 
of any Ordinance. 
(8) The Central Government shall inform the Executive Council about its objection to the 
Ordinances referred to in clause ( 7) and may, after receiving the comments of the University, either 
withdraw the order suspending the Ordinances or disallow the Ordinances, and its decision shall be 
final. 
37. Regulations .—(1) The authorities of the University may make Regulations consistent with this 
Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the following matters, namely:— 
(i) laying down the procedure to be observed at their meeting and the number of members 
required to form a quorum; 
(ii) providing for all matters which are required by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances, to 
be prescribed by Regulations; and 
(iii) providing for all other matters solely concerning such authorities or committees appointed 
by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances. 
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the giving of notice to the 
members of such authority of the dates of meeting and of the business to be considered at meetings and 
for the keeping of a record of the proceedings of meetings. 
(3) The Executive Council may direct the amendment in such manner as it may specify of any 
Regulation made under the Statutes or the annulment of any such Regulation. 
38. Delegation of powers .—Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, any officer or 
authority of the University may delegate his or its powers to any other officer or authority or person 
under his or its respective control and subject to the condition that overall responsibility for the 
exercise of the powers so delegated shall continue to vest in the officer or authority delegating such 
powers. 
--------------------------The Repealing and Amending (Second) Act, 2017--------------------------
1 THE REPEALING AND AMENDING (SECOND) ACT, 2017 
_________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
________ 
SECTIONS
1.Short title. 
2.Repeal of certain enactments. 
3.Amendment of certain enactments. 
4.Savings. 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE .2 THE REPEALING AND AMENDING (SECOND) ACT, 2017 
ACT NO. 4 OF 2018 
[5th January, 2018.] 
An Act to repeal certain enactments and to amend certain other enactments. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Repealing and Amending (Second) Act, 2017. 
2. Repeal of certain enactments .—The enactments specified in the First Schedule are hereby 
repealed. 
3. Amendment of certain enactments .—The enactments specified in the Second Schedule are 
hereby amended to the extent and in the manner mentioned in the fourth column thereof. 
4. Savings .—The repeal by this Act of any enactment shall not affect any other enactment in which 
the repealed enactment has been applied, incorporated or referred to;
and this Act shall not affect the validity, invalidity, effect or consequences of anything already 
done or suffered, or any right, title, obligation or liability already acquired, accrued or incurred, or any 
remedy or proceeding in respect thereof, or any release or discharge of or from any debt, penalty, 
obligation, liability, claim or demand, or any indemnity already granted, or the proof of any past act or 
thing; 
nor shall this Act affect any principle or rule of law, or established jurisdiction, form or course of 
pleading, practice or procedure, or existing usage, custom, privilege, restriction, exemption, office or 
appointment, notwithstanding that the same respectively may have been in any manner affirmed or 
recognised or derived by, in or from any enactment hereby repealed; 
nor shall the repeal by this Act of any enactment revive or restore any jurisdiction, office, custom, 
liability, right, title, privilege, restriction, exemption, usage, practice, procedure or other matter or thing 
not now existing or in force. 3 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See section 2) 
REPEALS
Year Act No. Short title 
1 2 3 
Central Acts 
1850 XXI The Caste Disabilities Removal Act, 1850. 
1857 VII The Madras Uncovenanted Officers Act, 1857. 
1857 XXI The Howrah Offences Act, 1857. 
1859 XII The Calcutta Pilots Act, 1859. 
1862 III The Government Seal Act, 1862. 
1873 XVI The North-Western Provinces Village and Road Police Act, 1873. 
1875 XX The Central Provinces Laws Act, 1875. 
1876 XIX The Dramatic Performances Act, 1876. 
1879 XIV The Hackney-carriage Act, 1879. 
1879 XIX The Raipur and Khattra Laws Act, 1879. 
1881 XIII The Fort William Act, 1881. 
1882 XXI The Madras Forest (Validation) Act, 1882. 
1883 X The Bikrama Singh's Estates Act, 1883. 
1886 XXI The Oudh Wasikas Act, 1886. 
1888 III The Police Act, 1888. 
1888 VIII The Indian Tolls Act, 1888. 
1893 II The Porahat Estate Act, 1893. 
1895 XV The Government Grants Act, 1895. 
1897 VIII The Reformatory Schools Act, 1897. 
1911 X The Prevention of Seditious Meetings Act, 1911. 
1912 VII The Bengal, Bihar and Orissa and Assam Laws Act, 1912. 
1917 XXV The Sir Currimbhoy Ebrahim Baronetcy (Amendment) Act, 1917. 
1921 XVII The Cattle-trespass (Amendment) Act, 1921. 
1931 XX The Sheriff of Calcutta (Powers of Custody) Act, 1931. 4 Year Act No. Short title 
1 2 3 
1932 XI The Public Suits Validation Act, 1932. 
1932 XXIV The Bengal Suppression of Terrorist Outrages (Supplementary) Act, 1932. 
1938 XX The Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1938. 
1941 IV The Berar Laws Act, 1941. 
1942 XVIII The Weekly Holidays Act, 1942. 
1943 XXIII The War Injuries (Compensation Insurance) Act, 1943. 
1947 XVI The Trading with the Enemy (Continuance of Emergency Provisions) Act, 
1947. 
1948 26 The Junagadh Administration (Property) Act, 1948. 
1949 51 The Requisitioned Land (Apportionment of Compensation) Act, 1949. 
1949 61 The Professions Tax Limitation (Amendment and Validation) Act, 1949. 
1950 IV The Preventive Detention Act, 1950. 
1950 L The Preventive Detention (Amendment) Act, 1950. 
1950 67 The Cooch-Behar (Assimilation of Laws) Act, 1950. 
1951 3 The Part B States (Laws) Act, 1951. 
1951 IV The Preventive Detention (Amendment) Act, 1951. 
1951 51 The Railway Companies (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1951. 
1951 66 The Part C States (Miscellaneous Laws) Repealing Act, 1951. 
1951 70 The Displaced Persons (Debts Adjustment) Act, 1951. 
1952 1 The Part B States Marriages Validating Act, 1952. 
1952 XXXIV The Preventive Detention (Amendment) Act, 1952. 
1952 LXI The Preventive Detention (Second Amendment) Act, 1952. 
1954 4 The Abducted Persons (Recovery and Restoration) Amendment Act, 1954. 
1954 7 The Government of Part C States (Amendment) Act, 1954. 
1954 15 The Transfer of Evacuee Deposits Act, 1954. 
1954 20 The Absorbed Areas (Laws) Act, 1954. 
1954 36 The Chandernagore (Merger) Act, 1954. 
1954 51 The Preventive Detention (Amendment) Act, 1954. 5 Year Act No. Short title 
1 2 3 
1955 19 The Commanders-in-Chief (Change in Designation) Act, 1955. 
1955 30 The Abducted Persons (Recovery and Restoration) Continuance Act, 1955. 
1956 4 The Bar Councils (Validation of State Laws) Act, 1956. 
1956 50 The Indian Cotton Cess (Amendment) Act, 1956. 
1956 65 The Abducted Persons (Recovery and Restoration) Continuance Act, 1956. 
1956 88 The Representation of the People (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1956. 
1956 97 The Delhi Tenants (Temporary Protection) Act, 1956. 
1957 32 The Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Act, 1957. 
1957 37 The Legislative Councils Act, 1957. 
1957 54 The Preventive Detention (Continuance) Act, 1957. 
1959 24 The Pharmacy (Amendment) Act, 1959. 
1960 31 The Tripura Municipal Law (Repeal) Act, 1960. 
1960 47 The Bilaspur Commercial Corporation (Repeal) Act, 1960. 
1960 48 The Mahendra Pratab Singh Estates (Repeal) Act, 1960. 
1960 53 The Tripura Excise Law (Repeal) Act, 1960. 
1962 62 The Emergency Risks (Goods) Insurance Act, 1962. 
1962 63 The Emergency Risks (Factories) Insurance Act, 1962. 
1963 29 The Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act, 1963. 
1963 56 The Delhi Development (Amendment) Act, 1963.
1964 23 The Delhi (Delegation of Powers) Act, 1964. 
1965 50 The Goa, Daman and Diu (Absorbed Employees) Act, 1965. 
1967 16 The Anti-Corruption Laws (Amendment) Act, 1967. 
1969 41 The International Monetary Fund and Bank (Amendment) Act, 1969. 
1971 65 The Asian Refractories Limited (Acquisition of Undertaking) Act, 1971. 
1971 68 The Uttar Pradesh Cantonments (Control of Rent and Eviction) (Repeal) 
Act, 1971. 
1972 36 The Coking Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1972. 
1973 26 The Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973. 
1975 19 The All-India Services Regulations (Indemnity) Act, 1975. 6 Year Act No. Short title 
1 2 3 
1976 22 The Assam Sillimanite Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Refractory 
Plant) Act, 1976. 
1976 28 The Parliamentary Proceedings (Protection of Publication) Repeal Act, 
1976. 
1976 76 The National Library of India Act, 1976. 
1976 89 The Indian Iron and Steel Company (Acquisition of Shares) Act, 1976. 
1976 96 The Braithwaite and Company (India) Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1976. 
1977 16 The Disputed Elections (Prime Minister and Speaker) Act, 1977. 
1977 41 The Smith, Stainstreet and Company Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1977. 
1977 42 The Gresham and Craven of India (Private) Limited (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1977. 
1978 13 The Hindustan Tractors Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1978. 
1978 42 The Bolani Ores Limited (Acquisition of Shares) and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1978. 
1979 12 The Punjab Excise (Delhi Amendment) Act, 1979. 
1980 58 The Bengal Chemical and Pharmaceutical Works Limited (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980. 
1983 35 The Dangerous Machines (Regulation) Act, 1983. 
1984 39 The Punjab Municipal (New Delhi Amendment) Act, 1984. 
1984 43 The Aluminium Corporation of India Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Aluminium Undertaking) Act, 1984. 
1984 57 The Bengal Immunity Company Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1984. 
1985 80 The Customs (Amendment) Act, 1985. 
1987 36 The Brentford Electric (India) Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1987. 
1993 24 The National Thermal Power Corporation Limited, the National 
Hydroelectric Power Corporation Limited and the North-Eastern Electric 
Power Corporation Limited(Acquisition and Transfer of Power 
Transmission Systems) Act, 1993. 
1994 56 The Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Power Transmission System) Act, 1994. 
1999 6 The Delhi Development Authority (Validation of Disciplinary Powers) Act, 
1998. 
1999 8 The Customs (Amendment) Act, 1998. 
1999 49 The Copyright (Amendment) Act, 1999. 7 Year Act No. Short title 
1 2 3 
2000 20 The Direct-tax Laws (Miscellaneous) Repeal Act, 2000. 
2000 48 The Forfeiture (Repeal) Act, 2000. 
2001 33 The Influx from Pakistan (Control) Repealing (Repeal) Act, 2001. 
2001 36 The Indian Universities (Repeal) Act, 2001. 
2001 37 The Auroville (Emergency Provisions) Repeal Act, 2001. 
2001 41 The Central Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 2001.
2001 47 The Two-Member Constituencies (Abolition) and other Laws Repeal Act, 
2001. 
2002 57 The Mysore State Legislature (Delegation of Powers) Repeal Act, 2002. 
2002 65 The Countess of Dufferin's Fund (Repeal) Act, 2002. 
2002 66 The Prevention of Food Adulteration (Extension to Kohima and 
Mokokchung Districts) Repeal Act, 2002. 
2002 70 The Refugee Relief Taxes (Abolition) Repeal Act, 2002. 
2003 2 The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2002. 
2005 38 The Displaced Persons Claims and other Laws Repeal Act, 2005. 
2005 44 The Immigration (Carriers' Liability) Amendment Act, 2005. 
2006 3 The Central Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 2005. 
2006 18 The National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions 
(Amendment) Act, 2006. 
2006 24 The Cess Laws (Repealing and Amending) Act, 2006. 
2006 29 The Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2006. 
2006 32 The Spirituous Preparations (Inter-State Trade and Commerce) Control 
(Repeal) Act, 2006. 
2006 46 The Produce Cess Laws (Abolition) Act, 2006. 
2006 49 The Indian Rifles (Repeal) Act, 2006. 
2007 24 The Mizoram University (Amendment) Act, 2007. 
2007 39 The Competition (Amendment) Act, 2007. 
2008 25 The Central Universities Laws (Amendment) Act, 2008. 
2009 39 The Competition (Amendment) Act, 2009. 8 Year Act No. Short title 
1 2 3 
2010 20 The National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions 
(Amendment) Act, 2010. 
2010 33 The Jharkhand Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2010. 
2012 27 The Copyright (Amendment) Act, 2012. 
2012 31 The Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) 
Amendment Act, 2012. 
Ordinances made by the Governor-General 
1941 VII The War Injuries Ordinance, 1941. 
1942 XX The Collective Fines Ordinance, 1942. 
1942 XLI The Armed Forces (Special Powers) Ordinance, 1942. 
1944 XXI The Public Health (Emergency Provisions) Ordinance, 1944. 
1945 XXIV The War Gratuities (Income-tax Exemption) Ordinance, 1945. 
1945 XXX The Secunderabad Marriage Validating Ordinance, 1945. 
1946 II The Bank Notes (Declaration of Holdings) Ordinance, 1946. 
1946 VI The Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance, 1946. 
1946 X The Termination of War (Definition) Ordinance, 1946. 
_____________9 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 3) 
AMENDMENTS
_________________ Year Act No. Short title Amendments 
1 2 3 4
1951 69 The Plantations Labour Act, 1951 In section 43, sub-section ( 4) shall 
be omitted. 
2016 2 The Juvenile Justice (Care and 
Protection of Children) Act, 2015 In section 69, in sub-section ( 2), 
for the words, brackets and letters 
"mentioned at ( d) to ( f)", the 
words, brackets, letters and figure 
"mentioned at clauses ( d) to ( f) of 
sub-section ( 1)" shall be 
substituted. 
2016 49 The Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities Act, 2016 In section 76, after the word, 
brackets and letter, "clause ( b)", 
the words, brackets and figure "of 
sub-section ( 1)" shall be inserted 
--------------------------The Repealing and Amending Act, 2017--------------------------
1 THE REPEALING AND AMENDING ACT, 2017 
_________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
________ 
SECTIONS 
1.Short title. 
2.Repeal of certain enactments. 
3.Amendment of certain enactments. 
4.Savings. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 2 THE REPEALING AND AMENDING ACT, 2017 
ACT NO. 2 OF 2018 
[5th January, 2018.] 
An Act to repeal certain enactments and to amend certain other enactments. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Repealing and Amending Act, 2017. 
2. Repeal of certain enactments .—The enactments specified in the First Schedule are hereby repealed to 
the extent mentioned in the fourth column thereof. 
3. Amendment of certain enactments.— The enactments specified in the Second Schedule are hereby 
amended to the extent and in the manner mentioned in the fourth column thereof. 
4. Savings.— The repeal by this Act of any enactment shall not affect any other enactment in which the 
repealed enactment has been applied, incorporated or referred to;
and this Act shall not affect the validity, invalidity, effect or consequences of anything already done or 
suffered, or any right, title, obligation or liability already acquired, accrued or incurred, or any remedy or 
proceeding in respect thereof, or any release or discharge of or from any debt, penalty, obligation, liability, claim or 
demand, or any indemnity already granted, or the proof of any past act or thing; 
nor shall this Act affect any principle or rule of law, or established jurisdiction, form or course of pleading, 
practice or procedure, or existing usage, custom, privilege, restriction, exemption, office or appointment, 
notwithstanding that the same respectively may have been in any manner affirmed or recognised or derived by, 
in or from any enactment hereby repealed; 
nor shall the repeal by this Act of any enactment revive or restore any jurisdiction, office, custom, 
liability, right, title, privilege, restriction, exemption, usage, practice, procedure or other matter or thing not 
now existing or in force. 3 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See section 2) 
REPEALS
Year No. Short title Extent of repeal 
1 2 3 4 
1850 XXXVII The Public Servants (Inquiries) Act, 1850 The whole. 
1852 VIII The Sheriffs' Fees Act, 1852 The whole. 
1866 XXI The Converts' Marriage Dissolution Act, 1866 The whole. 
1867 I The Ganges Tolls Act, 1867 The whole. 
1892 II The Marriages' Validation Act, 1892 The whole. 
1897 I The Public Servants (Inquiries) Amendment Act, 1897 The whole. 
1897 V The Repealing and Amending Act, 1897 The whole. 
1897 XIV The Indian Short Titles Act, 1897 The whole. 
1899 XXIII The Church of Scotland Kirk Sessions Act, 1899 The whole. 
1901 XI The Amending Act, 1901 The whole. 
1903 I The Amending Act, 1903 The whole. 
1928 XII The Hindu Inheritance (Removal of Disabilities) Act, 1928 The whole. 
1929 XXI The Transfer of Property (Amendment) Supplementary Act, 1929 So much as is not 
repealed. 
1934 XXVII The Assam Criminal Law Amendment (Supplementary) Act, 1934 The whole. 
1935 XIII The Jubbulpore and Chhattisgarh Divisions (Divorce Proceedings Validation) Act, 1935 The whole. 
1936 V The Decrees and Orders Validating Act, 1936 The whole. 
1936 XVI The Bangalore Marriages Validating Act, 1936 The whole. 
1938 XI The Hindu Women's Right to Property (Amendment) Act, 1938 The whole. 
1939 XXIX The Indian Tariff (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1939 The whole. 
1946 XXII The Mica Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1946 The whole. 
1948 XL The Indian Matrimonial Causes (War Marriages) Act, 1948 The whole. 
1948 LI The Imperial Library (Change of Name) Act, 1948 The whole. 
1950 XXXIII The Opium and Revenue Laws (Extension of Application) Act, 1950 The whole. 
1951 I The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1951 So much as is not 
repealed. 
1951 II The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1951 So much as is not 
repealed. 
1953 11 The Administration of Evacuee Property (Amendment) Act, 1953 The whole. 
1954 3 The Ancient and Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains 
(Declaration of National Importance) Amendment Act, 1953 The whole. 
1954 42 The Administration of Evacuee Property (Amendment) Act, 1954 The whole. 
1955 26 The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1955 So much as is not 
repealed. 
1956 7 The Sales-Tax Laws Validation Act, 1956 The whole. 
1956 27 The Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Act, 1956 The whole. 
1956 66 The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1956 So much as is not 
repealed. 
1956 70 The Ancient and Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains The whole. 
(Declaration of National Importance) Amendment Act, 1956 4 1 2 3 4
1956 91 The Administration of Evacuee Property (Amendment) Act, 1956 The whole. 
1956 93 The Young Persons (Harmful Publications) Act, 1956 The whole. 
1956 100 The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1956 The whole. 
1959 37 The Central Excises and Salt (Amendment) Act, 1959 So much as is not 
repealed. 
1959 41 The Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 1959 So much as is not 
repealed. 
1959 48 The Miscellaneous Personal Laws (Extension) Act, 1959 The whole. 
1959 59 The Mineral Oils (Additional Duties of Excise and Customs) Amendment Act, 1959 So much as is not 
repealed. 
1959 61 The Married Women's Property (Extension) Act, 1959 The whole. 
1960 2 The Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Amendment Act, 1960 So much as is not 
repealed. 
1960 5 The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1960 So much as is not 
repealed. 
1960 19 The Hindu Marriages (Validation of Proceedings) Act, 1960 The whole. 
1960 38 The Central Excises (Conversion to Metric Units) Act, 1960 So much as is not 
repealed. 
1960 40 The Customs Duties and Cesses (Conversion to Metric Units) Act, 1960 So much as is not 
repealed. 
1960 57 The British Statutes (Application to India) Repeal Act, 1960 The whole. 
1966 47 The Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 1966 So much as is not 
repealed. 
1969 46 The Punjab Legislative Council (Abolition) Act, 1969 The whole. 
1971 20 The Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) (Delhi Validation of Appointments and The whole. 
Proceedings) Act, 1971 
1971 54 The Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Amendment and The whole. 
Validation Act, 1971 
1972 62 The Limestone and Dolomite Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1972 The whole. 
1976 91 The Delhi Sales Tax (Amendment and Validation) Act, 1976 The whole. 
1980 63 The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1980 So much as is not 
repealed. 
1981 30 The Cine-workers Welfare Cess Act, 1981 The whole. 
1983 20 The Delegated Legislation Provisions (Amendment) Act, 1983 The whole. 
1984 1 9 The Government of Union Territories (Amendment) Act, 1984 So much as is not 
repealed. 
1985 37 The Tea Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Sick Tea Units) Act, 1985 The whole. 
1985 81 The Banking Laws (Amendment) Act, 1985 So much as is not 
repealed. 
1986 6 The Additional Duties of Excise (Textiles and Textile Articles) Amendment Act, 1985 The whole. 
1986 7 The Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Second Amendment The whole. 
Act, 1985 
1986 8 The Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 1985 The whole. 
1986 19 The Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Act, 1986 So much as is not 
repealed. 
1986 46 The Taxation Laws (Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1986 The whole. 
1999 29 The Contingency Fund of India (Amendment) Act, 1999 The whole. 5 1 2 3 4
1999 31 The Securities Laws (Amendment) Act, 1999 The whole. 
1999 32 The Securities Laws (Second Amendment) Act, 1999 The whole. 
1999 45 The Vice-President's Pension (Amendment) Act, 1999 The whole. 
2000 14 The President's Emoluments and Pension (Amendment) Act, 2000 The whole. 
2000 49 The Protection of Human Rights (Amendment) Act, 2000 The whole. 
2001 12 The Colonial Prisoners Removal (Repeal) Act, 2001 The whole. 
2001 19 The Industrial Disputes (Banking Companies) Decision (Repeal) Act, 2001 The whole. 
2001 22 The Judicial Administration Laws (Repeal) Act, 2001 The whole. 
2001 24 The Indian Railway Companies (Repeal) Act, 2001 The whole. 
2001 25 The Railway Companies (Substitution of Parties in Civil Proceedings) Repeal Act, 2001 The whole. 
2001 26 The Hyderabad Export Duties (Validation) Repeal Act, 2001 The whole. 
2001 50 The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2001 The whole. 
2002 21 The St. John Ambulance Association (India) Transfer of Funds (Repeal) Act, 2002 The whole. 
2002 22 The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2002 The whole. 
2002 23 The Vice-President's Pension (Amendment) Act, 2002 The whole. 
2002 28 The National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (Amendment) Act, 2002 The whole. 
2002 59 The Securities and Exchange Board of India (Amendment) Act, 2002 The whole. 
2002 68 The North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Act, 2002 The whole. 
2003 25 The Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 2003 The whole. 
2003 31 The Prevention of Insults to National Honour (Amendment) Act, 2003 The whole. 
2004 7 The Uttar Pradesh Reorganisation (Amendment) Act, 2003 The whole. 
2004 28 The Special Tribunals (Supplementary Provisions) Repeal Act, 2004 The whole. 
2004 29 The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Act, 2004 The whole. 
2005 1 The Securities Laws (Amendment) Act, 2004 The whole. 
2005 5 The Central Excise Tariff (Amendment) Act, 2004 The whole. 
2005 31 The Hire-purchase (Repeal) Act, 2005 The whole. 
2005 51 The Prevention of Insults to National Honour (Amendment) Act, 2005 The whole. 
2006 10 The Khadi and Village Industries Commission (Amendment) Act, 2006 The whole. 
2006 20 The Delhi Special Police Establishment (Amendment) Act, 2006 The whole. 
2006 30 The Union Duties of Excise (Electricity) Distribution Repeal Act, 2006 The whole. 
2006 43 The Protection of Human Rights (Amendment) Act, 2006 The whole. 
2006 51 The Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial (Amendment) Act, 2006 The whole. 
2007 1 The Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Act, 2007 The whole. 
2007 16 The Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2007 Sections 9 to 11. 
2007 19 The National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (Amendment) Act, 2007 The whole. 
2007 27 The Securities Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2007 The whole. 
2008 28 The President's Emoluments and Pension (Amendment) Act, 2008 The whole. 
2008 29 The Vice-President's Pension (Amendment) Act, 2008 The whole. 
2008 35 The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Act, 2008 The whole. 
2009 1 The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Act, 2008 The whole. 6 THE SECOND SCHEUDULE 
(See section 3) 
AMENDMENTS
Year No. Short title Amendments 
1 2 3 4 
2007 29 The National Institutes of 
Technology, Science 
Education and Research Act, 
2007 In clause ( d) of section 3, the words "as 
the case may be" shall be omitted. 
2009 27 The Prevention and Control 
of Infectious and Contagious 
Diseases in Animals Act, 
2009 In sub-section ( 1) of section 1, for the 
word and figures "Bill, 2009", the word 
and figures "Act, 2009" shall be 
substituted. 
2009 35 The Right of Children to Free 
and Compulsory Education 
Act, 2009 In section 1, for the marginal heading, the 
marginal heading "Short title, extent, 
application and commencement" shall be 
substituted. 
