--------------------------The Banning of Unregulated Deposit Schemes Act, 2019--------------------------
1 
 THE BANNING OF UNREGULATED DEPOSIT SCHEMES ACT, 201 9  
_______ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                      
________ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
SECTIONS 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
BANNING OF UNREGULATED  DEPOSIT  SCHEMES . 
3. Banning of Unregulated Deposit Schemes. 
4. Fraudulent default in Regulated Deposit Schemes.  
5. Wrongful inducement in relation to Unregulated D eposit Schemes. 
6. Certain scheme to be Unregulated Deposit Scheme.  
CHAPTER III 
AUTHORITIES  
7. Competent Authority. 
8. Designated Court. 
CHAPTER IV  
INFORMATION ON DEPOSIT TAKERS 
9. Central database. 
10. Information of business by deposit taker. 
11. Information to be shared. 
CHAPTER V 
RESTITUTION TO DEPOSITORS 
12. Priority of depositors' claim. 
13. Precedence of attachment. 
14. Application for confirmation of attachment and sale of property. 
15. Confirmation of attachment by Designated Court.  
16. Attachment of property of mala fide transferees. 
17. Payment in lieu of attachment. 
18. Powers of Designated Court. 
19. Appeal to High Court. 
20. Power of Supreme Court to transfer cases. 
 
 2 
 CHAPTER VI 
OFFENCES AND PUNISHMENTS 
 
21. Punishment for contravention of section 3. 
22. Punishment for contravention of section 4. 
23. Punishment for contravention of section 5. 
24. Punishment for repeat offenders. 
25. Offences by deposit takers other than individua ls. 
26. Punishment for contravention of section 10. 
27. Cognizance of offences. 
CHAPTER VII 
INVESTIGATION, SEARCH AND SEIZURE 
28. Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable. 
29. Competent Authority to be informed of offences.  
30. Investigation of offences by Central Bureau of Investigation. 
31. Power to enter, search and seize without warran t. 
32. Application of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  to proceedings before Designated Court. 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
33. Publication of advertisement of Unregulated Dep osit Scheme. 
34. Act to have overriding effect. 
35. Application of other laws not barred. 
36. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
37. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
38. Power of State Government, etc., to make rules.  
39. Laying of rules. 
40. Power to amend First Schedule. 
41. Act not to apply certain deposits. 
42. Amendment to certain enactments. 
43. Power to remove difficulties. 
44. Repeal and saving. 
 
 
 
 
 
  3 
 THE BANNING OF UNREGULATED DEPOSIT SCHEMES ACT, 201 9  
ACT NO. 21 OF  2019 
[31st July, 2019.] 
An Act to provide for a comprehensive mechanism to ban the unregulated deposit 
schemes, other than deposits taken in the ordinary course of business, and to protect the 
interest of depositors and for matters connected th erewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of  the Republic of India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.— (1) This Act may be called the Banning of 
Unregulated Deposit Schemes Act, 2019.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State  of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the  21st day of February, 2019 
2. Definitions— In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —  
(1) “appropriate Government” means in respect of matt ers relating to,—  
(i) the Union territory without legislature, the Cent ral Government;  
(ii ) the Union territory of Puducherry, the Government  of that Union territory;  
(iii ) the Union territory of Delhi, the Government of t hat Union territory; and  
(iv ) the State, the State Government;  
(2) “company” shall have the same meaning as assigned  to it in clause (20) of section 2 of the 
Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013);  
(3) “Competent Authority” means an Authority appointe d by the appropriate Government under 
section 7;  
(4) “deposit” means an amount of money received by wa y of an advance or loan or in any other 
form, by any deposit taker with a promise to return  whether after a specified period or otherwise, 
either in cash or in kind or in the form of a speci fied service, with or without any benefit in the fo rm 
of interest, bonus, profit or in any other form, bu t does not include— 
 (a) amounts received as loan from a scheduled bank or  a co-operative bank or any other 
banking company as defined in section 5 of the Bank ing Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949); 
 (b) amounts received as loan or financial assistance from the Public Financial Institutions 
notified by the Central Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India or any              
non-banking financial company as defined in clause ( f) of section 45-I of the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934) and is registered with the Reserve Bank of India or any Regional 
Financial Institutions or insurance companies;  4 
 (c) amounts received from the appropriate Government,  or any amount received from any other 
source whose repayment is guaranteed by the appropr iate Government, or any amount received 
from a statutory authority constituted under an Act  of Parliament or a State Legislature; 
(d) amounts received from foreign Governments, foreig n or international banks, multilateral 
financial institutions, foreign Government owned de velopment financial institutions, foreign 
export credit collaborators, foreign bodies corpora te, foreign citizens, foreign authorities or person  
resident outside India subject to the provisions of  the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 
(42 of 1999) and the rules and regulations made the reunder;  
(e) amounts received by way of contributions towards the capital by partners of any partnership 
firm or a limited liability partnership;  
(f) amounts received by an individual by way of loan from his relatives or amounts received by 
any firm by way of loan from the relatives of any o f its partners; 
(g) amounts received as credit by a buyer from a sell er on the sale of any property (whether 
movable or immovable);  
(h) amounts received by an asset re-construction comp any which is registered with the Reserve 
Bank of India under section 3 of the Securitisation  and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and 
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (54 of 2 002); 
(i) any deposit made under section 34 or an amount ac cepted by a political party under section 
29B of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 ( 43 of 1951); 
(j) any periodic payment made by the members of the s elf-help groups operating within such 
ceilings as may be prescribed by the State Governme nt or Union territory Government;  
(k) any other amount collected for such purpose and w ithin such ceilings as may be prescribed 
by the State Government; 
(l) an amount received in the course of, or for the p urpose of, business and bearing a genuine 
connection to such business including— 
(i) payment, advance or part payment for the supply o r hire of goods or provision of services 
and is repayable in the event the goods or services  are not in fact sold, hired or otherwise 
provided; 
(ii ) advance received in connection with consideration  of an immovable property under an 
agreement or arrangement subject to the condition t hat such advance is adjusted against such 
immovable property as specified in terms of the agr eement or arrangement;  
(iii ) security or dealership deposited for the performa nce of the contract for supply of goods 
or provision of services; or 
(iv ) an advance under the long-term projects for suppl y of capital goods except those 
specified in item ( ii ): 
Provided that if the amounts received under items ( i) to ( iv ) become refundable, such 
amounts shall be deemed to be deposits on the expir y of fifteen days from the date on which 
they become due for refund:  5 
 Provided further that where the said amounts become  refundable, due to the deposit taker 
not obtaining necessary permission or approval unde r the law for the time being in force, 
wherever required, to deal in the goods or properti es or services for which money is taken, such 
amounts shall be deemed to be deposits.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause,— 
 (i) in respect of a company, the expression “deposit”  shall have the same meaning as 
assigned to it under the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of  2013);  
(ii ) in respect of a non-banking financial company reg istered under the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), the expression “deposi t” shall have the same meaning as assigned 
to it in clause ( bb ) of section 45-I of the said Act;  
(iii ) the expressions “partner” and “firm” shall have t he meanings respectively assigned to 
them under the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (9 of 1 932);  
(iv ) the expression “partner” in respect of a limited liability partnership shall have the same 
meaning as assigned to it in clause ( q) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Limited Liability 
Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009);  
(v) the expression “relative” shall have the same mea ning as assigned to it in the Companies 
Act, 2013 (18 of 2013);  
(5) “depositor” means any person who makes a deposit under this Act;  
(6) “deposit taker” means— 
(i) any individual or group of individuals;  
(ii ) a proprietorship concern; 
(iii ) a partnership firm (whether registered or not);  
(iv ) a limited liability partnership registered under the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 
(6 of 2009); 
(v) a company;  
(vi ) an association of persons; 
(vii ) a trust (being a private trust governed under the  provisions of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 
(2 of 1882) or a public trust, whether registered o r not); 
(viii ) a co-operative society or a multi-State co-operat ive society; or  
(ix ) any other arrangement of whatsoever nature, recei ving or soliciting deposits, but does not 
include—  
(i) a Corporation incorporated under an Act of Parlia ment or a State Legislature; 
(ii ) a banking company, a corresponding new bank, the State Bank of India, a subsidiary 
bank, a regional rural bank, a co-operative bank or  a multi-State co-operative bank as defined in 
the Banking Regulation Act,1949 (10 of 1949); 6 
 (7) “Designated Court” means a Designated Court const ituted by the appropriate Government 
under section 8;  
(8) “insurer” shall have the same meaning as assigned  to it in clause ( 9) of section 2 of the 
Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938);  
(9) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression 
“notify” shall be construed accordingly; 
(10 ) “person” includes—  
(i) an individual;  
(ii ) a Hindu Undivided Family; 
(iii ) a company;  
(iv ) a trust;  
(v) a partnership firm;  
(vi ) a limited liability partnership;  
(vii ) an association of persons;  
(viii ) a co-operative society registered under any law f or the time being in force relating to co-
operative societies; or 
(ix ) every artificial juridical person, not falling wi thin any of the preceding sub-clauses; 
(11 ) “prescribed” means prescribed by the rules made b y the Central Government or, as the case 
may be, the State Government under this Act; 
(12 ) “property” means any property or assets of every description, whether corporeal or 
incorporeal, movable or immovable, tangible or inta ngible, and includes deeds and instruments 
evidencing title to, or interest in, such property or assets, wherever located; 
(13 ) “public financial institution” shall have the sam e meaning as assigned to it in clause ( 72 ) of 
section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013);  
(14 ) “Regulated Deposit Scheme” means the Schemes spec ified under column ( 3) of the First 
Schedule;  
(15 ) “Regulator” means the Regulator specified in colu mn ( 2) of the First Schedule;  
(16 ) “Schedule” means the Schedule appended to this Ac t;  
(17 ) “Unregulated Deposit Scheme” means a Scheme or an  arrangement under which deposits are 
accepted or solicited by any deposit taker by way o f business and which is not a Regulated Deposit 
Scheme, as specified under column ( 3) of the First Schedule. 7 
 CHAPTER II 
BANNING OF UNREGULATED  DEPOSIT  SCHEMES  
3. Banning of Unregulated Deposit Schemes.  — On and from the date of commencement of this 
Act,—  
(a) the Unregulated Deposit Schemes shall be banned; and  
(b) no deposit taker shall, directly or indirectly, p romote, operate, issue any advertisement 
soliciting participation or enrolment in or accept deposits in pursuance of an Unregulated Deposit 
Scheme. 
4. Fraudulent default in Regulated Deposit Schemes.  —No deposit taker, while accepting 
deposits pursuant to a Regulated Deposit Scheme, sh all commit any fraudulent default in the 
repayment or return of deposit on maturity or in re ndering any specified service promised against such  
deposit.  
5. Wrongful inducement in relation to Unregulated D eposit Schemes. —No person by whatever 
name called shall knowingly make any statement, pro mise or forecast which is false, deceptive or 
misleading in material facts or deliberately concea l any material facts, to induce another person to 
invest in, or become a member or participant of any  Unregulated Deposit Scheme. 
6. Certain scheme to be Unregulated Deposit Scheme. —A prize chit or a money circulation 
scheme banned under the provisions of the Prize Chi ts and Money Circulation Scheme (Banning) Act, 
1978 (43 of 1978) shall be deemed to be an Unregula ted Deposit Scheme under this Act. 
CHAPTER III 
AUTHORITIES  
7. Competent Authority.  — (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification , appoint one or 
more officers not below the rank of Secretary to th at Government, as the Competent Authority for the 
purposes of this Act. 
(2) The appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint such other officer or officers as it 
thinks fit, to assist the Competent Authority in di scharging its functions under this Act. 
(3) Where the Competent Authority or officers appoint ed under sub-section ( 2), for the purposes of 
this section, has reason to believe (the reason for  such belief to be recorded in writing), on the bas is of 
such information and particulars as may be prescrib ed, that any deposit taker is soliciting deposits i n 
contravention of section 3, he may, by an order in writing, provisionally attach the deposits held by 
the deposit taker and the money or other property a cquired either in the name of the deposit taker or in 
the name of any other person on behalf of the depos it taker from the date of the order, in such manner  
as may be prescribed.  
(4) The Competent Authority shall, for the purposes o f sub-section ( 3), have the same powers as 
vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Pro cedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while conducting 
investigation or inquiry in respect of the followin g matters, namely:— 
(a) discovery and inspection; 8 
 (b) enforcing the attendance of any person, including  any officer of a reporting entity and 
examining him on oath;  
(c) compelling the production of records;  
(d) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(e) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses and documents; and  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(5) The Competent Authority shall have power to summo n any person whose attendance he 
considers necessary whether to give evidence or to produce any records during the course of any 
investigation or proceeding under this section.  
(6) All the persons so summoned shall be bound to att end in person or through authorised agents, 
as such officer may direct, and shall be bound to s tate the truth upon any subject respecting which th ey 
are examined or make statements, and produce such d ocuments as may be required.  
(7) Every proceeding under sub-sections ( 4) and ( 5) shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding 
within the meaning of section 193 and section 228 o f the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
(8) Subject to any rules made in this behalf by the C entral Government, any officer referred to in 
sub-section ( 2) may impound and retain in his custody for such pe riod, as he thinks fit, any records 
produced before him in any proceedings under this A ct: 
Provided that the officer or officers referred to i n sub-section ( 2) shall not—  
(a) impound any records without recording his reasons  for so doing; or  
(b) retain in his custody any such records for a peri od exceeding three months, without 
obtaining the previous approval of the Competent Au thority. 
 8. Designated Court.  — (1) The appropriate Government shall, with the concur rence of the Chief 
Justice of the concerned High Court, by notificatio n, constitute one or more Courts known as the 
Designated Courts for such area or areas or such ca se or cases as may be specified in such notificatio n, 
which shall be presided over by a Judge not below t he rank of a District and Sessions Judge or 
Additional District and Sessions Judge. 
(2) No Court other than the Designated Court shall ha ve jurisdiction in respect of any matter to 
which the provisions of this Act apply.  
(3) When trying an offence under this Act, the Design ated Court may also try an offence, other 
than an offence under this Act, with which the accu sed may, under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974), be charged at the same trial.  
CHAPTER IV 
INFORMATION ON DEPOSIT TAKERS 
9. Central database.  — (1) The Central Government may designate an authority , whether existing 
or to be constituted, which shall create, maintain and operate an online database for information on 
deposit takers operating in India.  9 
 (2) The authority designated under sub-section ( 1) may require any Regulator or the Competent 
Authority to share such information on deposit take rs, as may be prescribed.  
10. Information of business by deposit taker. —(1) Every deposit taker which commences or 
carries on its business as such on or after the com mencement of this Act shall intimate the authority 
referred to in sub-section ( 1) of section 9 about its business in such form and manner and within such 
time, as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Competent Authority may, if it has reason to believe that the deposits are being solicited or 
accepted pursuant to an Unregulated Deposit Scheme,  direct any deposit taker to furnish such 
statements, information or particulars, as it consi ders necessary, relating to or connected with the 
deposits received by such deposit taker. 
Explanation. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that—  
(a) the requirement of intimation under sub-section ( 1) is applicable to deposit takers accepting 
or soliciting deposits as defined in clause ( 4) of section 2; and  
(b) the requirement of intimation under sub-section ( 1) applies to a company, if the company 
accepts the deposits under Chapter V of the Compani es Act, 2013 (18 of 2013).  
11. Information to be shared.  — ( 1) The Competent Authority shall share all informati on 
received under section 29 with the Central Bureau o f Investigation and with the authority which may 
be designated by the Central Government under secti on 9.  
(2) The appropriate Government, any Regulator, income -tax authorities or any other investigation 
agency, having any information or documents in resp ect of the offence investigated under this Act by 
the police or the Central Bureau of Investigation, shall share all such information or documents with 
the police or the Central Bureau of Investigation.  
(3) Where the principal officer of any banking compan y, a corresponding new bank, the State Bank 
of India, a subsidiary bank, a regional rural bank,  a co-operative bank or a multi-State co-operative 
bank has reason to believe that any client is a dep osit taker and is acting in contravention to the 
provisions of this Act, he shall forthwith inform t he same to the Competent Authority. 
CHAPTER V 
RESTITUTION TO DEPOSITORS 
12. Priority of depositors' claim.  — Save as otherwise provided in the Securitisation  and 
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (54 of 2002) or the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016), any amount due to depositors from a deposit 
taker shall be paid in priority over all other debt s and all revenues, taxes, cesses and other rates 
payable to the appropriate Government or the local authority.  
13. Precedence of attachment.  — ( 1) Save as otherwise provided in the Securitisation and 
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (54 of 2002) or the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016), an order of provisional attachment passed by the 
Competent Authority, shall have precedence and prio rity, to the extent of the claims of the depositors , 
over any other attachment by any authority competen t to attach property for repayment of any debts, 
revenues, taxes, cesses and other rates payable to the appropriate Government or the local authority.  10 
 (2) Where an order of provisional attachment has been  passed by the Competent Authority— 
(a) such attachment shall continue until an order is passed under sub-section ( 3) or sub-section 
(5) of section 15 by the Designated Court;  
(b) all the attached money or property of the deposit  taker and the persons mentioned therein 
shall vest in the Competent Authority and shall rem ain so vested till further order of the Designated 
Court.  
(3) The Competent Authority shall open an account in a scheduled bank for the purpose of 
crediting and dealing with the money realised under  this Act, which shall not be utilised except under  
the instructions of the Designated Court.  
(4) The Competent Authority shall not dispose of or a lienate the property or money attached, 
except in accordance with the order of the Designat ed Court under sub-section ( 3) or sub-section ( 5) 
of section 15. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section  ( 4), the Competent Authority may, if it 
thinks it expedient, order the immediate sale of pe rishable items or assets, and the proceeds of the s ale 
shall be utilised in the same manner as provided fo r other property. 
14. Application for confirmation of attachment and sale of property. —(1) The Competent 
Authority shall, within a period of thirty days, wh ich may extend up to sixty days, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, from the date of the order of provisional attachment, file an application with su ch 
particulars as may be prescribed, before the Design ated Court for making the provisional attachment 
absolute, and for permission to sell the property s o attached by public auction or, if necessary, by 
private sale. 
(2) In case where the money or property has been atta ched on the permission granted by a 
Designated Court in another State or Union territor y, the application for confirmation of such 
attachment shall be filed in that Court. 
15. Confirmation of attachment by Designated Court.  — ( 1) Upon receipt of an application 
under section 14, the Designated Court shall issue notice to— 
(a) the deposit taker; and  
(b) any person whose property is attached under secti on 14,  
to show cause, within a period of thirty days from the date of issue of notice, as to why the order of  
attachment should not be made absolute and the prop erties so attached be sold. 
 (2) The Designated Court shall also issue notice to a ll other persons represented to it as having or 
being likely to claim any interest or title in the property, to appear on the same date as persons ref erred 
to in sub-section ( 1) to raise objections, if they so desire, to the at tachment of the property. 
(3) The Designated Court shall, after adopting such p rocedure as may be prescribed, pass an 
order—  
(a) making the provisional order of attachment absolu te; or 
(b) varying it by releasing a portion of the property  from attachment; or  11 
 (c) cancelling the provisional order of attachment, a nd in case of an order under clause ( a) or 
clause ( b), direct the Competent Authority to sell the prope rty so attached by public auction or, if 
necessary, by private sale and realise the sale pro ceeds.  
(4) The Designated Court shall not, in varying or can celling the provisional order of attachment, 
release any property from attachment, unless it is satisfied that—  
(a) the deposit taker or the person referred to in su b-section ( 1) has interest in such property; 
and  
(b) there shall remain an amount or property sufficie nt for repayment to the depositors of such 
deposit taker.  
(5) The Designated Court shall pass such order or iss ue such direction as may be necessary for the 
equitable distribution among the depositors of the money attached or realised out of the sale.  
(6) The Designated Court shall endeavour to complete the proceedings under this section within a 
period of one hundred and eighty days from the date  of receipt of the application referred to in                
sub-section ( 1). 
16. Attachment of property of mala fide transferees. —(1) Where the Designated Court is 
satisfied that there is a reasonable cause for beli eving that the deposit taker has transferred any 
property otherwise than in good faith and not for c ommensurate consideration, it may, by notice, 
require any transferee of such property, whether or  not he received the property directly from the sai d 
deposit taker, to appear on a date to be specified in the notice and show cause why so much of the 
transferee’s property as is equivalent to the prope r value of the property transferred should not be 
attached. 
(2) Where the said transferee does not appear and s how cause on the specified date or where the 
Designated Court is satisfied that the transfer of the property to the said transferee was not a bona fide 
transfer and not for commensurate consideration, it  shall order the attachment of so much of the said 
transferee’s property as in its opinion is equivale nt to the proper value of the property transferred.  
 17. Payment in lieu of attachment. —(1) Any deposit taker or a person referred to in                   
sub-section ( 1) of section 15, or transferee referred to in secti on 16 whose property is about to be 
attached or has been provisionally attached under t his Act, may, at any time before the confirmation o f 
attachment, apply to the Designated Court for permi ssion to deposit the fair value of the property in 
lieu of attachment.  
(2) While allowing the deposit taker or person or tra nsferee referred to in sub-section ( 1) to make 
the deposit under sub-section ( 1), the Designated Court may order such deposit take r or person or 
transferee to pay any sum towards costs as may be a pplicable. 
18. Powers of Designated Court.  — ( 1) The Designated Court shall exercise the following  
powers, namely:—  
(a) power to approve the statement of dues of the dep osit taker due from various debtors;  
(b) power to assess the value of the assets of the de posit taker and finalise the list of the 
depositors and their respective dues; 12 
 (c) power to direct the Competent Authority to take p ossession of any assets belonging to or in 
the control of the deposit taker and to sell, trans fer or realise the attached assets, either by publi c 
auction or by private sale as it deems fit dependin g upon the nature of assets and credit the sale 
proceeds thereof to its bank account; 
(d) power to approve the necessary expenditure to be incurred by the Competent Authority for 
taking possession and realisation of the assets of the deposit taker; 
(e) power to pass an order for full payment to the de positors by the Competent Authority or an 
order for proportionate payment to the depositors i n the event, the money so realised is not 
sufficient to meet the entire deposit liability; 
(f) power to direct any person, who has made profit o r averted loss by indulging in any 
transaction or activity in contravention of the pro visions of this Act, to disgorge an amount 
equivalent to the wrongful gain made or loss averte d by such contravention; and 
(g) power to pass any other order which the Designate d Court deems fit for realisation of assets 
of the deposit taker and for repayment of the same to the depositors of such deposit taker or on any 
other matter or issue incidental thereto.  
(2) On the application of any person interested in an y property attached and vested in the 
Competent Authority under this Act and after giving  such Competent Authority an opportunity of 
being heard, make such order as the Designated Cour t considers just and reasonable for—  
(a) providing from such of the property attached and vested in the Competent Authority as the 
applicant claims an interest in, such sums as may b e reasonably necessary for the maintenance of 
the applicant and of his family, and for expenses c onnected with the defence of the applicant where 
criminal proceedings have been initiated against hi m in the Designated Court under this Act; or 
(b) safeguarding, so far as may be practicable, the i nterest of any business affected by the 
attachment. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression “deposit taker” includes the 
directors, promoters, managers or members of said e stablishment or any other person whose 
property or assets have been attached under this Ac t.  
19. Appeal to High Court.  — Any person including the Competent Authority, if  aggrieved by any 
final order of the Designated Court under this Chap ter, may appeal to the High Court, within a period 
of sixty days from the date of such order: 
Provided that the High Court may entertain the appe al after the expiry of the said period of sixty 
days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was pre vented by sufficient cause from preferring the appe al in 
time.  
Explanation. —The expression “High Court” means the High Court o f a State or Union territory 
where the Designated Court is situated. 
20. Power of Supreme Court to transfer cases.  — ( 1) Whenever it is made to appear to the 
Supreme Court that there is a default in any deposi t scheme or deposit schemes of the nature referred 
to in section 30, the Supreme Court may, by an orde r, direct that any particular case be transferred 
from one Designated Court to another Designated Cou rt. 13 
 (2) The Supreme Court may act under this section only  on an application filed by the Competent 
Authority or any interested party, and every such a pplication shall be supported by an affidavit. 
(3) Where an application for the exercise of the powe rs conferred by this section is dismissed, the 
Supreme Court may, if it is of opinion that the app lication was frivolous or vexatious, order the 
applicant to pay by way of compensation to any pers on who has opposed the application such sum not 
exceeding fifty thousand rupees as it may consider appropriate in the circumstances of the case.  
CHAPTER VI 
OFFENCES AND PUNISHMENTS 
21. Punishment for contravention of section 3.  — ( 1) Any deposit taker who solicits deposits in 
contravention of section 3 shall be punishable with  imprisonment for a term which shall not be less 
than one year but which may extend to five years an d with fine which shall not be less than two lakh 
rupees but which may extend to ten lakh rupees. 
(2) Any deposit taker who accepts deposits in contrav ention of section 3 shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less tha n two years but which may extend to seven years 
and with fine which shall not be less than three la kh rupees but which may extend to ten lakh rupees. 
(3) Any deposit taker who accepts deposits in contrav ention of section 3 and fraudulently defaults 
in repayment of such deposits or in rendering any s pecified service, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less tha n three years but which may extend to ten years 
and with fine which shall not be less than five lak h rupees but which may extend to twice the amount 
of aggregate funds collected from the subscribers, members or participants in the Unregulated Deposit 
Scheme. 
Explanation. —For the purposes of this Act,— 
(i) the expression “fraudulently” shall have the same  meaning as assigned to it in section 25 of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860); 
(ii ) where the terms of the Deposit Scheme are entirel y impracticable or unviable, the terms 
shall be relevant facts showing an intention to def raud. 
22. Punishment for contravention of section 4.  — Any deposit taker who contravenes the 
provisions of section 4 shall be punishable with im prisonment for a term which may extend to seven 
years, or with fine which shall not be less than fi ve lakh rupees but which may extend to twenty-five 
crore rupees or three times the amount of profits m ade out of the fraudulent default referred to in sa id 
section, whichever is higher, or with both.  
23. Punishment for contravention of section 5.  —Any person who contravenes the provisions of 
section 5 shall be punishable with imprisonment for  a term which shall not be less than one year but 
which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.  
24. Punishment for repeat offenders.  —Whoever having been previously convicted of an of fence 
punishable under this Chapter, except the offence u nder section 26, is subsequently convicted of an 
offence shall be punishable with imprisonment for a  term which shall not be less than five years but 
which may extend to ten years and with fine which s hall not be less than ten lakh rupees but which 
may extend to fifty crore rupees.  14 
 25. Offences by deposit takers other than individua ls.  — ( 1) Where an offence under this Act 
has been committed by a deposit taker other than an  individual, every person who, at the time the 
offence was committed, was in charge of, and was re sponsible to, the deposit taker for the conduct of 
its business, as well as the deposit taker, shall b e deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be l iable 
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section ( 1) shall render any such person liable to any punish ment 
provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence  was committed without his knowledge or that he 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commissi on of such offence.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section  ( 1), where an offence under this Act has 
been committed by a deposit taker other than an ind ividual, and it is proved that the offence—  
(a) has been committed with the consent or connivance  of; or 
(b) is attributable to any neglect on the part of any  director, manager, secretary, promoter, 
partner, employee or other officer of the deposit t aker,  
such person shall also be deemed to be guilty of th at offence and shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly.  
26. Punishment for contravention of section 10.  — Whoever fails to give the intimation required 
under sub-section ( 1) of section 10 or fails to furnish any such statem ents, information or particulars 
as required under sub-section ( 2) of that section, shall be punishable with fine wh ich may extend to 
five lakh rupees.  
27. Cognizance of offences. — Notwithstanding anything contained in section 4, no Designated 
Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishabl e under that section except upon a complaint made 
by the Regulator:  
Provided that the provisions of section 4 and this section shall not apply in relation to a deposit 
taker which is a company. 
CHAPTER VII 
INVESTIGATION, SEARCH AND SEIZURE 
28. Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable.  —Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) every offence punishable under this Act, except the 
offence under section 22 and section 26, shall be c ognizable and non-bailable. 
29. Competent Authority to be informed of offences.  —The police officer shall, on recording 
information about the commission of an offence unde r this Act, inform the same to the Competent 
Authority. 
30. Investigation of offences by Central Bureau of Investigation.  — ( 1) On receipt of 
information under section 29 or otherwise, if the C ompetent Authority has reason to believe that the 
offence relates to a deposit scheme or deposit sche mes in which— 
(a) the depositors, deposit takers or properties invo lved are located in more than one State or 
Union territory in India or outside India; and 15 
 (b) the total value of the amount involved is of such  magnitude as to significantly affect the 
public interest, 
the Competent Authority shall refer the matter to t he Central Government for investigation by the 
Central Bureau of Investigation. 
(2) The reference made by the Competent Authority und er sub-section ( 1) shall be deemed to be 
with the consent of the State Government under sect ion 6 of the Delhi Special Police Establishment 
Act, 1946 (25 of 1946). 
(3) On the receipt of the reference under sub-section  ( 1), the Central Government may transfer the 
investigation of the offence to the Central Bureau of Investigation under section 5 of the Delhi Speci al 
Police Establishment Act, 1946 (25 of 1946). 
31. Power to enter, search and seize without warran t.  — ( 1) Whenever any police officer, not 
below the rank of an officer in-charge of a police station, has reason to believe that anything necess ary 
for the purpose of an investigation into any offenc e under this Act may be found in any place within 
the limits of the police station of which he is in- charge, or to which he is attached, such officer ma y, 
with the written authorisation of an officer not be low the rank of Superintendent of Police, and after  
recording in writing so far as possible, the thing for which the search is to be made and subject to t he 
rules made in this behalf, authorise any officer su bordinate to him,— 
(a) to enter and search any building, conveyance or p lace, between sunrise and sunset, which he 
has reason to suspect is being used for purposes co nnected with the promotion or conduct of any 
deposit taking scheme or arrangement in contraventi on of the provisions of this Act; 
(b) in case of resistance, to break open any door and  remove any obstacle to such entry, if 
necessary by force, with such assistance as he cons iders necessary, for exercising the powers 
conferred by clause ( a);  
(c) to seize any record or property found as a result  of the search in the said building, 
conveyance or place, which are intended to be used,  or reasonably suspected to have been used, in 
connection with any such deposit taking scheme or a rrangement in contravention of the provisions 
of this Act; and  
(d) to detain and search, and if he thinks proper, ta ke into custody and produce before any 
Designated Court any such person whom he has reason  to believe to have committed any offence 
punishable under this Act:  
Provided that if such officer has reason to believe  that the said written authorisation cannot be 
obtained without affording opportunity for the conc ealment of evidence or facility for the escape of 
an offender, he may, without the said written autho risation, enter and search such building, 
conveyance or place, at any time between sunset and  sunrise after recording the grounds in writing. 
(2) Where it is not practicable to seize the record o r property, the officer authorised under sub-
section ( 1), may make an order in writing to freeze such prop erty, account, deposits or valuable 
securities maintained by any deposit taker about wh ich a complaint has been made or credible 
information has been received or a reasonable suspi cion exists of their having been connected with the  
promotion or conduct of any deposit taking scheme o r arrangement in contravention of the provisions 
of this Act and it shall be binding on the concerne d bank or financial or market establishment to 
comply with the said order: 16 
 Provided that no bank or financial or market establ ishment shall freeze such account, deposit or 
valuable securities, for a period beyond thirty day s unless the same is authorised by the order of the  
Designated Court: 
Provided further that, if at any time, it becomes p racticable to seize the frozen property, the office r 
authorised under sub-section ( 1) may seize such property.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expressions ,— 
(i) “freezing of account” shall mean that no transact ion, whether deposit or withdrawal shall be 
allowed in the said account; and  
(ii ) “freezing of property” shall mean that no transfe r, conversion, disposition or movement of 
property shall be allowed.  
(3) Where an officer takes down any information in wr iting or records grounds for his belief or 
makes an order in writing under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2), he shall, within a time of seventy-
two hours send a copy thereof to the Designated Cou rt in a sealed envelope and the owner or occupier 
of the building, conveyance or place shall, on appl ication, be furnished, free of cost, with a copy of  the 
same by the Designated Court.  
(4) All searches, seizures and arrests under this sec tion shall be made in accordance with the 
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974). 
32. Application of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  to proceedings before Designated 
Court. — (1) The Designated Court may take cognizance of offen ces under this Act without the 
accused being committed to it for trial. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in section 31, the pro visions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974) shall apply—  
(a) to all arrests, searches and seizures made under this Act; 
(b) to the proceedings under this Act and for the pur poses of the said provisions, the Designated 
Court shall be deemed to be a Court of Session and the persons conducting the prosecution before 
the Designated Court, shall be deemed to be Public Prosecutors. 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
33. Publication of advertisement of Unregulated Dep osit Scheme.  — Where any newspaper or 
other publication of any nature, contains any state ment, information or advertisement promoting, 
soliciting deposits for, or inducing any person to become a member of any Unregulated Deposit 
Scheme, the appropriate Government may direct such newspaper or publication to publish a full and 
fair retraction, free of cost, in the same manner a nd in the same position in such newspaper or 
publication as may be prescribed. 
34. Act to have overriding effect. — Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act,  the 
provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithsta nding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, including any law made by any State or Union territory. 17 
 35. Application of other laws not barred.  — The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, 
and not in derogation of, the provisions of any oth er law for the time being in force. 
36. Protection of action taken in good faith.  —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings 
shall lie against the appropriate Government or the  Competent Authority or any officer of the 
appropriate Government for anything which is in goo d faith done or intended to be done under this 
Act or the rules made thereunder. 
37. Power of Central Government to make rules.  — ( 1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make rules for carrying out the provi sions of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the genera lity of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, na mely:— 
(a) the information and other particulars to be taken  into consideration before issuing an order, 
and the manner of attachment, under sub-section ( 3) of section 7;  
(b) the information to be shared under sub-section ( 2) of section 9;  
(c) the form and manner in which and the time within which the intimation shall be given under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 10;  
(d) the particulars contained in the application to b e filed by the Competent Authority before the 
Designated Court under sub-section ( 1) of section 14;  
(e) the procedure to be adopted by the Designated Cou rt before issuing an order under               
sub-section ( 3) of section 15;  
(f) rules under sub-section ( 1) of section 31; 
(g) the manner of publication of advertisement under section 33; and  
(h) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 
38. Power of State Government, etc., to make rules.  — ( 1) The State Government or Union 
territory Government, as the case may be, in consul tation with the Central Government, by 
notification, make rules for carrying out the provi sions of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the genera lity of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, na mely:— 
(a) ceiling for self-help groups under clause (j) of sub-section (4) of section 2; 
(b) purpose and ceiling under clause (k) of sub-secti on (4) of section 2;  
(c) the manner of provisional attachment of property by the Competent Authority under sub-
section ( 3) of section 7;  
(d) other matters under clause  
(f) of sub-section ( 4) of section 7;  
(e) the rules relating to impounding and custody of r ecords under sub-section ( 8) of section 7; 
and 18 
 (f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 
39. Laying of rules.  — ( 1) Every rule made by the Central Government under t his Act shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before ea ch House of Parliament, while it is in session, for  a 
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session, or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive  
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any  modification in the rule, or both Houses agree 
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall th ereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that  any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previ ously done under that rule. 
(2) Every rule made by a State Government or the Unio n territory Government, as the case may be, 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature or the 
Union territory Legislature, as the case may be, wh ere it consists of two Houses, or where such 
Legislature consists of one House, before that Hous e. 
40. Power to amend First Schedule.  — ( 1) The Central Government may, having regard to the 
objects of this Act, and if it considers necessary or expedient so to do, by notification, add to, or as the 
case may be, omit from the First Schedule, any sche me or arrangement, and on such addition, or 
omission, such scheme or arrangement shall become, or cease to be, a Regulated Deposit Scheme, as 
the case may be. 
(2) A copy of every notification issued under this se ction shall, as soon as may be after it has been 
issued, be laid before each House of Parliament. 
41. Act not to apply certain deposits.  —The provisions of this Act shall not apply to dep osits 
taken in the ordinary course of business. 
42. Amendment to certain enactments.  —The enactments specified in the Second Schedule s hall 
be amended in the manner specified therein. 
43. Power to remove difficulties.  — ( 1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions 
of this Act, the Central Government may, by order p ublished in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of  this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary for 
removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under thi s section after the expiry of three years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid , as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament. 
44. Repeal and saving.  — ( 1) The Banning of Unregulated Deposit Schemes Ordina nce, 2019, is 
hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any  action taken under the said Ordinance, shall 
be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act .  
 
 
 19 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section  2 ( 15 )] 
REGULATED  DEPOSIT  SCHEMES  
(1) The Regulator and Regulated Deposit Scheme refers  to the regulators and schemes and 
arrangements listed in the following Table, namely: — 
TABLE 
Sl. No. Regulator Regulated Deposit Scheme 
(1) (2) (3) 
1. The Securities and Exchange 
Board of India (i) Any scheme or an arrangement 
[as defined under section 11AA of 
the Securities and Exchange Board 
of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992)] 
launched, sponsored or carried out 
by a Collective Investment 
Management Company registered 
with the Securities and Exchange 
Board of India under the Securities 
and Exchange Board of India 
(Collective Investment Scheme) 
Regulations, 1999. 
  (ii ) Any scheme or an arrangement 
registered with the Securities and 
Exchange Board of India under the 
Securities and Exchange Board of 
India (Alternative Investment 
Funds) Regulations, 2012. 
  (iii ) Any scheme or an 
arrangement, pursuant to which 
funds are managed by a portfolio 
manager, registered under the 
Securities and Exchange Board of 
India (Portfolio Managers) 
Regulations, 1993. 
  (iv ) Any scheme or an arrangement 
regulated under the Securities and 
Exchange Board of India (Share 
Based Employee Benefits) 
Regulations, 2014 or providing for 
employee benefits as permitted 
under the Companies Act, 2013 (18 
of 2013). 
  (v) Any other scheme or an 
arrangement registered under the 
Securities and Exchange Board of 
India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992), or the 
regulations made thereunder. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 20 
 (1) (2) (3)  
  ( vi ) Any amount received as 
contributions in the nature of 
subscriptions to a mutual fund 
registered with Securities and 
Exchange Board of India under the 
Securities and Exchange Board of 
India (Mutual Funds) Regulations, 
1996. 
2. The Reserve Bank of India ( i) Any scheme under which 
deposits are accepted by 
Non-Banking Financial Companies 
as defined in clause (f) of section 
45-I of the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934 (2 of 1934) and 
registered with the Reserve Bank 
of India; or any other scheme or an 
arrangement registered under the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. 
  ( ii ) Any scheme or an arrangement 
under which funds are accepted by 
individuals or entities engaged as 
Business Correspondents and 
Facilitators by banks subject to the 
guidelines and circulars issued by 
the Reserve Bank of India from 
time to time. 
  (iii) Any scheme or an arrangement 
under which funds are received by 
a system provider operating as an 
authorised payment system under 
the Payment and Settlement 
Systems Act, 2007 (51 of 2007). 
  (iv) Any other scheme or an 
arrangement regulated under the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 
of 1934), or the guidelines or 
circulars of the Reserve Bank of 
India 
3. 
 The Insurance 
Regulatory and 
Development 
Authority of India A contract of insurance pursuant to 
a certificate of 
registration obtained in accordance 
with the Insurance 
Act, 1938 (4 of 1938). 
4. The State Government 
or Union territory 
Government (i) Any scheme or an arrangement 
made or offered by a co-operative 
society registered under the Co-
operative Societies Act, 1912 (2 of 
1912) or a society being a society 
registered or deemed to be 
registered under any law relating to 
co-operative societies for the time 
being in force in any State or 
Union territory 
 
 
 
 
 
 21 
 (1) (2) (3)  
  (ii ) Any scheme or an arrangement 
commenced or conducted as a chit 
business with the previous sanction 
of the State Government in 
accordance with the provisions of 
the Chit Funds Act, 1982 (40 of 
1982). 
  (iii ) Any scheme or an arrangement 
regulated by any enactment 
relating to money lending which is 
for the time being in force in any 
State or Union territory. 
 
 
  (iv ) Any scheme or an arrangement 
by a prize chit or money circulation 
scheme under section 11 of the 
Prize Chits and Money Circulation 
Schemes (Banning) Act, 1978 (43 
of 1978). 
5. The National 
Housing Bank Any scheme or an arrangement for 
acceptance of deposits registered 
under the National Housing Bank 
Act, 1987 (53 of 1987). 
6. The Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority Any scheme or an arrangement 
under the Pension Fund Regulatory 
and Development Authority Act, 
2013 (23 of 2013). 
 
 
7. The Employees' Provident Fund 
Organisation  Any scheme, Pension Scheme or 
Insurance Scheme framed under 
the Employees' Provident Fund and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 
1952 ( 19 of 1952). 
8. The Central Registrar, Multi-State 
Co- operative Societies Any scheme or an arrangement for 
acceptance of deposits from voting 
members by a Multi-State Co-
operative Society registered under 
the Multi-State Co-operative 
Societies Act, 2002 (39 of 2002). 
9. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs, 
Government of India (i) Deposits accepted or permitted 
under the provisions of Chapter V 
of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 
2013). 
  (ii) Any scheme or an arrangement 
under which deposits are accepted 
by a company declared as a Nidhi 
or a Mutual Benefit Society under 
section 406 of the Companies Act, 
2013 (18 of 2013). 
 
(2) The following shall also be treated as Regulated Deposit Schemes under this Act, namely:—  
(a) deposits accepted under any scheme or an arrangem ent registered with any regulatory body in 
India constituted or established under a statute; a nd  
(b) any other scheme as may be notified by the Centra l Government under this Act. 
 22 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See  section 42) 
AMENDMENTS TO CERTAIN ENACTMENTS 
PART I 
AMENDMENT TO THE RESERVE  BANK OF INDIA  
ACT, 1934 
Amendment of section 45-I of Act 2 of 1934 .In the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, in                
section 45-I, in clause ( bb ), after Explanation  II, the following Explanation  shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
“Explanation  III.—The amounts accepted by a co-operative societ y from the members or 
shareholders, by whatever name called, but excludin g the amounts received as share capital, shall be 
deemed to be deposits for the purposes of this clau se, if such members or shareholders are nominal or 
associate members, by whatever name called, who do not have full voting rights in the meetings of 
such co-operative society.”. 
PART II 
AMENDMENTS TO THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE  BOARD OF INDIA ACT , 1992 
In the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992,— 
Amendment of section 11 of Act 15 of 1992.  — ( i) in section 11, in sub-section ( 4), for                       
clause ( e), the following clause shall be substituted, namel y:— 
“(e) attach, for a period not exceeding ninety days, b ank accounts or other property of any 
intermediary or any person associated with the secu rities market in any manner involved in violation 
of any of the provisions of this Act, or the rules or the regulations made thereunder: 
Provided that the Board shall, within ninety days o f the said attachment, obtain confirmation of the 
said attachment from the Special Court, established  under section 26A, having jurisdiction and on 
such confirmation, such attachment shall continue d uring the pendency of the aforesaid proceedings 
and on conclusion of the said proceedings, the prov isions of section 28A shall apply: 
Provided further that only property, bank account o r accounts or any transaction entered therein, so 
far as it relates to the proceeds actually involved  in violation of any of the provisions of this Act,  or 
the rules or the regulations made thereunder shall be allowed to be attached.”; 
(ii ) in section 28A, after Explanation  3, the following Explanation  shall be inserted, namely:— 
“Explanation  4.—The interest referred to in section 220 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 shall 
commence from the date the amount became payable by  the person.”. 
 
 
 23 
 PART III 
AMENDMENT TO THE MULTI -STATE  CO-OPERATIVE  SOCIETIES  ACT , 2002 
Amendment of section 67 of Act 39 of 2002. —In the Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 
2002, in section 67, in sub-section (1),— 
(a) after the words “receive deposits”, the words “fr om its voting members” shall be inserted; 
(b) the following Explanation shall be inserted, name ly:— 
“Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified  that a multi-State co-operative 
society shall not be entitled to receive deposits f rom persons other than voting members.”. 
_______ 
--------------------------The Central Educational Institutions (Reservations in Teachers Cadre) Act, 2019--------------------------
1 
 THE CENTRAL EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS  (RESERVATION IN TEACHERS ’ 
CADRE) ACT, 2019  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Reservation of posts in recruitments by Cen tral Educational Institutions . 
4. Act not to apply in certain cases.  
5. Laying of notifications before Parliament.  
6. Repeal and savings.  
 
  2 
 THE CENTRAL EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS  (RESERVATION IN TEACHERS ’ 
CADRE) ACT, 2019  
ACT NO. 10 OF 2019  
[9th July, 2019.]  
An Act to provide  for the reservation  of posts  in appointments  by direct  recruitment of persons  belonging  
to the Scheduled  Castes,  the Scheduled  Tribes,  the socially  and educationally  backward  classes  
and the economically  weaker sections, to teachers ’ cadre in certain Centr al Educational 
Institutions established,  maintained  or aided  by the Central  Government,  and for matters connected  
therewith  or incidental  thereto . 
BE it enacted  by Parliament  in the Seventieth  Year of the Republic  of India  as follows:— 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Central Educational Institutions 
(Reservation in Teachers’ Cadre)  Act, 2019.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 7th day of March, 2019.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise  requires,— 
(a) “appropriate  authority”  means  the University  Grants  Commission  established under the 
University Grants Commission Act, 1956  (3 of 1956) , or any other authority or body established  by or 
under  a Central  Act for the determination,  coordination  or maintenance of the standards of high er 
education in any Central Educational Institution;  
(b) “branch  of study” means  a branch  of study  leading  to three  principal  levels of qualifications at 
bachelors (under graduate), masters (post graduate) and doctoral levels;  
(c) “Central Educational Institution ” means— 
(i) a University  established  or incorporated  by or under  a Central  Act; 
(ii) an institution of national importance established by an Act of Parliament;  
(iii) an institution, declared as an institution deemed to be University under  section  3 of the 
University  Grants  Commission  Act, 1956  (3 of 1956) ,, and maintained by  or receiving  aid from  the 
Central  Government;  
(iv) an institution maintained by or receiving aid from the Central Government,  whether  
directly  or indirectly,  and affiliated  to an institution  referred to in sub -clause ( i) or sub -clause ( ii), or 
a constituent unit of an institution referred to in sub -clause ( iii); and 
(v) an educational  institution  established  by the Central  Government  under the  Societies  
Registration  Act, 1860  (21 of 1860) ; 
(d) “direct recruitment ” means the process of appointing faculty by inviting applications against 
public advertisement from persons eligible to teach in a  Central Educational  Institution;  
(e) “economically  weaker  sections” means  such weaker  sections  as are referred to in Explanation 
to clause (6) of article 15 of the  Constitution;  
(f) “faculty” means  the faculty  of a Central  Educational  Institution;  
(g) “Minority Educational Institution ” means an institution establi shed and administered  by the 
minorities  under  clause  (1) of article  30 of the Constitution  and so declared  by an Act of Parliament  or by 
the Central  Government  or declared  as a Minority Educational Institution under the National 
Commission for Minority Educational Institutions Act,  2004  (2 of 2005) ; 
(h) “sanctioned  strength” means  the number  of posts  in teachers’ cadre  approved by the appropriate  3 
 authority;  
(i) “Scheduled  Castes” means  the Scheduled  Castes  notified  under  article  341 of the  Constitution;  
(j) “Scheduled  Tribes” means  the Scheduled  Tribes  notified  under  article  342 of the  Constitution;  
(k) “socially  and educationally  backward  classes” means  such backward  classes as  are so deemed  
under  article  342A  of the Constitution;  
(l) “teachers’ cadre” means a class of all the teacher s of a Central Educational Institution, 
regardless of the branch of study or faculty, who are remunerated at the same  grade  of pay, excluding  
any allowance  or bonus.  
3. Reservation of posts in recruitments by Cen tral Educational Institutions. —(1) 
Notwithstanding  anything  in any other  law for the time being  in force,  there  shall be  reservation  of posts  
in direct  recruitment  out of the sanctioned  strength  in teachers'  cadre in  a Central  Educational  Institution  
to the extent  and in the manner  as may be specified  by the  Central  Government  by notification  in the 
Official  Gazette.  
(2) For the purpose  of reservati on of posts,  a Central  Educational  Institution  shall  be regarded as one  
unit. 
4. Act not to apply in certain cases. —The provisions of section 3 shall not apply  to— 
(a) the institutions of excellence, research institutions, institutions of national and strategic 
importance specified in the Schedule to this  Act; 
(b) a Minority Educational  Institution.  
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule referred 
to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) from time to time.  
5. Laying of notifications before Parliament. —Every  notification  made  by the Central  Government  
under  this Act shall  be laid, as soon  as may be after it is made,  before  each House  of Parliament  while  it is 
in session,  for a total period  of thirty  days which  may be comprised  in one session  or in two or more  successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the notification  or both Houses  agree  
that the notification  should  not be made,  the notification shall  thereafter  have  effect  only in such modified  
form  or be of no effect,  as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the v alidity of anything previously done under that notification.  
6. Repeal and savings. —(1) The Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Teachers' 
Cadre) Ordinance,  2019  (Ord. 13 of 2019) is hereby  repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under this  Act. 
 
--------------------------The Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Marriage) Act, 2019--------------------------
1 
 THE  MUSLIM  WOMEN  (PROTECTION  OF RIGHTS  ON MARRIAGE) ACT,  2019  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
DECLARATION OF TALAQ  TO BE VOID AND ILLEGAL  
3. Talaq to be void and illegal . 
4. Punishment for pronouncing talaq . 
CHAPTER III  
PROTECTION OF RIGHTS OF MARRIED MUSLIM WOMEN  
5. Subsistence allowance.  
6. Custody of minor children . 
7. Offence to be cognizable, compoundable, etc . 
8. Repeal and savings.  
  2 
 THE  MUSLIM  WOMEN  (PROTECTION  OF RIGHTS  ON MARRIAGE) ACT,  2019  
ACT NO. 20 OF 2019  
[31st July , 2019.]  
An Act to protect  the rights  of married  Muslim  women  and to prohibit  divorce  by pronouncing  talaq by 
their husbands  and to provide  for matters  connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted  by Parliament  in the Seventieth  Year of the Republic  of India  as follows :— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Muslim Women 
(Protection of Rights on Marriage) Act, 2019.  
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 19th day of September, 2018.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “electronic  form” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (r) of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 2  of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000);  
(b) “Magistrate ” means a Judicial Magistrate of the first class exercising jurisdiction under the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), in the area where the married Muslim woman resides; 
and 
(c) “talaq” means talaq -e-biddat  or any other similar form of talaq  having the effect of 
instantaneous and irrevocable divorce pronounced by a Muslim husband.  
CHAPTER II  
DECLARATI ON OF TALAQ  TO BE VOID AND ILLEGAL  
3. Talaq to be void and illegal .—Any pronouncement of talaq  by a Muslim husband upon his wife, by words, 
either spoken or written or in electronic form or in any other manner whatsoever, shall be void and illegal.  
4. Punishment for pronouncing talaq .—Any Muslim husband who pronounces talaq  referred to in 
section 3  upon his wife shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, 
and shall also be liable to fine.  
CHAPTER III  
PROTECTION OF RIGHTS OF MARRIED MUSLIM WOMEN  
5. Subsistence allowance .—Without prejudice to the generality of the p rovisions contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, a married Muslim woman upon whom talaq  is pronounced shall be 
entitled to receive from her husband such amount of subsistence allowance, for her and dependent 
children, as may be determined by the Magistrate.  
6. Custody of minor children .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, a married Muslim woman shall be entitled to custody of her minor children in the event of 
pronouncement of talaq  by her husban d, in such manner as may be determined by the Magistrate.  
7. Offence to be cognizable, compoundable, etc .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 ( 2 of 1974), — 
(a) an offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable, if information relating to the 
commission of the offence is given to an officer in charge of a police station by the married Muslim 
woman upon whom talaq  is pronounced or any person related to her  by blood or marriage;  
(b) an offence punishable under this Act shall be compoundable, at the instance of the married 
Muslim woman upon whom  talaq  is pronounced with the permission of the Magistrate, on such terms 3 
 and conditions as he may determine;  
(c) no person accused of an offence punishable under this Act shall be released on bail unless the 
Magistrate, on an application filed by the accused and after hearing the married Muslim woman upon 
whom talaq  is pronounced, is satisfied that there are reasonable  grounds for granting bail to such 
person.  
8. Repeal and savings .—(1) The Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Marriage) Second 
Ordinance, 2019 (Ord. 4 of 2019) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Muslim Women 
(Protection of Rights on Marriage) Second Ordinance, 2019 (Ord. 4 of 2019), shall be deemed to have 
been done or taken under the provisions of this Act.  
 
--------------------------The New Delhi International Arbtration Centre Act, 2019--------------------------
1 
 THE NEW DELHI INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION 
CENTRE ACT, 2019  
_______ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                      
________ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY  
 
SECTIONS 
1.  Short title and commencement. 
2.  Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISHMENT AND INCORPORATION OF NEW  DELHI  INTERNATIONAL   
ARBITRATION  CENTRE  
3.  Establishment and incorporation of New Delhi In ternational Arbitration Centre. 
4.  Declaration of New Delhi International Arbitrat ion Centre as an institution of national  
      importance. 
5.  Composition of Centre. 
6.  Terms and conditions, etc., of Chairperson and Members. 
CHAPTER III 
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS OF SOCIETY  
7.  Transfer and vesting. 
8.  General effect of vesting. 
9.  Liability prior to specified date. 
10.  Power of Central Government to direct vesting of undertaking in Centre. 
11.  Management, etc., of undertakings. 
12.  Duties of persons in charge of management of u ndertakings to deliver all assets. 
13.  Certain powers of Central Government or Centre . 
14.  Objects of Centre. 
15.  Functions of Centre. 
16.  Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings  of Centre. 
17.  Resignation of Members. 
18.  Removal of Members. 
19.  Committees of Centre. 
20.  Meetings of Centre. 
21.  Chief Executive Officer. 
22.  Delegation of powers. 
23.  Secretariat. 2 
 SECTIONS 
CHAPTER IV 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
24.  Grants by Central Government 
25.  Fund of Centre. 
26.  Accounts and audit. 
27.  Assessment of assets and liabilities of undert aking. 
CHAPTER V 
CHAMBER OF ARBITRATION AND ARBITRATION  ACADEMY  
28.  Chamber of Arbitration. 
29.  Arbitration Academy. 
30.  Power to make rules. 
31.  Power to make regulations. 
32.  Laying of rules and regulations. 
33.  Protection of action taken in good faith. 
34.  Power to remove difficulty. 
35.  Repeal and savings. 
 
 
 
 
  3 
 THE NEW DELHI INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION CENTRE ACT,  2019  
ACT NO. 17 OF  2019 
[26 th July,  2019.] 
An Act to provide for the establishment and incorpo ration of the New Delhi International 
Arbitration Centre for the purpose of creating an i ndependent and autonomous regime 
for institutionalised arbitration and for acquisiti on and transfer of the undertakings of 
the International Centre for Alternative Dispute Re solution and to vest such 
undertakings in the New Delhi International Arbitra tion Centre for the better 
management of arbitration so as to make it a hub fo r institutional arbitration and to 
declare the New Delhi International Arbitration Cen tre to be an institution of national 
importance and for matters connected therewith or i ncidental thereto. 
WHEREAS  dispute resolution process has a huge impact on th e Indian economy and global 
perception on doing business in our country and it has become necessary to inspire confidence and 
credibility among the litigants of commercial dispu tes; 
AND  WHEREAS  rapidly changing economic activity demands expedit ious settlement of disputes 
and creation and establishment of institutional arb itration; 
AND WHEREAS  the International Centre for Alternative Dispute R esolution was set up in the year 
1995, under the aegis of the Central Government and  registered under the Societies Registration Act, 
1860, with the objective of promoting alternative d ispute resolution mechanism and providing 
facilities for the same; 
AND  WHEREAS  the International Centre for Alternative Dispute R esolution has received land and 
substantial funding by way of grants and other bene fits from the Central Government for constructing 
infrastructure and making other facilities; 
AND  WHEREAS  the International Centre for Alternative Dispute R esolution has not been able to 
actively engage and embrace developments in the arb itration ecosystem and to create a reputation par 
excellence keeping pace with the dynamic nature of arbitration over more than two decades; 
AND  WHEREAS  studies conducted by the High Level Committee appo inted by the Central 
Government indicate that the International Centre f or Alternative Dispute Resolution has failed to 
address the growing needs of the institutional arbi tration and also to bear optimum caseload and to 
become better choice to the parties for arbitration ; 
AND  WHEREAS  it has become expedient to take over the undertaki ngs of the International Centre 
for Alternative Dispute Resolution including its re gional offices without interfering with its activit ies 
and without adversely affecting its character as a Society but to utilise its existing infrastructure and 
other facilities which have been set up by using th e public funds provided by the Government and to 
incorporate a robust institution for domestic and i nternational arbitration to be known as the New 
Delhi International Arbitration Centre; 
AND  WHEREAS it is considered necessary to declare the New Delhi  International Arbitration 
Centre as an institution of national importance for  its overall development as a major arbitration hub  
by promoting quick and efficient dispute resolution  mechanism. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of  the Republic of India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement.—  (1) This Act may be called the New Delhi Internationa l 
Arbitration Centre Act, 2019. 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the  2nd March, 2019.  4 
 2. Definitions .— (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise require s,—( a) “Centre” means the 
New Delhi International Arbitration Centre establis hed and incorporated under section 3;  
(b) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Centre  referred to in clause ( a) of section 5;  
(c) “Chief Executive Officer” means the Chief Executi ve Officer appointed under section 21;  
(d) “Committee” means the relevant Committee of the C entre referred to in section 19;  
(e) “Custodian” means the person who is appointed as Custodian under sub-section ( 2) of 
section 11 in respect of the undertakings;  
(f) “Fund” means the Fund of the Centre to be maintai ned under section 25;  
(g) “Member” means Full-time or Part-time Member of t he Centre and includes the 
Chairperson;  
(h) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by th e Central Government under this Act; 
(j) “regulations” means regulations made by the Centr e under this Act; 
(k) “Society” means the International Centre for Alte rnative Dispute Resolution, registered as 
such under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21  of 1860), and having its registered office at 
New Delhi;  
(l) “specified date” means the date as may be specifi ed by the Central Government by 
notification; 
(m) “undertakings” means the undertakings of the Soci ety which vests with the Central 
Government under section 7. 
(2) All other words and expressions used herein but  not defined and defined in the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996), shall have the  same meanings as assigned to them in that Act. 
CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISHMENT AND INCORPORATION OF NEW  DELHI  INTERNATIONAL  ARBITRATION  CENTRE  
3.  Establishment and incorporation of New Delhi Intern ational Arbitration Centre . — (1) 
The Central Government shall, by notification, esta blish a body to be called the New Delhi 
International Arbitration Centre for the purposes o f exercising the powers and discharging the 
functions under this Act. 
 (2) The Centre shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal with power, subject to the provisions o f this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of 
property, both movable and immovable, and to enter into contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or 
be sued.  
4. Declaration of New Delhi International Arbitrati on Centre as an institution of national 
importance. —  (1) Whereas, the objects of the New Delhi Internation al Arbitration Centre are such 
as to make it as an institution of national importa nce, it is hereby declared that the New Delhi 
International Arbitration Centre is an institution of national importance. 
(2) The head office of the Centre shall be at New Del hi and it may with the previous approval of 
the Central Government, establish branches at other  places in India and abroad.  
5. Composition of Centre.  — The Centre shall consist of the following Members,  namely:–– 
(a) a person, who has been a Judge of the Supreme Cou rt or a Judge of a High Court or an 
eminent person, having special knowledge and experi ence in the conduct or administration of 
arbitration, law or management, appointed by the Ce ntral Government in consultation with the 
Chief Justice of India––Chairperson; 5 
 (b) two eminent persons having substantial knowledge and experience in institutional 
arbitration, both domestic and international, appoi nted by the Central Government––Full-time 
Members or Part-time Members; 
(c) one representative of a recognised body of commer ce and industry, chosen on rotational 
basis by the Central Government––Part-time Member;  
(d) Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice or his representative, 
not below the rank of the Joint Secretary––Member, ex officio;  
(e) one Financial Adviser nominated by the Department  of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance–– 
Member, ex officio; and  
(f) Chief Executive Officer––Member, ex officio. 
6. Terms and conditions, etc., of Chairperson and M embers.  –– (1) The Chairperson and 
Members shall hold office for a term of three years  from the date on which they enter upon their 
office and shall be eligible for re-appointment: 
Provided that no Chairperson or Member shall hold o ffice as such after he has attained the age of 
seventy years in the case of Chairperson and sixty- seven years in the case of a Member.  
(2) The terms and conditions, salaries and allowances  payable to the Chairperson and Full-time 
Member shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(3) The term of office of a Member appointed to fill a casual vacancy shall be for the remainder of 
the term of the Member in whose place he has been a ppointed.  
(4) The Part-time Member shall be entitled to such tr avelling and other allowances as may be 
prescribed. 
CHAPTER III 
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS OF SOCIETY  
7. Transfer and vesting .–– On and from the specified date, so much of the undertakings of the 
Society as form part of, or are relatable to the So ciety, and the right, title and interest of the Soc iety in 
relation to such undertakings, shall, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and vest in, the Ce ntral 
Government. 
8. General effect of vesting.  –– (1) The undertakings vested under section 7 shall be deemed to 
include all assets, rights, leaseholds, powers, aut horities and privileges, and all property (movable and 
immovable), including lands, buildings, works, proj ects, instruments, automobiles and other vehicles, 
cash balances, funds, including reserve funds, inve stments and book debts of the Society as form part 
of, or are relatable to, the Society and all other rights and interest arising out of such properties as 
were immediately before the commencement of the New  Delhi International Arbitration Centre 
Ordinance, 2019 (Ord. 10 of 2019) in the ownership,  possession, power or control of the Society, and 
all books of account, registers and all other docum ents of whatever nature relating thereto.  
(2) All properties and assets as aforesaid which have  vested in the Central Government under 
section 7 shall, by force of such vesting, be freed  and discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgag e, 
charge, lien  and all other encumbrances affecting them or of an y attachment, injunction, decree or 
order of any court or other authority restricting t he use of such properties or assets in any manner o r 
appointing any receiver in respect of the whole or any part of such properties or assets shall be 
deemed to have been withdrawn.  
(3) Any licence or other instrument granted to the So ciety in relation to any undertaking which has 
vested in the Central Government under section 7 at  any time before the specified date and in force 
immediately before the specified date, shall contin ue to be in force on and after such day in 
accordance with its tenor in relation to and for th e purpose of such undertaking or where the 
undertaking is directed under section 10, to vest i n the Centre, the Centre shall be deemed to be 
substituted in such licence or other instrument as if such licence or other instrument had been grante d 6 
 to the Centre and the Centre shall hold it for the remainder of the period which the Society would 
have held it under the terms thereof.  
(4) If, on the specified date, any suit, appeal or ot her proceeding, of whatever nature, in relation to 
any property or asset which has vested in the Centr al Government under section 7, instituted or 
preferred by or against the Society is pending, the  same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in an y 
way, prejudicially affected by reason of the transf er of the undertaking of the Society of anything 
contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or othe r proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or 
enforced by or against the Central Government or wh ere the undertakings of the Society are directed 
under section 10, to vest in the Centre, by or agai nst the Centre.  
9. Liability prior to specified date.  ––  Every liability in relation to any undertaking in r espect of 
any period prior to the specified date, shall be en forceable against the Society and not against the 
Central Government.  
10. Power of Central Government to direct vesting o f undertaking in Centre.  –– (1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 7 an d 8, the Central Government shall, as soon as 
may be after the specified date, direct by notifica tion, that the undertakings and the right, title an d 
interest of the Society in relation to such underta kings which had vested in the Central Government 
under section 7, shall, vest in the Centre either o n the date of publication of the notification or on  such 
earlier or later date as may be specified in the no tification. 
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the Societ y in relation to the undertakings vest, under sub-
section ( 1), in the Centre, the Centre shall, on and from the  date of such vesting, be deemed to have 
become the owner in relation to such undertakings a nd the rights and liabilities of the Central 
Government in relation to such undertakings shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to 
have become, the rights and liabilities, respective ly, of the Centre. 
11.  Management, etc., of undertakings.  ––   (1) The general superintendence, direction, control 
and management of affairs of the undertakings, the right, the interest in relation to which have veste d 
in the Central Government under section 7, shall–– 
(a) where a direction has been made by the Central Go vernment under sub-section ( 1) of 
section 10, vest in the Centre; or  
(b) where no such direction has been made by the Cent ral Government, vest in the Custodian 
appointed by the Central Government under sub-secti on ( 2),  
and, thereupon, the Centre or the Custodian so appo inted, as the case may be, shall be entitled to 
exercise all such powers and do all such things as the Society, is authorised to exercise and do in 
relation to its undertakings.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint any person as the Custodian of the undertakings in 
relation to which no direction has been made by it under sub-section ( 1) of section 10. 
(3) The Custodian so appointed shall receive such rem uneration as the Central Government may 
fix and shall hold office during the pleasure of th e Central Government.  
12. Duties of persons in charge of management of un dertakings to deliver all assets.  ––  (1) On 
the vesting of the management of the undertakings i n the Centre or on the appointment of a Custodian 
under sub-section ( 2) of section 11, all persons in charge of managemen t of the undertakings 
immediately before such vesting or appointment shal l be bound to deliver to the Centre or Custodian, 
as the case may be, all assets, books of account, r egisters and other documents in their custody 
relating to the undertakings. 
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions as it may deem desirable in the 
circumstances of the case to the Custodian as to th e powers and duties of the Custodian and such 
Custodian may also, if it is considered necessary s o to do, apply to the Central Government at any 
time for instructions as to the manner in which the  management of the undertaking shall be conducted 
or in relation to any other matter arising in the c ourse of such management.  7 
 (3) Any person who on the specified date, has in his possession or under his control, any books, 
documents or other papers relating to the undertaki ngs shall be liable to account for the said books, 
documents or other papers to the Central Government  or the Custodian or the Centre, as the case may 
be, and shall deliver them to the Central Governmen t or the Custodian or the Centre or to such person 
or body of persons as the Central Government or the  Centre may specify in this behalf.  
(4) The Central Government or the Centre may take or cause to be taken, all necessary steps for 
securing possession of all undertakings which have vested in the Central Government or the Centre 
under this Act.  
(5) The Society shall, within such period as the Cent ral Government may allow in this behalf, 
furnish to that Government a complete inventory of all its properties and assets, as on the 
commencement of the New Delhi International Arbitra tion Centre Ordinance, 2019 (Ord. 10 of 2019)  
pertaining to the undertaking and for this purpose,  the Central Government or Custodian or the Centre 
shall afford to the Society, or body all reasonable  facilities.  
13. Certain powers of Central Government or Centre.  ––  The Central Government or the 
Custodian or the Centre shall be entitled to receiv e up to the specified date, to the exclusion of all  
other persons, any money due to the Society in rela tion to its undertakings which have vested in the 
Central Government or Custodian or the Centre, as t he case may be, and realised after the 
commencement of the New Delhi International Arbitra tion Centre Ordinance, 2019 (Ord. 10 of 
2019.), notwithstanding that the realisation pertai ns to a period prior to the commencement of the 
New Delhi International Arbitration Centre Ordinanc e, 2019 (Ord. 10 of 2019 ). 
14. Objects of Centre.  –– The objects of the Centre shall be,––  
(a) to bring targeted reforms to develop itself as a flagship institution for conducting 
international and domestic arbitration;  
(b) to promote research and study, providing teaching  and training, and organising conferences 
and seminars in arbitration, conciliation, mediatio n and other alternative dispute resolution 
matters;  
(c) to provide facilities and administrative assistan ce for conciliation, mediation and arbitral 
proceedings;  
(d) to maintain panels of accredited arbitrators, con ciliators and mediators both at national and 
international level or specialists such as surveyor s and investigators;  
(e) to collaborate with other national and internatio nal institutions and organisations for 
ensuring credibility of the Centre as a specialised  institution in arbitration and conciliation;  
(f) to set up facilities in India and abroad to promo te the activities of the Centre;  
(g) to lay down parameters for different modes of alt ernative dispute resolution mechanisms 
being adopted by the Centre; and  
(h) such other objectives as it may deem fit with the  approval of the Central Government.  
15. Functions of Centre.  –– Without prejudice to the provisions contained in  section 14, the 
Centre shall strive,––  
(a) to facilitate for conducting international and do mestic arbitration and conciliation in the 
most professional manner;  
(b) to provide cost effective and timely services for  the conduct of arbitration and conciliation 
at national and international level; 
(c) to promote studies in the field of alternative di spute resolution and related matters, and to 
promote reforms in the system of settlement of disp utes; 
(d) to undertake teaching and to provide for diffusio n of knowledge of law and procedures on 
alternative dispute resolution and related matters and to award certificates and other academic or 
professional distinction; 8 
 (e) to impart training in alternative dispute resolut ion and related matters to those who are 
handling arbitration, conciliation and mediation; 
(f) to co-operate with other societies, institutions and organisations, national or international for 
promoting alternative dispute resolution; and  
(g) to perform such other functions as may be entrust ed to it by the Central Government for 
promoting alternative dispute resolution.  
16. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Centre.  ––No act or proceedings of the 
Centre shall be invalid merely by reason of,––  
(a) any vacancy or any defect in the constitution of the Centre; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the Centre; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Centre n ot affecting the merits of the case. 
17. Resignation of Members.  ––The Chairperson or the Full-time Member or Part- time Member 
may, by notice in writing, under his hand addressed  to the Central Government, resign his office:  
Provided that the Chairperson or the Full-time Memb er shall, unless he is permitted by the Central 
Government to relinquish his office sooner, continu e to hold office until the expiry of three months 
from the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon 
his office or until the expiry of his term of offic e, whichever is the earlier.  
18.  Removal of Members.  –– (1) The Central Government may, remove a Member from his 
office if he,––  
(a) is an undischarged insolvent; or 
(b) has engaged at any time (except Part-time Member) , during his term of office, in any paid 
employment; or  
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the op inion of the Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions 
as a Member; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his conti nuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest; or  
(f) has become physically or mentally incapable of ac ting as a Member. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section  ( 1), no Member shall be removed from his 
office on the grounds specified in clauses ( d) and ( e) of that sub-section unless the Supreme Court, on 
a reference being made to it in this behalf by the Central Government, has, on an inquiry, held by it in 
accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed  in this behalf by the Supreme Court, reported 
that the Member, ought on such ground or grounds to  be removed.  
19. Committees of Centre. –– (1) The Centre may constitute such Committees as may be 
considered necessary to administer various aspects of its functions. 
(2) The composition and functions of the Committees r eferred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be such as 
may be prescribed.  
(3) The Committee shall meet at such time and at such  places and shall observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings including the quorum as may be 
specified by the regulations.  
20. Meetings of Centre. –– (1) The Chairperson shall ordinarily preside at the m eetings of the 
Centre:  
Provided that, in his absence, the Member chosen by  the other Members present amongst 
themselves shall preside at the meetings.  9 
 (2) It shall be the duty of the Chairperson to ensure  that the decisions taken by the Centre are 
implemented.  
(3) The Chairperson shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as are 
assigned to him under this Act.  
(4) The Centre shall meet at least four times a year and follow such procedure in its meetings 
including quorum at such meetings in such manner as  may be specified by the regulations. 
(5) All questions which come up before any meeting of  the Centre shall be–– 
(a) decided by a majority of votes by the Members pre sent and voting, and in the event of an 
equality of votes, the Chairperson or in his absenc e, the person presiding, shall have a casting vote;  
(b) dealt with as expeditiously as possible and the C entre shall dispose of the same within a 
period of sixty days from the date of receipt of th e application:  
Provided that where any such application could not be disposed of within the said period of 
sixty days, the Centre shall record its reasons in writing for not disposing of the application within  
that period.  
(6) The Chairperson may invite any expert, not bein g a Member, to attend the meetings of the 
Centre, but such invitee shall not be entitled to v ote at the meeting.  
21. Chief Executive Officer.  –– ( 1) There shall be a Chief Executive Officer of the C entre who 
shall be responsible for day-to-day administration of the Centre and for this purpose, he shall mainta in 
liaison with the Centre and the Secretariat. 
 (2) The appointment, qualifications and the terms and  conditions of services of the Chief 
Executive Officer shall be such as may be specified  by the regulations.  
(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall exercise such p owers and discharge such functions as may 
be specified by the regulations or as may be delega ted to him by the Centre. 
22. Delegation of powers.  –– The Centre may, for the purpose of discharging of its powers, 
functions and duties, by general or special order i n writing, specify the powers and duties conferred or 
imposed upon the Centre by or under this Act (excep t the power to make regulation) which may also 
be exercised or performed by the Chief Executive Of ficer or any officer or officers of the Centre and 
the conditions and restrictions, if any, subject to  which the powers and duties may be exercised and 
performed.  
23. Secretariat.  –– (1) There shall be a Secretariat to the Centre consis ting of––  
(a) Registrar, who shall supervise the activities of the Centre;  
(b) Counsel, dealing with the matters relating to dom estic and international arbitration; and  
(c) such number of other officers and employees as ma y be prescribed. 
(2) The qualifications, experience, method of selecti on and the functions of the Registrar, Counsel 
and other officers and employees shall be such as m ay be prescribed. 
CHAPTER IV 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
 24. Grants by Central Government.  –– The Central Government may, after due appropria tion 
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to th e Centre in each financial year such sums of 
money and in such manner as it may think fit for be ing utilised for the purposes of this Act. 
25. Fund of Centre.  –– (1) The Centre shall maintain a Fund to which shall b e credited,— 
(a) all monies provided by the Central Government;  
(b) all fees and other charges received during or in connection with the arbitration, conciliation, 
mediation or other proceedings;  10 
 (c) all monies received by the Centre for the facilit ies provided by it to the parties;  
(d) all monies received by the Centre in the form of donations, grants, contributions and income 
from other sources; and 
(e) the amount received from the investment income.  
(2) All monies credited to the Fund shall be deposite d in such banks or invested in such manner as 
may be decided by the Centre. 
(3) The Fund shall be applied towards meeting the sal aries and other allowances of Members and 
the expenses of the Centre including expenses incur red in the exercise of its powers and discharge of 
its duties under this Act. 
26. Accounts and audit.  –– ( 1) The Centre shall maintain proper accounts and oth er relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts , including the balance sheet, in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed in consultation with th e Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Centre shall be audited by th e Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
and any expenditure incurred by him in connection w ith such audit shall be payable by the Centre to 
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Centre shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and A uditor-General of India has in connection with 
the audit of the Government accounts, and, in parti cular, shall have the right to demand the productio n 
of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other do cuments and papers and to inspect the offices of 
the Centre.  
(4) The accounts of the Centre as certified by the Co mptroller and Auditor-General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf togeth er with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded  
annually to the Central Government and the Central Government shall cause the same to be laid 
before each House of Parliament.  
27. Assessment of assets and liabilities of underta king.  ––The assets and liabilities in relation to 
any undertaking under this Act shall be caused to b e assessed by any agency authorised by the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India in such ma nner as may be specified by him and any 
payment on a claim to be made in relation thereto s hall be settled by him between the Society and the 
Central Government and shall be paid by the Society  or the Central Government, as the case may be, 
in the manner as may be specified by the Comptrolle r and Auditor-General of India. 
CHAPTER V 
CHAMBER OF ARBITRATION AND ARBITRATION  ACADEMY   
28. Chamber of arbitration.  –– ( 1) The Centre shall, establish a Chamber of Arbitrat ion which 
shall empanel the Arbitrators and also scrutinise t he applications for admission in the panel of reput ed 
arbitrators to maintain a permanent panel of arbitr ators. 
(2) The Chamber of Arbitration shall consist of exper ienced arbitration practitioners of repute, at 
national and international level and persons having  wide experience in the area of alternative dispute  
resolution and conciliation. 
(3) The Centre shall by regulations lay down the crit eria for admission to the panel of the cadre so 
as to maintain a pool of reputed arbitrators having  expertise in international commercial arbitration 
and arbitration other than international commercial  arbitration. 
(4) The Registrar to the Secretariat of the Centre sh all act as the Member-Secretary to the Chamber 
of Arbitration.  
29. Arbitration Academy.  –– (1) The Centre may establish an Arbitration Academy––  
(a) to train the arbitrators, particularly in the are a of international commercial arbitration to 
compete on par with the reputed international arbit ral institutions;  11 
 (b) to conduct research in the area of alternative di spute resolution and allied areas; and (c) to 
give suggestions for achieving the objectives of th e Act. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), there may be constituted a permanent three membe r 
committee in order to suggest and to submit a repor t to the Centre with respect to the amendments, if 
any, necessary to the rules and regulations made un der this Act.  
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS  
30. Power to make rules.  — ( 1) The Central Government may, by notification, make  rules to 
carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the gener ality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
make provision for—  
(a) the terms and conditions and the salaries and all owances payable to the Chairperson and 
Full-time Members under sub-section ( 2) of section 6;  
(b) the travelling and other allowances payable to th e Part-time Members under sub-section ( 4) 
of section 6;  
(c) the composition and functions of the Committees r eferred to in sub-section ( 2) of section 
19;  
(d) the number of officers and employees of the Secre tariat of the Centre under clause ( c) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 23;  
(e) the qualifications, experience, method of selecti on and the functions of the Registrar, 
Counsel and other officers and employees of the Cen tre under sub-section ( 2) of section 23;  
(f) annual statement of accounts, including the balan ce sheet under sub-section ( 1) of section 
26; and 
(g) any other matter in respect of which provision is  to be made or may be made under this Act. 
31. Power to make regulations.  — ( 1) The Centre may, with the previous approval of the  
Central Government, by notification, make regulatio ns consistent with this Act and the rules made 
thereunder to provide for all matters for which pro vision is necessary or expedient for the purposes 
of giving effect to the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the gener ality of the foregoing power, such 
regulations may make provision for––  
(a) the time and place and the rules of procedure to be observed in regard to the transaction of 
business of the Committee at the meetings including  the quorum under sub-section ( 3) of section 
19;  
(b) the time and place and rules of procedure in rega rd to the transaction of business of the 
Centre or any Committee including the quorum at the  meeting under sub-section (4) of section 20; 
(c) the appointment, qualifications and the terms and  conditions of service of the Chief 
Executive Officer under sub-section (2) of section 21;  
(d) the powers and functions of the Chief Executive O fficer under sub-section (3) of section 21;  
(e) the criteria for admission to the panel of repute d arbitrators under sub-section (3) of section 
28; and  
(f) any other matter in respect of which provision, i n the opinion of the Centre, is necessary for 
the performance of its functions under this Act.  
32. laying of rules and regulations.  –– Every rule and regulation made under this Act s hall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before ea ch House of Parliament, while it is in session, for  
a total period of thirty days which may be comprise d in one session or in two or more successive 12 
 sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in  making any modification in the rule or 
regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or re gulation should not be made, the rule or 
regulation shall thereafter have effect only in suc h modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rul e or regulation.  
33. Protection of action taken in good faith.  –– No suit, prosecution or other legal 
proceedings shall lie against the Centre, the Chair person or Members or its employees and 
arbitrators for anything which is in good faith don e or intended to be done under this Act or the 
rules or regulations made thereunder.  
34. Power to remove difficulty.  –– (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions 
of this Act, the Central Government may, by order p ublished in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of  this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary for 
removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made under thi s section after the expiry of a period of two 
years from the date of commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid , as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament.  
35. Repeal and savings.  –– ( 1) The New Delhi International Arbitration Centre Or dinance, 
2019 (Ord. 10 of 2019) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any  action taken under the New Delhi 
International Arbitration Centre Ordinance, 2019 (O rd. 10 of 2019), shall be deemed to have been 
done or taken under the provisions of this Act.  
